MATINS

On feasts with Litiya, the priest vested in the epitrachelion (and in the mantle), or, where there is the custom, also in the phelonion, opens the holy doors, incenses the altar, the sanctuary, icons, and the people, and then intones: Glory to the holy.... At the beginning of the psalm, the priest closes the holy doors, takes off the phelonion, and goes out before the holy doors, where he reads the prayers of Matins.

On other days, the priest, wearing the epitrachelion, stands before the holy doors, and intones: Glory to the holy....

Priest: Glory to the holy, consubstantial, life-giving and undivided Trinity, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen

Glory to God in the highest, and to His people on earth, His peace and good will. (3x)
O Lord, You shall open my lips, and my mouth will declare Your praise. (2x)

Psalm 3 (Monday)

How many are my foes, O Lord!* How many are rising up against me!
How many are saying about me:* there is no help for him in God.
But You, Lord, are a shield about me,* my glory, Who lift up my head.
I cry aloud to the Lord.* He answers from His holy mountain.
I lie down to rest and I sleep.* I wake, for the Lord upholds me.
I will not fear even thousands of people* who are ranged on every side against me.
Arise, Lord; save me, my God,* You Who strike all my foes on the mouth.
You who break the teeth of the wicked,* O Lord of salvation, bless Your people.
I lie down to rest and I sleep.* I wake, for the Lord upholds me.

Psalm 37 (Tuesday)

O Lord, do not rebuke me in Your anger;* do not punish me, Lord, in Your rage.
Your arrows have sunk deep in me;* Your hand has come down upon me.
Through Your anger all my body is sick:* through my sin, there is no health in my limbs.
My guilt towers higher than my head:* it is a weight too heavy to bear.
My wounds are foul and festering,* the result of my own folly.
I am bowed and brought to my knees.* I go mourning all the day long.
All my frame burns with fever;* all my body is sick.
Spent and utterly crushed,* I cry aloud in anguish of heart.
O Lord, You know all my longing:* my groans are not hidden from You.
My heart throbs, my strength is spent;* the very light has gone from my eyes.
My friends avoid me like a leper;* those closest to me stand afar off.
Those who plot against my life lay snares;* those who seek my ruin speak of harm, planning treachery all the day long.
But I am like the deaf who cannot hear;* like the dumb unable to speak.
I am like one who hears nothing* in whose mouth is no defense.
I count on You, O Lord:* it is You, Lord God, Who will answer.
I pray: Do not let them mock me,* those who triumph if my foot should slip.
For I am on the point of falling* and my pain is always before me.
I confess that I am guilty* and my sin fills me with dismay.
My wanton enemies are numberless* and my lying foes are many.
They repay me evil for good* and attack me for seeking what is right.
O Lord, do not forsake me!* My God, do not stay afar off!
Make haste and come to my help,* O Lord, my God, my Savior!

Psalm 62 (Wednesday)

O God, You are my God, for You I long;* for You my soul is thirsting.
My body pines for You* like a dry, weary land without water.
So I gaze on You in the sanctuary* to see Your strength and Your glory.
For Your love is better than life,* my lips will speak Your praise.
So I will bless You all my life;* in Your name I will lift up my hands.
My soul shall be filled as with a banquet,* my mouth shall praise You with joy.
On my bed I remember You.* On You I muse throughout the night
For You have been my help;* in the shadow of Your wings I rejoice.
My soul clings to You;* Your right hand holds me fast.
Those who seek to destroy my life* shall go down to the depths of the earth.
They shall be put into the power of the sword* and left as the prey of the jackals.
But the king shall rejoice in God;* all that swear by Him shall be blessed for the mouth of liars shall be silenced.

Psalm 87 (Thursday)

Lord my God, I call for help by day;* I cry at night before You.
Let my prayer come into Your presence.* O turn Your ear to my cry.
For my soul is filled with evils;* my life is on the brink of the grave.
I am reckoned as one in the tomb* I have reached the end of my strength.
Like one alone among the dead;* like the slain lying in their graves;
Like those You remember no more,* cut off, as they are, from Your hand.
You have laid me in the depths of the tomb,* in places that are dark, in the depths.
Your anger weighs down upon me;* I am drowned beneath Your waves.
You have taken away my friends* and made me hateful in their sight.
Imprisoned, I cannot escape;* my eyes are sunken with grief.
I call to You, Lord, all the day long;* to You I stretch out my hands.
Will You work Your wonders for the dead?* Will the shades stand and praise You?
Will Your love be told in the grave* or Your faithfulness among the dead?
Will Your wonders be known in the dark* or Your justice in the land of oblivion?
As for me, Lord, I call to You for help;* in the morning my prayer comes before You.
Lord, why do You reject me?* Why do You hide Your face?
Wretched, close to death from my youth,* I have borne Your trials; I am numb.
Your fury has swept down upon me;* Your terrors have utterly destroyed me.
They surround me all the day like a flood,* they assail me all together.
Friend and neighbor You have taken away;* my one companion is darkness.

Psalm 102 (Friday)

My soul, give thanks to the Lord,* all my being, bless His holy name.
My soul, give thanks to the Lord,* and never forget all His blessings.
It is He Who forgives all your guilt,* Who heals every one of your ills,
Who redeems your life from the grave,* Who crowns you with love and compassion,
Who fills your life with good things,* renewing your youth like an eagle’s.
The Lord does deeds of justice,* gives judgment for all who are oppressed.
He made known His ways to Moses* and His deeds to Israel’s children.
The Lord is compassion and love,* slow to anger and rich in mercy.
His wrath will come to an end;* He will not be angry for ever.
He does not treat us according to our sins* nor repay us according to our faults.
For as the heavens are high above the earth* so strong is His love for those who fear Him.
As far as the east is from the west* so far does He remove our sins.
As a father has compassion on his children,* the Lord has pity on those who fear Him;
For He knows of what we are made,* He remembers that we are dust.
As for mortals, their days are like grass;* they flower like the flower of the field;
The wind blows and they are gone* and their place never sees them again.
But the love of the Lord is everlasting* upon those who hold Him in fear;
His justice reaches out to children’s children when they keep His covenant in truth,* when they keep His will in their mind.
The Lord has set His sway in heaven* and His kingdom is ruling over all.
Give thanks to the Lord, all His angels,* mighty in power, fulfilling His word, who heed the voice of His word.
Give thanks to the Lord, all His hosts,* His servants who do His will.
Give thanks to the Lord, all His works, in every place where He rules.* My soul, give thanks to the Lord!

Psalm 142
(Saturday and Sunday)

Lord, listen to my prayer; turn Your ear to my appeal;* You are faithful; You are just; give answer.
Do not call Your servant to judgment* for no one is just in Your sight.
The enemy pursues my soul; he has crushed my life to the ground;* He has made me dwell in darkness like the dead, long forgotten.
Therefore, my spirit fails;* my heart is numb within me.
I remember the days that are past: I ponder all Your works;* I muse on what Your hand has wrought and to You I stretch out my hands.
Like a parched land my soul thirsts for You;* Lord, make haste and answer; for my spirit fails within me.
Do not hide Your face* lest I become like those in the grave.
In the morning let me know Your love for I put my trust in You;* make me know the way I should walk;* to You I lift up my soul.
Rescue me, Lord, from my enemies;* I have fled to You for refuge.
Teach me to do Your will, for You, O Lord, are my God;* let Your good Spirit guide me in ways that are level and smooth.
For Your name’s sake, Lord, save my life;* in Your justice save my soul from distress.
In Your love make an end of my foes;* destroy all those who oppress me for I am Your servant, O Lord.

After every psalm:
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit:
Now and for ever, and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x)

Prayers of Matins

During the recitation of the psalms, the priest quietly says the following Prayers of Matins before the holy doors:

We thank You, Lord our God, for You have wakened us from our sleep, and have filled our lips with praise that we might worship You and call upon Your holy name. We beg of Your compassion that You have always shown towards us, hear us now and send help to those who stand before Your holy glory awaiting Your abundant mercy. O Lord, grant that those who serve You in fear and love may praise Your ineffable goodness. For to You is due all glory, honor, and worship, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

From the depths of night our soul longs for You, our God, for Your commandments are a light upon the earth. Give us understanding that we may be perfected in righteousness and holiness in fear of You, for it is You Whom we glorify as our true God. Turn Your ear and hear us. O Lord, remember all those present and praying with us by their own name, and save them by Your might. Bless Your people and sanctify Your inheritance. Give peace to Your world, to Your churches, to the priests, and to all Your people. For blessed and glorified is Your most honored and sublime name, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

From the depths of night our soul longs for You, our God, for Your commandments are a light upon the earth. Teach us, O God, Your righteousness, Your statutes, and Your decrees. Enlighten the eyes of our minds, lest in sin we fall asleep until death. Cast out all darkness from our hearts, favor us with the Sun of Righteousness, and keep our lives from danger by the seal of Your Holy Spirit. Direct our steps along the road of peace. Grant that we may see the dawn and the whole day in joy, and that we may offer You our morning prayers. For Yours is the power, and Yours is the kingdom and the might and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Lord God, holy and incomprehensible, You told the light to shine out of darkness; You have given us rest in the sleep of night; and You have raised us to glorify and praise Your goodness. We beg of Your mercy, accept us who now worship You and thank You with all our strength, and grant all that we ask for our salvation. Reveal us to be children of light and of the day, and heirs of Your eternal good gifts. In the abundance of Your mercy, Lord, remember all Your people who invoke Your love for mankind and aid those here present and who pray with us and those traveling abroad in every place of Your kingdom, who are in need of Your loving kindness and help. Be greatly merciful to all, that we may persevere always in confidence, being saved in soul and body. We glorify Your magnificent and blessed name, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Treasury of all good, ever-flowing spring, holy Father, Wonder-worker, all-powerful Ruler of all: we worship You and beg of Your mercy and compassion, help and support us in our lowliness. Lord, remember those who pray to You, and let our morning prayer rise like incense before You. Grant that no one of us may be put to shame, but surround us with Your mercy. Lord, remember those who keep watch and sing of Your glory, and that of Your only-begotten Son and our God, and of Your Holy Spirit. Be their help and support and accept their prayers upon Your heavenly spiritual altar. For You are our God, and to You we give glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

We give thanks to You, O Lord and God of our salvation. You have done everything that is good for our lives, and we look always to You, Savior and Benefactor of our souls. For You have given us rest in that part of the night which has passed, and now have raised us from our sleep to worship Your honored name. Therefore, O Lord, we pray: give us the grace and strength to be found worthy to sing praise always, and to pray constantly, and to work for our own salvation in fear and trembling, with the help of Your Christ. O Lord, remember those who pray to You in the night. Hear them and have mercy on them and crush under their feet invisible and malicious enemies. For You are the King of Peace, and the Savior of our souls, and we give thanks to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, You have raised us from our sleep and gathered us for this time of prayer. Give us grace that we may open our lips in praise. Accept the thanksgiving we offer with all our strength. Teach us Your decrees, for we do not know how to pray as we should, unless You guide us by Your Holy Spirit. Therefore, we pray, that if until now we have sinned in any way – in word, or deed, or thought, voluntarily or involuntarily – remit, pardon and forgive us; for if You, O Lord, were to look upon our guilt, Lord, who would survive? For with You is found redemption. You alone are holy and a helper and the stronghold of our lives, and our praise is for You forever. Blessed and glorified be the power of Your reign, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Lord our God, You have shaken from us the laziness of sleep; You have called us to be holy, to lift up our hands in the night, and to glorify You for Your just decrees. Receive our prayers, our petitions, our confessions of faith, and our nighttime worship. Bestow on us, O Lord, an invincible faith, a confident hope, and a love without pretense. Bless our comings and our goings, our deeds and works, our words and desires. Grant that we may come to the beginning of the day praising, glorifying, and blessing the goodness of Your inexpressible generosity. For blessed is Your all-holy name, and glorified is Your kingdom, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord our God, You have given us forgiveness through repentance, and as a model of knowledge and confession of sins, You have revealed to us the repentance of the prophet David that led to pardon. Master, have mercy on us who have fallen into so many and so great sins. Have mercy in Your kindness, and in Your compassion blot out our offenses, for against You have we sinned, O Lord, Who know the hidden depths of our hearts, and Who alone have the power to forgive sins. A pure heart You have created for us; You have sustained us with a spirit of fervor and have given us the joy of Your help. Do not cast us away from Your presence, but in Your goodness and love for all, grant that we may offer a sacrifice of righteousness and oblation on Your holy altar until our last breath. Through the mercies and goodness and love of Your only-begotten Son, with Whom You are blessed, together with Your good and life-creating Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O God, our God, who have placed all spiritual and intellectual powers under Your will, we pray and beg You, accept these hymns of praise which we offer to You according to our ability together with all Your creatures. Give us in exchange the riches of Your goodness, for before You all beings in the heavens, or on earth and under the earth bend their knees, and everything that lives or that breathes gives praise to Your glory beyond reach, for You are the one true God, full of mercy. For all the heavenly powers praise You, and we give glory to You, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.
