>>>GREAT COMPLINE<<<

Great Compline with litiya is celebrated on the eves of the Nativity of our Lord, the Theophany, and the Annunciation, as prescribed by the typikon. In these instances, there is incensing at the beginning as at Vespers with Litiya (p. 9); the priest is vested only in the epitrachelion. After the incensing, the deacon says: Master, give the blessing!, and the priest intones: Blessed be our God...; the choir responds: Amen. Glory be to You, our God; Heavenly King, etc. (p. 10). The holy doors remain closed from Come, let us adore... to the Stichera of Litiya.

During the Great Fast, Great Compline is celebrated Monday evening to Thursday evening. If it is the first week of the Great Fast, then after the usual beginning we take Psalm 69 (p. 45), and part of the Great Canon of Andrew of Crete, (p. 488-506), according to the typicon. The holy doors remain closed during the entire service.

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God... (the usual beginning, until Come, let us adore..., p. 10-11).

Psalm 4
(Monday Evening)

When I call, answer me,* O God of justice;
From anguish You released me;* have mercy and hear me!
O men, how long will your hearts be closed,* will you love what is futile and seek what is false?
It is the Lord who grants favors to those whom he loves;* the Lord hears me whenever I call Him.
Fear Him; do not sin:* ponder on your bed and be still.
Make justice your sacrifice* and trust in the Lord.
“What can bring us happiness?” many say.* Let the light of Your face shine on us, O Lord.
You have put into my heart a greater joy* than they have from abundance of corn and new wine.
I will lie down in peace and sleep comes at once* for You alone, Lord, make me dwell in safety.

Psalm 6
(Tuesday Evening)

Lord, do not reprove me in Your anger:* punish me not in Your rage.
Have mercy on me, Lord, I have no strength;* Lord, heal me, my body is racked;
My soul is racked with pain.* But You, O Lord ... how long?
Return, Lord, rescue my soul.* Save me in Your merciful love,
For in death no one remembers You;* from the grave, who can give You praise?
I am exhausted with my groaning;* every night I drench my pillow with tears;* I bedew my bed with weeping.
My eye wastes away with grief;* I have grown old surrounded by my foes.
Leave me, all you who do evil;* for the Lord has heard my weeping.
The Lord has heard my plea;* the Lord will accept my prayer.
All my foes will retire in confusion,* foiled and suddenly confounded.

Psalm 12
(Wednesday Evening)

How long, O Lord; will You forget me?* How long will You hide Your face?
How long must I bear grief in my soul,* this sorrow in my heart day and night?
How long shall my enemy prevail?* Look at me, answer me, Lord my God!
Give light to my eyes* lest I fall asleep in death,
Lest my enemy say:* I have overcome him;
Lest my foes rejoice* to see my fall.
As for me, I trust in Your merciful love.* Let my heart rejoice in Your saving help:
Let me sing to the Lord for His goodness to me* singing psalms to the name of the Lord, the Most High.

Psalm 24
(Thursday Evening)

To You, O Lord, I lift up my soul;* I trust You.
Let me not be disappointed;* do not let my enemies triumph.
Those who hope in You shall not be disappointed,* but only those who wantonly break faith.
Lord, make me know Your ways* Lord, teach me Your paths.
Make me walk in Your truth, and teach me,* for You are God my Savior.
In You I hope all day long* because of Your goodness, O Lord.
Remember Your mercy, Lord,* and the love You have shown from of old.
Do not remember the sins of my youth.* In Your love remember me.
The Lord is good and upright.* He shows the path to those who stray,
He guides the humble in the right path,* He teaches His way to the poor.
His ways are faithfulness and love* for those who keep His covenant and will.
Lord, for the sake of Your name forgive my guilt,* for it is great.
To those who revere the Lord* He will show the path they should choose.
Their souls will live in happiness* and their children shall possess the land.
The Lord’s friendship is for those who revere Him;* to them He reveals His covenant.
My eyes are always on the Lord,* for He rescues my feet from the snare.
Turn to me and have mercy* for I am lonely and poor.
Relieve the anguish of my heart* and set me free from my distress.
See my affliction and my toil* and take all my sins away.
See how many are my foes,* how violent their hatred for me.
Preserve my life and rescue me.* Do not disappoint me, You are my refuge.
May innocence and uprightness protect me,* for my hope is in You, O Lord.
Redeem Israel, O God,* from all its distress.

Psalm 30
(Friday Evening)

In You, O Lord, I take refuge.* Let me never be put to shame.
In Your justice, set me free,* hear me and speedily rescue me.
Be a rock of refuge for me, a mighty stronghold to save me,* for You are my rock, my stronghold.
For Your name’s sake, lead me and guide me.* Release me from the snares they have hidden* for You are my refuge, Lord.
Into Your hands I commend my spirit.* It is You Who will redeem me, Lord.
O God of truth, You detest those who worship false and empty gods.* As for me, I trust in the Lord:
Let me be glad and rejoice in Your love.* You who have seen my affliction
And taken heed of my soul’s distress,* have not handed me over to the enemy, but set my feet at large.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am in distress.* Tears have wasted my eyes, my throat and my heart.
For my life is spent with sorrow* and my years with sighs.
Affliction has broken down my strength,* and my bones waste away.
In the face of all my foes I am a reproach,* an object of scorn to my neighbors and of fear to my friends.
Those who see me in the street* run far away from me.
I am like a dead man, forgotten,* like a thing thrown away.
I have heard the slander of the crowd,* fear is all around me.
As they plot together against me,* as they plan to take my life.
But as for me, I trust in You, Lord,* I say: You are my God.
My life is in Your hands,* deliver me from the hands of those who hate me.
Let Your face shine on Your servant.* Save me in Your love.
How great is the goodness, Lord, that You keep for those who fear You,* that You show to those who trust You in the sight of men.
You hide them in the shelter of Your presence from the plotting of men:* You keep them safe within Your tent from disputing tongues.
Blessed be the Lord* Who has shown me the wonders of His love in a fortified city.
“I am far removed from Your sight,”* I said in my alarm.
Yet You heard the voice of my plea* when I cried for help.
Love the Lord, all you saints.* He guards His faithful.
But the Lord will repay you to the full* those who act with pride.
Be strong, let your heart take courage,* all who hope in the Lord.

Psalm 90
(Saturday and Sunday Evening)

Those who dwell in the shelter of the Most High* and abide in the shade of the Almighty
Say to the Lord: My refuge, my stronghold,* my God in whom I trust!
It is He who will free you from the snare of the fowler* who seeks to destroy you;
He will conceal you with His pinions,* and under His wings you will find refuge.
You will not fear the terror of the night* nor the arrow that flies by day,
Nor the plague that prowls in the darkness* nor the scourge that lays waste at noon.
A thousand may fall at your side, ten thousand fall at your right,* you, it will never approach,* His faithfulness is buckler and shield.
Your eyes have only to look to see* how the wicked are repaid,
You who have said: Lord, my refuge!* and have made the Most High your dwelling
Upon you no evil shall fall,* no plague approach where you dwell.
For you He has commanded His angels* to keep you in all your ways.
They shall bear you upon their hands* lest you strike your foot against a stone.
On the lion and the viper you will tread,* and trample the young lion and the dragon.
You set your love on Me so I will save you,* protect you for you know My name.
When you call I shall answer: I am with you,* I will save you in distress and give you glory.
With length of days I will content you;* I shall let you see my saving power.

Ending the psalm, the choir says:
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit:*
Now and for ever and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x)
Lord, have mercy. (3x)
Glory be: Now and for ever:

God is with us... (Is. 8:9)

On the feasts of the Nativity and the Theophany of our Lord, the priest himself intones the verses, while after each verse the choir sings: God is with us....

I Choir: God is with us! Give ear, O you nations, and be humbled, for God is with us.
II Choir: God is with us....
I Choir: God is with us! Give ear, O you nations:
II Choir: And be humbled, for God is with us.

The two choirs read the verses alternately:
Give ear, all you lands afar off, for God is with us.
You mighty ones, be humbled, for God is with us.
And if any take counsel together, the Lord will destroy them, for God is with us.
And if you make resolutions, they will not stand, for God is with us.
It is the Lord, whom you must hold in veneration, for God is with us.
Him you must fear, him you must dread, for God is with us.
He shall be a stone of stumbling and a rock on which they shall fall, for God is with us.
I shall confide in Him, and I shall be saved by Him, for God is with us.
Behold, I come with the children whom the Lord has given me, for God is with us.
O nation, which is walking in the darkness, expect to see a great light, for God is with us.
Upon us, who dwell in the land of the shadow of death, a great light shall dawn, for God is with us.
Indeed, a Child is born to us, the Son, and He is given to us, for God is with us.
His power is upon His shoulder, for God is with us.
And His name shall be called Wonderful Counsellor, for God is with us.
Mighty God, the everlasting Father, Prince of Peace, for God is with us.
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, for God is with us.
Now and always, and for ever and ever. Amen, for God is with us.

God is with us; give ear, O you nations:
And be humbled, for God is with us.

Immediately we recite:
Now that the day has come to a close, I thank You, Lord, and I ask of You that my evening and my night be without sin: grant this to me, O Savior, and save me!
Glory be: Now that the day has come to a close, I glorify You, O Master, and I ask of You that my evening and my night be undisturbed: grant this to me, O Savior, and save me!
Now and for ever: Now that the day has come to a close, I praise You, O holy One, and I ask of You that my evening and my night be undisturbed: grant this to me, O Savior, and save me!

The incorporeal cherubim glorify You with unceasing praise. The seraphim, the six-winged angels, exalt You with tireless voices. And all the armies of angels praise You with the thrice-holy hymn. Because You are, before all else, O Father; and Your Son, like Yourself, is without beginning. By breathing forth the Spirit of life, equal in honor to You, You make manifest the indivisibility of the Trinity.

Most holy Virgin, Mother of God, and you eyewitnesses of the Lord and his servants, intercede for us! All the choirs of the prophets and martyrs who are enjoying eternal life, intercede for us! Intercede for all of us unceasingly, for we are all in distress. That escaping from the terrors of evil, we may sing the angels’ hymn: Holy, holy, holy, O thrice-holy Lord, have mercy on us and save us!

I believe in one God.... (p. 48).

Most holy Lady, Mother of God, intercede for us sinners.
All you heavenly powers, holy angels and archangels, intercede for us sinners.
Holy John, the forerunner, prophet, and baptizer of the Lord Jesus Christ, intercede for us sinners.
Glorious saints, apostles, prophets, martyrs, and all you holy ones, intercede for us sinners.
You just ones, and you God-bearing fathers Anthony and Theodosius, and other wonderworkers of the Kyivan Caves, pray to God for us sinners.
O you divine, undefeated and incomprehensible power of the precious and life-giving cross, do not forsake us sinners.
O God, have mercy on us sinners.
O God cleanse us of our sins and have mercy on us.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the troparion of the feast (of the Nativity of our Lord, (p. 1334); of the Theophany, (p. 1278); of the Annunciation, (p. 1289); or, during the Great Fast, the following:

On Mondays and Wednesdays (Tone 2): Enlighten my eyes, O Christ God, lest I sleep to death; lest my enemy say: I prevailed over him!
Verse: O God, look down upon me and have mercy on me.
O God, be the Defender of my soul, for I walk in the midst of many snares. Deliver me from them, O gracious Lord, and save me, for You are the Lover of mankind.
Glory be: Now and for ever: Since our many transgressions prevent us from finding favor before God, be our intercessor with Him Who was born of you, O Virgin Mother of God; for the prayers of mothers have much weight in obtaining the Master’s favor. O most venerable one, despise not the pleadings of us sinners, for He who willed to suffer for us is merciful, and He has power to save us.

On Tuesdays and Thursdays (Tone 8): O Lord, You know well the alertness of my invisible enemies and the weakness of my own wretched body for You Yourself have made me. Wherefore, I entrust my soul to Your hands, cover me with the wings of Your bounty, lest I sleep to death; enlighten my spirit with the delight of Your divine Word; awaken me at the time appointed for Your glory, for You alone are a gracious God and the Lover of mankind.
Verse: O God, look down upon me and have mercy on me!
How dreadful is Your judgment-seat, O Lord, where angels will be on guard, all men assembled, the book of life opened, all my works uncovered, and all my thoughts revealed! What judgment shall be mine, O Lord, for I was conceived in sin! Who shall put out for me the raging fires? Who shall bring light to my darkness, if You, O Lord, and Lover of mankind, have no mercy on me?
Glory be: Give me tears, O Lord, as You did to the sinful woman; make me worthy to wash Your feet that saved me from the ways of error. Grant that I may offer You, as a fragrant ointment, a blameless life that repentance has redeemed, so that I also may hear Your sweet words: Go in peace, your faith has saved you.
Now and for ever: O Mother of God, because of my great confidence in you, I shall obtain salvation. Because I have succeeded in having you for my intercessor, O Purest of all, I shall not fear. Imploring your most powerful help, I shall pursue my enemies and drive them away, for I wear your protection as a breastplate. O Lady, save me through your intercession, and, by the power of God who was made of your flesh, awaken me from my dark slumber that I may sing your glory.

Lord, have mercy (40x).

Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word; O true Mother of God, we magnify you.
Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us.
Choir: Amen.

Prayer of St. Basil the Great

O Lord, O Lord, Who delivered us from every arrow that flies in the light of day, protect us against any difficulty that lurks around at night, and accept our outstretched hands as an evening sacrifice. Make us worthy to spend the night blamelessly, and fully sheltered against all evil; protect us against all disturbances or fear of the devil. Grant repentance to our souls and diligence to our minds, that we may understand your dreadful and just judgment; subdue our flesh with the fear of You, let our passions die out, so that in the stillness of night we may be enlightened by the thinking of Your precepts; keep afar from us all indecent dreams and harmful cravings; awaken us in time for prayer, strengthened in the faith and able to obey Your commands through the mercy and kindness of Your only-begotten Son, with Whom You are blessed, together with Your all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit, always, now and for ever and ever. Amen.
