God of our ancestors, we praise You, we glorify You, we bless You, we thank You, for You have made the shadow of night pass and have shown us again the light of day. We beg You in Your goodness and in Your great mercy, cleanse our sins and hear our prayer, for we take refuge in You, O merciful and all-powerful God. Make the true Sun of Righteousness shine in our hearts, enlighten our minds, and watch over all our senses, that we may live decently like people of the daytime, so that walking in Your commandments, we may come to eternal life, and may be made worthy of the enjoyment of Your light beyond reach, for You are the source of life. For You are a God of mercy and kindness and love, and we glorify You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

After the recitation of the psalms, the priests returns to the sanctuary and stands before the altar. The deacon leaves the sanctuary, goes in front of the holy doors, and says the litany. If there is no deacon, the priest says the litany before the holy doors.

Litany of Peace

In peace let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (and after each petition).

For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.

For peace throughout the whole world, for the well-being of God’s holy churches and for the unity of all, let us pray to the Lord.

For this holy church and for all who enter it with faith, reverence, and fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.

For our most holy universal Pontiff, N., Pope of Rome, let us pray to the Lord.

For our most blessed Patriarch, N., our most reverend Metropolitan, N., our God-loving Bishop, N., the reverend priesthood, the diaconate in Christ, and all the clergy and the people, let us pray to the Lord.

For our nation under God, for our government, and for all the military, let us pray to the Lord.

For this city (or For this village, or For this holy monastery), for every city and country and for the faithful who live in them, let us pray to the Lord.

For favorable weather, for an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and for peaceful times, let us pray to the Lord.

For the seafarers and travelers, for the sick and the suffering, for those held captive, and for their salvation, let us pray to the Lord.

That we may be delivered from all tribulation, wrath, and misfortune, let us pray to the Lord.

Help and save, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.

Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest: For all glory, honor, and worship befit You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

God the Lord

After the Litany, the choir sings God the Lord... (Ps. 117) in the tone of the first troparion:

God the Lord has revealed Himself to us, blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord.
Verse: Give thanks to the Lord, for He is good; for His love endures forever.
Verse: They encircled me, compassed me about; in the Lord’s name I crushed them.
Verse: I shall not die, I shall live and recount the deeds of the Lord.
Verse: The stone which the builders rejected has become the cornerstone. This is the work of the Lord, a marvel in our eyes.

Then the troparion and the theotokion are taken according to the typikon. After the troparia we sing the Sessional Hymns.

During the Great Fast

Instead of God the Lord..., the choir sings according to the tone of the week: Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Verse: My spirit yearns for You in the night; yes, keeps vigil for You.
Verse: When Your judgment dawns upon the earth, the world’s inhabitants learn justice.
Verse: Let them be ashamed when they see Your zeal for Your people; let the fire prepared for Your enemies consume them.
Verse: You have increased the nation, O Lord, increased the nation to Your own glory.

Then the choir immediately sings the following trinitarian hymns in the tone of the week.

Tone 1
Through bodily forms, we have come to the spiritual, immaterial understanding of the bodiless powers, and by the singing of the thrice-holy hymn, we have received the light of the divinity in three Persons. Let us sing with the cherubim to our only Lord: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God...

(:) Monday – through the intercession of Your angelic powers have mercy on us.
(:) Tuesday – through the prayers of Your Forerunner have mercy on us.
(:) Wednesday – through the power of Your holy Cross have mercy on us.
(:) Thursday – through the prayers of Your holy Apostles have mercy on us.
(:) Friday – through the power of Your holy Cross have mercy on us.

Glory be: With all the powers of heaven let us sing as the cherubim, and offer the thrice-holy hymn of praise to the Most High: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: Rising from sleep we bow down before You, as we sing again, the hymn of the angels: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 2
On earth we imitate the powers on high, and we offer our hymn of victory to You as we sing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see above).

Glory be: O uncreated Nature and Maker of the universe, open our lips, and our mouths shall proclaim Your praise by singing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: O Lord, You have wakened me from my sleep; enlighten my heart and my spirit, open my lips that I may praise You, O Holy Trinity: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God, through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 3
Consubstantial and indivisible Trinity, unity in three Persons and equal in eternity, with the angels we sing to You, O Lord: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see above).

Glory be: Eternal Father and coeternal Son and the Spirit Who shares eternity with the one God, together with the angels we sing to You, O Lord: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: The Judge will come as a flash of lightning to lay bare the deeds of everyone; at midnight we cry to You with fear: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 4
We mortals now dare to sing and offer You the hymn of Your heavenly ministers: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see p. 120).

Glory be: As the army of angels in heaven, O Lord, with fear we on earth offer You this hymn of victory: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: We dare to glorify You, O Christ our God, together with Your eternal Father and Your Most Holy Spirit; and with the cherubim we cry out: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 5
This is the hour for praise and prayer; let us unceasingly cry to the Lord: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see p. 120).

Glory be: With unworthy voices we dare to represent the heavenly hosts and sing to You, O eternal Trinity: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: O Christ, You dwelt in the virginal womb without being separated from the bosom of the Father; accept our voices with the angels: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 6
With fear and trembling, the cherubim and seraphim sing the Thrice-holy Hymn with unceasing voice; and we sinners also cry out with them: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see p. 120).

Glory be: The cherubim with immaterial lips and the seraphim with unceasing praise, sing the Thrice-holy hymn to You, O our God; and we on earth with our unworthy lips offer You our praise by singing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: Let us glorify the three Persons in one God, united without confusion, and let us take up the hymn of the angels as we sing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 7
Your great glory is praised by the cherubim, O Lord, and the angels adore Your divine majesty; accept from our sinful lips this hymn: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see p. 120).

Glory be: Shaking off both laziness and sleep, arise and offer praise to the Creator, and in fear, O my soul, sing to Him: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: To the unapproachable Divinity and the unique Trinity, let us offer the triple praise of the seraphim, and with fear and trembling, let us sing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 8
Lifting our hearts to heaven, let us imitate the heavenly hosts, and let us fall down with fear before the Lord; as we sing the hymn of victory and say: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see p. 120).

Glory be: The cherubim dare not raise their eyes to You, as they joyfully sing the divine words of the Thrice-Holy Hymn; and we sinners also cry out with them: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: Overwhelmed by the weight of our many sins, we dare not raise our eyes to heaven. With souls and bodies bowed before You, we sing together with the angels: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

After the troparia, we sing the Sessional hymns. At Daily Matins take Psalm 50, (p. 128). On Sunday, from September 22 to December 19, and from January 14 to Cheesefare Sunday, as well as on all feasts, take the Polyeleos (Ps. 134-135):

Polyeleos

Praise the name of the Lord, praise Him, servants of the Lord. Alleluia! (3x)
Who stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our God. Alleluia! (3x)
Lord, Your name stands forever, unforgotten from age to age. Alleluia! (3x)
From Zion may the Lord be blessed, He who dwells in Jerusalem. Alleluia! (3x)
O give thanks to the Lord for He is good, alleluia, for His love endures forever. Alleluia! (3x)
Who fixed the earth firmly on the seas, alleluia, for His love endures forever. Alleluia! (3x)
He snatched us away from our foes, alleluia, for His love endures forever. Alleluia! (3x)
To the God of heaven give thanks, alleluia, for His love endures forever. Alleluia! (3x)

After the Polyeleos, if it is a feast, the Exaltation is sung. The priest, vested in the phelonion, opens the holy doors, sings the Exaltation, and incenses the altar, sanctuary, icons, the people, and the icon of the feast on the tetrapod.

Hosts of Angels
(On all Sundays and on the Saturday of Lazarus)

Verse before each troparion: Blessed are You, O Lord, teach me Your commandments.

The hosts of angels were amazed and dazzled when they beheld You, O Savior, among the dead destroying the power of Death, raising up Adam with You and releasing all the souls from Hades.

The radiant angel standing by the grave cried out to the ointment-bearing women: Why do you lament and mingle your tears with the spices? Look upon the grave and rejoice, for the Savior is risen from the dead.

The ointment-bearing women hastened very early to Your grave. But the angel stood by them and said: The time for lamenting is no more. Do not cry, but go and announce the Resurrection to the disciples.

O Savior, the ointment-bearing women came to Your grave with ointments, and they heard the angel say to them: Why are you seeking the Living One among the dead? Indeed, He is God. He is risen from the dead.

Glory be: We worship the Father and His Son and His Holy Spirit, the Holy Trinity, One in essence, and we cry out with the seraphim: Holy, holy, holy are You, O Lord.

Now and for ever: O Virgin, you bore the Giver of Life, Who redeemed Adam from his sin and granted joy to Eve instead of sadness. For He Who is both God and Man was incarnate of you, and He has restored life to those who had strayed away from it.

Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x)

The Exaltation and the hymn Hosts of angels... are followed by the Small Litany, the Hypakoe (for Sunday, see pp. 1231-1233); the Sessional (on feasts), and the Gradual according to the tone of the week (on Sunday); on feasts according to tone 4.

Gradual Hymn (Tone 4)

My sinful desires have encircled me, from my youth they have oppressed me; but You, O Savior, will come to aid me. You will protect and save me.
May the enemies of Zion be confounded by the Lord; may they be a grass which withers, which is dried up by the fire.
Glory be: Now and for ever: Every spirit lives by the grace of the Holy Spirit, and is raised up in all purity; it is mystically enlightened by the one God in three Persons.

The Gospel

Deacon: Let us be attentive!
Priest: Peace + be with all.
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us be attentive!

The choir sings the resurrectional prokimenon or of the feast. The deacon incenses; if incensing had already been performed at the exaltation, it is not repeated here.

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: For You are holy, our God, and You dwell in the holy place, and to You we give glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Then immediately according to the tone of the prokimenon: Let everything that breathes give praise to the Lord.
Verse: Praise God in His holy place, praise Him in His mighty heavens.
Deacon: That we be deemed worthy of hearing the holy Gospel, let us pray to the Lord, our God.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. (3x)
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us stand and listen to a reading of the holy Gospel.
Priest: Peace + be with all.
Choir: And with your spirit.
Priest: A reading of the holy Gospel according to (name of the Evangelist).
Choir: Glory be to You, O Lord, glory be to You!
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

The priest alone reads the Gospel (see pp. 413-429). After the reading, the priest closes the Gospel Book, kisses it, and places it upon the tetrapod. The choir reads the Hymn of Resurrection which is immediately taken after the Gospel on all Sundays (except Palm Sunday), everyday from the feast of the Pasch (Resurrection) to its leave-taking on the Ascension of our Lord, on the feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, and on the Saturday of Lazarus. It may be sung according to Tone 6.

Hymn of Resurrection

Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, let us adore the holy Lord Jesus Who alone is sinless. We bow to Your cross, O Christ, and we praise and glorify Your holy Resurrection. You are our God and besides You we recognize no other, and we invoke Your name. Come, all you faithful, and let us bow to the holy Resurrection of Christ, since through the Cross joy has come to all the world. Ever praising the Lord, let us extol His Resurrection, since He, having endured the Crucifixion, has destroyed death by His death.

Psalm 50

Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness.* In Your compassion blot out my offense.
O wash me more and more from my guilt* and cleanse me from my sin.
My offenses truly I know them;* my sin is always before me.
Against You, You alone, have I sinned;* what is evil in Your sight I have done.
That You may be justified when You give sentence* and be without reproach when You judge.
O see, in guilt I was born,* a sinner was I conceived.
Indeed, You love truth in the heart;* then in the secret of my heart teach me wisdom.
O purify me, then I shall be clean;* O wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me hear rejoicing and gladness,* that the bones You have crushed may rejoice.
From my sins turn away Your face* and blot out all my guilt.
A pure heart create for me, O God,* put a steadfast spirit within me.
Do not cast me away from Your presence,* nor deprive me of Your Holy Spirit.
Give me again the joy of Your help;* with a spirit of fervor sustain me.
That I may teach transgressors Your ways* and sinners may return to You.
O rescue me, God, my helper,* and my tongue shall ring out Your goodness.
O Lord, open my lips* and my mouth shall declare Your praise.
For in sacrifice You take no delight,* burnt offering from me You would refuse.
My sacrifice, a contrite spirit.* A humbled, contrite heart You will not spurn.
In Your goodness, show favor to Zion:* rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will be pleased with lawful sacrifice, burnt offerings wholly consumed,* Then You will be offered young bulls on Your altar.
