After Psalm 50, the following stichera are sung on Sundays and on feasts, unless otherwise prescribed;

Glory be: (Tone 6): Through the intercession of the holy apostles, O Merciful One, remit our many sins.
Now and for ever: Through the intercession of the Mother of God, O Merciful One, remit our many sins.
Verse: Have mercy on me, O God, in Your kindness. In Your compassion blot out my offense.

On Sunday: Jesus is risen from the tomb, as He foretold, and granted us everlasting life and great mercy. (On feast days special stichera are sung).

On Sundays and on Feast days; and during the Great Fast (on all days except Saturday), the deacon says: Save your people, O God... (p. 31).
Choir: Lord, have mercy. (12x)
Priest: Through the mercies and goodness and love of Your only-begotten Son, with Whom You are blessed, together with Your good and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Anointing with Oil

If there was litiya, then after the exclamation: Through the mercies..., the priest with cross in hand, and the deacon with the oil blessed at Litiya and the brush, stand at the right of the tetrapod. The priest anoints, in the form of a cross, the foreheads of the faithful, who come up to kiss the Gospel Book. After the completion of the anointing, they return to the sanctuary, and having closed the holy doors, the priest takes off the phelonion. The anointing may be performed during the great doxology, if it is more convenient.

Canon – Ode 9

The Magnificat is taken everyday, except on those feasts that have a special verse before the hirmos of the 9th Ode. On Sundays and on feasts, the deacon performs the incensing.

Deacon: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos and the Mother of Light in hymns.

Choir: My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God, my Savior.
More honorable than the cherubim, and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word; O true Mother of God, we magnify you (after each verse).

Because He has regarded the humility of His handmaid, for behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
Because He Who is mighty has done great things for me, and holy is His name, and His love is from generation to generation to those who fear Him.
He has shown might in His arm; He has scattered the proud in the conceit of their heart.
He has put down the mighty from their seat and has exalted the humble; He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich He has sent away empty.
He has received Israel His servant, being mindful of his love, as He spoke to our Fathers: to Abraham and to his seed forever.

Then the ninth hirmos and the rest of the canon are taken.

On Sunday, after the canon, Holy is the Lord our God is sung three times in the tone of the matinal prokimenon. Then the Exapostilaria, (pp. 413-429), are taken. The hymn: It is truly right... is omitted.

After the canon, on feasts, prefeasts, and postfeasts, the Exapostilaria of the feast are immediately taken. The hymn: It is truly right... is also omitted.

On other days, after the canon, the hymn: It is truly right... and the Exapostilaria are taken.

It Is Truly Right

(Tone 6) It is truly right to bless you, O God-bearing One, as the ever-blessed and immaculate Mother of our God. More honorable than the cherubim and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word; O true Mother of God, we magnify you.

Daily Exapostilaria

Monday: Angels, archangels, and principalities, virtues, powers and dominions, thrones and many-eyed cherubim, along with the six-winged seraphim, intercede for us, that we may be delivered from all danger and that we may escape the unending flames.
Glory be: Now and for ever: O Virgin, you are my help, the protection of the world and its strong support; I bow down before you and cry out: Deliver me from all affliction and from the eternal fire, for in you, O Virgin, is all my hope.

Tuesday: O glorious prophet and forerunner of grace! You preached to all salvation through repentance, and have made known to all, O blessed One, the Lamb, Who takes away the sins of the world. Today pray to Him, that He may have mercy on the world.
Glory be: Now and for ever: All the prophets foretold you, O Virgin! David called you a mountain and a ship, a lampstand and a ladder, a bridge and the urn that contains the manna, and the blossoming rod; but we fittingly extol you as the Mother of God.

Wednesday: With faith, we praise Your holy Cross, and we adore it, for it is an unconquerable weapon and a bulwark of faith; it is a great protection, the praise of Christians, the defense of orthodoxy, and the glory of the passionbearers; therefore, we venerate it.
Glory be: Now and for ever: Standing near the Cross and seeing your Son crucified on the tree and lifeless, you, O most pure one, wept as a mother would, and tearfully lamenting, you cried out: What is this wonder! That the Creator as a creature gives Himself to be raised upon the cross to be crucified?

Thursday: O Apostles of the Lord, you traveled to the ends of the earth and preached the truth of the Incarnation of the Lord from a virgin, converting nations from deceit, and enlightening and teaching all to worship the Holy Trinity.
Glory be: Now and for ever: O most pure Virgin! With the wise Apostles and the multitude of martyrs, together with the wise Nicholas, pray unceasingly to Christ, that He may deliver us from every kind of misfortune; for we have placed our hope in you, O Virgin!

Friday: Rejoice, O most holy Cross, – impregnable bulwark of the world, harbor of the unfortunate, protection of those who are in distress, victory of kings, protection of armies, crown of the apostles, and salvation of the faithful!
Glory be: Now and for ever: Seeing You nailed to the cross, the most pure one wept and lamented, crying out: How has the Sun of Glory, the most splendorous light, set? How is it; that You, for the sake of the salvation of the human race, were nailed to the cross and pierced in the side with a lance? O my Son and my God!

Saturday: O glorious prophets, blessed apostles, righteous patriarchs, festive assembly of hierarchs, ascetics, just ones, company of holy women, and all the holy martyrs! With the Mother of God, intercede with the Lord, that He may have mercy on your servants.
Glory be: Now and for ever: O sweetness of the angels, joy of the suffering, defender of Christians, O Virgin and Mother of our Lord! Intercede for us and deliver us from the eternal torments.

Exapostilaria during the Great Fast

Tone 1
O Christ, You make the light arise, purify my heart from all sin ...

Monday: through the protection of Your angelic powers and save me.
Tuesday: through the prayers of Your Forerunner, and save me.
Wednesday and Friday: through the power of Your holy cross, and save me.
Thursday: through the prayers of Your holy apostles, and save me.

Glory be: O Christ, You make the light arise, purify my heart from all sin, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: O Christ, You make the light arise, purify my heart from all sin, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 2
Send forth Your eternal light, O Christ our God, illumine my eyes and my heart... (see above).

Glory be: Send forth your eternal light, O Christ our God, and illumine my heart, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: Send forth Your eternal light, O Christ our God, illumine my eyes and my heart, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 3
Send forth Your light, O Christ our God, and illumine my heart... (see above).

Glory be: Send forth Your light, O Christ our God, and illumine my heart, through the prayers of all the saints and save me.
Now and for ever: Send forth Your light, O Christ our God, and illumine my heart, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 4
You make the light shine upon the whole world; enlighten my soul by purifying it of every sin ... (see above).

Glory be: You make the light shine upon the whole world; enlighten my soul by purifying it of every sin, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: You make the light shine upon the whole world; enlighten my soul by purifying it of every sin, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 5
O Lord, the source of light, send forth Your brightness to illumine my heart... (see p. 134).

Glory be: O Lord, the source of light, send forth Your brightness to illumine my heart, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: O Lord, the source of light, send forth Your brightness to illumine my heart, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 6
Send Your everlasting light upon our souls, O Lord... (see p. 134).

Glory be: Send Your everlasting light upon our souls, O Lord, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: Send Your everlasting light upon our souls, O Lord, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 7
Enlighten my heart, O Lord, that I may sing to You; teach me to do Your will... (see p. 134).

Glory be: Enlighten my heart, O Lord, that I may sing to You; teach me to do Your will, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: Enlighten my heart, O Lord, that I may sing to You; teach me to do Your will, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 8
O Christ, the everlasting light, enlighten me completely... (see p. 134).

Glory be: O Christ, the everlasting light, enlighten me completely, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: O Christ, the everlasting light, enlighten me completely, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Psalm 148

On Sundays, Feast days, and the final day or leave-taking of a feast, and when the Great Doxology is taken, the choir sings the following verses according to the tone of the first stichera at the praises.

Let everything that lives and that breathes give praise to the Lord.* Praise the Lord from the heavens; praise Him in the heights.* To You is due a hymn, O God!
Praise Him, all His angels,* praise Him, all His hosts.* To You is due a hymn, O God!

If the Lesser Doxology is taken, then we say:
Praise the Lord from the heavens,* praise Him in the heights.
Praise Him, all His angels,* praise Him, all His hosts.
Praise Him, sun and moon,* praise Him, shining stars.
Praise Him, highest heavens* and the waters above the heavens.
Let them praise the name of the Lord.* He commanded: they were made.
He fixed them forever;* gave a law which shall not pass away.
Praise the Lord from the earth,* sea creatures and all oceans,
Fire and hail, snow and mist,* stormy winds that obey His word;
All mountains and hills,* all fruit trees and cedars,
Beasts, wild and tame,* reptiles and birds on the wing;
All earth’s kings and peoples,* earth’s princes and rulers,
Young men and maidens,* old men together with children.
Let them praise the name of the Lord for He alone is exalted.* The splendor of His name reaches beyond heaven and earth.
He exalts the strength of His people.* He is the praise of all His saints, of the children of Israel, of the people to whom He comes close.

Psalm 149

Sing a new song to the Lord,* His praise in the assembly of the faithful.
Let Israel rejoice in its Maker;* let Zion’s sons exalt in their king.
Let them praise His name with dancing* and make music with timbrel and harp.
For the Lord takes delight in His people.* He crowns the poor with salvation.
Let the faithful rejoice in their glory,* shout for joy and take their rest.
Let the praise of God be on their lips* and a two-edged sword in their hand,
To deal out vengeance to the nations* and punishment on all the peoples;
To bind their kings in chains* and their nobles in fetters of iron.
(If 6 stichera are taken) To carry out the sentence preordained* this honor is for all His faithful.

Psalm 150

Praise God in His Holy place,* praise Him in His mighty heavens.
(For 4 stichera) Praise Him for His powerful deeds,* praise His surpassing greatness.
O praise Him with sound of trumpet,* praise Him with lute and harp.
(For 2 stichera) Praise Him with timbrel and dance,* praise Him with strings and pipes.
O praise Him with resounding cymbals praise Him with clashing of cymbals.* Let everything that lives and that breathes give praise to the Lord.

If the Lesser Doxology is taken, see p. 144.

After the stichera, we take, on feasts, the Glory be: and the Now and for ever: according to the typicon.

On Sunday – Glory be: the Gospel stichera; Now and for ever: the following sticherion:

Let Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us* because we have set our hope in You.
Blessed are You, O Lord,* teach me Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Master,* make me understand Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Holy One,* enlighten me with Your laws.
O Lord, You have been our refuge* from one generation to the next.
I said: Lord, have mercy on me,* heal my soul, for I have sinned against You.
O Lord, I have fled to You, teach me to do Your will,* for You, O Lord, are my God.
In You is the source of life* and in Your light we see light.
Keep on loving those* who know You.

Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have mercy on us. (3x)
Glory be: Now and for ever: Holy and Immortal, have mercy on us.
Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have mercy on us.

Then on feasts, the troparion is taken according to the typicon.
On the Sundays of tones 1, 3, 5 and 7, the following troparion is sung:
Today salvation has come to the world. Let us sing to Him Who is risen from the tomb, the Author of life Who has crushed Death by His death and bestowed victory and great mercy.

For tones 2, 4, 6 and 8, the following troparion is sung:
You came forth from death, destroying the eternal bonds of Hades, O Lord. You broke the curse of Death and thus delivered us from the snares of the Evil One. Then You appeared to Your Apostles and sent them forth to preach, and through them You have bestowed Your peace upon all the world, for You alone are rich in mercy.

As the troparion is being sung, the priest, together with the deacon who precedes him, takes the Gospel Book from the tetrapod into the sanctuary, and places it on the altar. Then the deacon says the litany:

Have mercy on us, O God, in the greatness of Your compassion, we pray You, hear us and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. (3x)

We also pray for our most holy universal Pontiff, N., Pope of Rome; for our most blessed Patriarch, N.; for our most reverend Metropolitan, N.; our God-loving Bishop, N., for those who serve and have served in this holy church, for our spiritual fathers, and for all our brethren in Christ.

We also pray for our nation under God, for our government, and for all the military.

We also pray for the people here present who await Your great and bountiful mercies, for those who have been kind to us, and for all orthodox Christians.

Priest: For You are a merciful and loving God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Litany

Let us complete our morning prayer to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Help and save, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
That this whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful, and sinless, let us ask the Lord.
Choir: Grant this, O Lord (after each petition).
For an angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies, let us ask the Lord.
For the forgiveness and remission of our sins and offenses, let us ask the Lord.
For all that is good and beneficial for our souls, and for peace for the world, let us ask the Lord.
That we may spend the rest of our life in peace and repentance, let us ask the Lord.
For a Christian end to our lives, one that is painless, unashamed, and peaceful; and for a good defense at the awesome tribunal of Christ, let us ask the Lord.
Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest: For You are a merciful, gracious and loving God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Peace be with all.
Choir: And with Your spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord.
