SIXTH HOUR

Come, let us adore... (3x) – see page 150.

Psalm 53
(Monday and Thursday)

O God, save me by Your name;* by Your power, uphold my cause.
O God, hear my prayer;* listen to the words of my mouth.
For the proud have risen against me,* ruthless foes seek my life.
They have no regard for God.* But I have God for my help. The Lord upholds my life.
Let the evil recoil upon my foes;* You Who are faithful, destroy them.
I will sacrifice to You with willing heart* and praise Your name for it is good;
For You have rescued me from all my distress* and my eyes have seen the downfall of my foes.

Psalm 54
(Tuesday and Friday)

O God, listen to my prayer,* do not hide from my pleading,
Attend to me and reply; with my cares, I cannot rest.* I tremble at the shouts of the foe, at the cries of the wicked;
For they bring down evil upon me.* They assail me with fury.
My heart is stricken within me,* death’s terror is on me,
Trembling and fear fall upon me* and horror overwhelms me.
O that I had wings like a dove* to fly away and be at rest.
So I would escape far away* and take refuge in the desert.
I would hasten to find a shelter from the raging wind,* from the destructive storm, O Lord, and from their plotting tongues.
For I can see nothing but violence and strife in the city.* Night and day they patrol high on the city walls.
It is full of wickedness and evil, it is full of sin.* Its streets are never free from tyranny and deceit.
If this had been done by an enemy* then I could bear it.
If a rival had risen against me,* then I could hide.
But it is you,* my own companion, my intimate friend!
How close was the friendship between us.* We walked together in harmony in the house of God.
May death fall suddenly upon them!* Let them go to the grave;
For wickedness dwells in their home* and deep in their hearts.
As for me, I will cry to God* and the Lord will save me.
Evening, morning and at noon I will cry and lament,* and He will hear my voice.
God will deliver my soul in peace in the attack against me,* for those who fight me are many, but He hears my voice
God will hear and will humble them,* the eternal judge;
For they will not amend their ways.* They have no fear of God.
The traitor has turned against me;* has broken our pact, with speech softer than butter, but war within the heart.
With words smoother than oil* though they are naked swords.
Entrust your cares to the Lord and He will support you.* He will never allow the just one to stumble.
But You, O God, will bring them down to the pit of death.* The bloodthirsty and the deceitful shall not live half their lives. O Lord, I will trust in You.

Psalm 90
(Wednesday, Saturday, and Sunday)

Those who dwell in the shelter of the Most High* and abide in the shade of the Almighty
Say to the Lord: My refuge, my stronghold,* my God in whom I trust!
It is He Who will free you from the snare of the fowler* who seeks to destroy you;
He will conceal you with His pinions* and under His wings you will find refuge.
You will not fear the terror of the night* nor the arrow that flies by day,
Nor the plague that prowls in the darkness* nor the scourge that lays waste at noon.
A thousand may fall at your side, ten thousand fall at your right,* you, it will never approach,* His faithfulness is buckler and shield.
Your eyes have only to look to see* how the wicked are repaid.
You who have said: Lord, my refuge!* and have made the Most High your dwelling
Upon you no evil shall fall,* no plague approach where you dwell.
For you He has commanded His angels,* to keep you in all your ways.
They shall bear you upon their hands* lest you strike your foot against a stone.
On the lion and the viper you will tread* and trample the young lion and the dragon.
You set your love on Me so I will save you,* protect you for you know My name.
When you call I shall answer: I am with you,* I will save you in distress and give you glory.
With length of days I will content you;* I shall let you see my saving power.

The choir concludes the psalms in the following manner:
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
Now and for ever, and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x)
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Then the troparion, according to the typicon. During the Great Fast, see below.

Now and for ever: Since we have no one in whom to confide because of our many sins,* O Virgin Mother of God, intercede for us with the One Who was born of you;* for a mother’s prayer is a powerful means for obtaining the Master’s favor.* You are most worthy of veneration, so do not turn away from the pleading of us sinners;* for the One Who willed to suffer in the flesh for our sake is full of mercy,* and His power is sufficient to save us.

During the Great Fast, the following troparion is taken:

(Tone 6) O Lord, on the sixth day and at the sixth hour* You nailed to the cross the sin which Adam presumed to commit in paradise.* Now also tear up the list of our iniquities and save us,* O Christ our God.
Verse: O God, listen to my prayer,* do not hide from my pleading.
Verse: As for me, I will cry to God,* and the Lord will save me.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Since we have no one... (see above).

Troparion of the Prophecy, Wisdom! Let us be attentive! First prokimenon and verse. Priest: Wisdom! Announce the reading from the Old Testament. Priest: Let us be attentive! Reading, and then second prokimenon and verse.

Let Your bounties, O Lord, come down upon us in haste, for our need has become great indeed. Help us, O God our Savior, for the glory of Your name. Save us, O Master, and forgive our sins for the sake of Your name.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the kontakion.

During the Great Fast, instead of the kontakion, the following troparia are sung:

(Tone 2) In the middle of the earth You brought about our salvation;* upon the cross You stretched out Your most pure hands* to gather all the nations who sing to You:* O Lord, glory be to You.

Glory be: We bow before Your sacred image, O gracious Lord,* and beg forgiveness for our offenses, O Christ our God;* for You, of your own free will, deigned to ascend the Cross in Your human nature* to deliver from the bondage of the Enemy those whom You have created.* Therefore, we gratefully cry out to You:* Through Your coming to save the world,* O Savior, You have filled all with joy.

Now and for ever: O Mother of God, fount of mercy;* deem us worthy of compassion.* Look upon a sinful people; as always show your power.* For, placing our trust in you, we cry out to you: Hail!* as once did Gabriel, the prince of angels.

On Wednesday and Friday, instead of O Mother of God... the following:

Now and for ever: We praise you, O Mother of God, more glorious than all others;* Death was put to death, and Hades was crushed by the cross of your Son;* He raised us from death and granted us eternal life.* Paradise is again opened, for us to enjoy as before.* Therefore, in thanksgiving we glorify the love and power of Christ our God.

Lord, have mercy (40x); Prayer: “O Christ our God ...” all the rest as in the First Hour to the prayer of the First Hour, (see p. 155 ff.), then:

Prayer of the Sixth Hour

O God, Lord of Powers and Maker of the whole creation, through Your compassion beyond our understanding, You sent down Your only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, for the salvation of our race. Through His cross He cancelled the debt of our sins and triumphed over the powers and masters of darkness. Now accept from us sinners these prayers of thanksgiving and petition, and preserve us from any deadly fall in the darkness and against every visible and invisible enemy who may seek our harm. Pierce our bodies with fear of You, and let not our souls fall into evil words or thoughts, but, instead, wound them with longing for You so that, looking upon You at all times and guided by the light that emanates from You, we may contemplate the unapproachable eternal light. May we ever address our thanksgiving and worship to You, O eternal Father, and to Your only-begotten Son, and to Your all-holy, gracious, and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

If the Ninth Hour is to follow, then begin immediately: Come, let us adore...; otherwise, the small dismissal is taken:

Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You!
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers; and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.
