Priest (quietly): Holy Lord, You live on high and yet stoop to look down upon the earth, and with Your divine eyes You see all creatures. Before You we bow down in spirit and body, and we pray You, O Holy of Holies, stretch forth Your invisible hand from Your holy dwelling and bless us. If we have sinned in any way, either deliberately or through human frailty, forgive us, for You are good; You give us earthly and heavenly blessings, and You alone love all.

Exclamation: For it is You alone Who have mercy and save us, and we glorify You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen

Deacon: Wisdom! Choir: Give the blessing. Then the Great Dismissal (p. 36). If the First Hour is to follow, then the choir immediately begins: Come, let us adore...

Lesser Doxology

During the Great Fast, the priest first intones:
For to You belongs glory, O Lord our God, and we render glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen. And then immediately:

Priest: Glory to You Who have shown us the light!
Choir: Glory to God in the highest,* and to His people on earth, peace and good will.
Lord God, Heavenly King, Almighty God and Father,* with the Lord Jesus Christ, only Son of the Father, and the Holy Spirit.
We praise You, we bless You, we worship You,* we glorify You, we thank You for Your great glory.
Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father,* You take away the sins of the world, have mercy on us.
You take away the sins of the world,* hear our prayer.
You are seated at the right hand of the Father,* have mercy on us.
For You alone are holy, You alone are the Lord, Jesus Christ,* for the glory of God the Father. Amen.
I will bless You day after day,* and praise Your name forever.
Lord, You have been our refuge* from one generation to the next.
I said: Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul,* for I have sinned against You.
O Lord, I have fled to You, teach me to do Your will,* for You, O Lord, are my God.
In You is the source of life* and in Your light we see light.
Keep on loving those* who know You.
Count us worthy, O Lord,* of passing this day without sin.
Blessed are You, O Lord, God of our Fathers,* and praised and glorified is Your name forever. Amen.
Let Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us*, because we have set our hope in You.
Blessed are You, O Lord,* teach me Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Master,* make me understand Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Holy One,* enlighten me with Your laws.
O Lord, Your mercy endures forever;* do not despise the work of Your hands.
It is proper to praise You,* and to You belong hymns.
Glory belongs to You,* Father, Son, and Holy Spirit;
Now and for ever* and ever. Amen.

Then the deacon says the litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ... (p. 143). After the litany, the stichera of the aposticha. On ordinary days the following verses (Ps 89) are added:

In the morning, fill us with Your love; we shall exalt and rejoice all our days. Give us joy to balance our affliction for the years when we knew misfortune.* Show forth Your work to Your servants; let Your glory shine on their children.

Let the favor of the Lord be upon us;* give success to the work of our hands! Give success to the work of our hands!

After the stichera of the aposticha, we recite:
It is good to give thanks to the Lord,* and to make music to Your name, O Most High.
To proclaim Your love in the morning* and Your truth in the watches of the night.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; the troparion according to the typicon (during the Great Fast, see below); then the litany Have mercy on us, O God... (p. 142); and the daily dismissal (p. 37).

If the First Hour is to follow immediately after Matins, then, instead of the Lesser Dismissal, the following is taken:
Deacon: Wisdom!
Choir: Give the blessing.
Priest: Blessed is Christ, our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Then immediately begin the First Hour: Come let us adore...

During the Great Fast, after the Our Father, we recite the following troparion:
Standing in the temple of your glory is like standing in heaven itself. O Mother of God and Gate of Heaven, open for us the door of your mercy.

Lord, have mercy (40x). Master, give the blessing!
Priest: Blessed is Christ our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Heavenly King, strengthen Your church, affirm our faith, calm the nations, give peace to the world, and preserve this city (this village, this monastery). Grant the faithful departed a share in the dwelling of the just, and receive and forgive us after repentance and confession, for You are good and love mankind.
Choir: Amen.
Lord, have mercy (3x). Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word, O true Mother of God, we magnify you.
Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us.
Choir: Amen.

Prayer of St. Ephrem

O Lord and Master of my life, drive from me the spirit of indifference, despair, lust for power, and idle chatter.
(Prostration)
Instead, bestow on me, Your servant, the spirit of integrity, humility, patience, and love. (Prostration)
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins and not judge my brothers and sisters; for you are blessed for ever and ever. Amen. (Prostration)

God, be merciful to me a sinner. God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me. I have sinned without number; forgive me, O Lord. (12 small bows)

If the First Hour is to follow, then the choir begins: Come let us adore...; if not, the priest says:
Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You.
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x): Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God... (p. 37).

After Matins

Sunday:
(Tone 6): O Christ our Savior, the angels in heaven sing the praises of Your resurrection; make us, on earth, also worthy to extol and glorify You with a pure heart.

Monday:
O Immaculate One, imitating the speech of the archangel, we cry out to you: rejoice, O full of grace; the Lord is with you!

Tuesday:
(Tone 6): We have no other help; we have no other hope besides you, O Immaculate Virgin! You are our hope; you are our glory. Therefore, help us for we are your servants. May we not be put to shame.

Wednesday and Friday: By the power of Your cross, O Christ, give me understanding, that I may glorify Your saving crucifixion with song.

Thursday:
(Tone 6): O Mother of God, you are the true vine laden with the Fruit of Life; wherefore, we implore you, O Lady, to intercede together with the apostles and all the saints that we may obtain mercy for our souls.

Saturday:
(Tone 8): O Mother of God, we your servants sing a hymn of thanks to you, a hymn of triumph to a valiant leader; for you have delivered us from all peril. We now exclaim to you: hail, O bride and virgin ever-pure!

On the feasts of our Lord, of the Theotokos, and of the saints, the Exaltation is sung.
