ABRIDGED HOROLOGION

VESPERS

Vespers with Nocturnal Vigil (Litiya): The priest, vested in the epitrachelion and phelonion (monks vest in the mantle), opens the holy doors. The deacon performs the incensing as usual, while the priest, during that time, stands before the altar. After the incensing, the deacon says in a low voice: Master, give the blessing! Then he leaves the sanctuary and stands before the holy doors, and exclaims: Master, proceed! [However, where it is customary, the holy doors are opened, the deacon exits through the northern door, stands before the holy doors, and exclaims: Master, proceed! Then he returns to the sanctuary, takes a candle and goes before the priest, who performs the incensing as prescribed. After the incensing, the deacon, returning to his place before the holy doors, says in a low voice: Master, give the blessing!]

Then the priest at the altar intones:
Glory be to the holy, consubstantial, life-giving and undivided Trinity, always, now and for ever and ever.

Choir: Amen. Come let us adore.... Then Ps. 103

The priest closes the holy doors, takes off the phelonion, and, vested only in the epitrachelion (and mantle), departs through the northern door and stands before the holy doors, where he reads the Prayers of Light. The deacon remains in the sanctuary.

Vespers without Nocturnal Vigil (Litiya): At Daily Vespers or at Great Vespers without Litiya, the priest, vested in the epitrachelion (and mantle, at Great Vespers), exits via the northern door and, standing before the closed holy doors, makes a small bow and intones:

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!
Heavenly King, Advocate, Spirit of Truth,* Who are everywhere present and fill all things,* Treasury of Blessings, Bestower of Life, come and dwell within us;* cleanse us of all that defiles us,* and, O Good One, save our souls.

Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have mercy on us. (3x)

Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit,* now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Trinity most holy, have mercy on us.* Cleanse us of our sins, O Lord;* pardon our transgressions, O Master;* look upon our weaknesses and heal them, O Holy One;* for the sake of Your name.

Lord, have mercy. (3x)

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,* now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Our Father, Who art in heaven,* hallowed be Thy name.* Thy kingdom come.* Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.* Give us this day our daily bread,* and forgive us our trespasses* as we forgive those who trespass against us.* And lead us not into temptation,* but deliver us from evil.

Priest: For the kingdom, the power and the glory are Yours, Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.

Choir: Amen. Lord, have mercy. (12x)
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Come, let us adore the King, our God.
Come, let us adore Christ, the King and our God.
Come, let us adore and bow down to the only Lord Jesus Christ, the King and our God.

Psalm 103

Bless the Lord, O my soul!* You are very great, O Lord, my God,
Clothed in pomp and brilliance;* arrayed with light as with a cloak.
Stretching out the sky as a tent-cloth,* covering Your lofty halls with water,
You make the clouds Your conveyance;* You surge on the wings of the wind.
You make spirits Your messengers,* and flaming fires Your attendants.
You settle the earth on its firm foundation;* it shall stand unmoved from age to age.
The abyss covers it like a garment;* waters stand over the mountains.
At Your rebuke they will take flight;* at the peal of Your thunder they will fear.
They hurdle the hills and run down the dales,* to the place You have chosen for them.
You have set up a boundary not to be passed;* they shall never return to cover the earth.
Down in the gullies You make springs to rise;* water shall go down between the mountains.
They shall give drink to the beasts of the field;* wild asses will seek them to quench their thirst.
The birds of the sky will abide by them;* from among the rocks they will raise their song.
From Your lofty halls You refresh the mountains;* the earth shall be fed with the fruit of Your works.
You make green pastures for the cattle,* and food-plants for the service of all,
So that bread may be brought forth from the earth,* and wine that gladdens the heart of all;
So that oil may put a gleam upon his face;* and that bread may strengthen the heart of all.
The trees of the plain will be satisfied,* the cedars of Lebanon that He planted.
The sparrows will build their nests in them;* and the herons will call them their home.
To the deer belong high mountains,* to rodents, the shelter of the rocks.
You have made the moon to mark the seasons;* the sun knows the time of its setting.
You establish darkness, and it is night,* wherein all the forest creatures prowl around.
Young lions roar for their prey,* and call out to God for their meat.
As the sun rises, they will come together,* and lay themselves down in their dens.
Man will go out to his labor,* and work until eventide.
How great are Your works, O Lord!* In wisdom You have wrought them all.
The earth is filled with Your creatures.* Even the wide and open sea itself,
Within it there are countless creeping things,* living beings small and large.
Upon it there are ships a-sailing,* and that great beast You made to have fun therein.
All of them look up to You,* to give them their food in due time.
You provide and they gather up;* You open Your hand and they are full.
You hide Your face and they cringe;* You suspend their breath, and they die and return to their dust.
You send forth Your breath and they live;* You renew the face of the earth.
May the Lord’s glory endure forever;* may the Lord rejoice in His works;
He looks upon the earth and makes it quake;* He touches the mountains and they smoke.
I will sing to the Lord as long as I live;* I will praise my God as long as I last.
Would that my thoughts be pleasing to Him:* and I will rejoice in the Lord.
May sinners vanish from the earth, and may the wicked be no more.* Bless the Lord, O my soul!
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God (3x).

As Psalm 103 is being recited, the priest quietly reads the Prayers of Light in front of the holy doors. Only one of the prayers may be read throughout the entire week according to the tone of the week.

The Prayers of Light

O Lord, compassionate and loving, long-suffering and most merciful, hear our prayer and listen to the voice of our supplication. Make a favorable covenant with us, guide us along Your ways that we may live in Your truth, gladden our hearts that we may fear Your holy name; for You are great and You perform wondrous deeds. You are the only God and none other is like You, O Lord. You are great in mercy and able, in Your power, to assist, support, and save all those who place their hope in Your holy name; and to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is due all glory, honor, and adoration, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, in Your indignation do not rebuke us; in Your wrath do not chastise us; but deal with us according to Your loving-kindness. O Physician and Healer of our souls, guide us to the harbor of Your will; enlighten the eyes of our mind that we may know Your truth. Grant that the remainder of this day and all the days of our life may be peaceful and without sin, through the prayers of the holy Mother of God and through the prayers of all the saints; for Yours is the might, and Yours is the kingdom and the power and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord our God, be mindful of us sinners, Your unworthy servants, as we call upon Your holy name, and put us not to shame for having placed our hope in Your mercy. Graciously grant us, O Lord, all the means of salvation; make us worthy to love and fear You with all our heart and to accomplish Your will in all things. For You are a gracious Lord and You love mankind; and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, You are praised by the holy powers in hymns which are never silent, and in doxologies which never cease. Fill our mouths with Your praise that we may exalt Your holy name. Through the prayers of the holy Mother of God and the intercession of all Your saints, give us a part and an inheritance with those who fear You in truth and who keep Your commandments. For to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is due all glory, honor, and adoration, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Blessed are You, O Lord, almighty God. You know the mind of each person; You know what each needs even before they ask or are aware of it. Now, O King Who loves mankind and Who is gracious in everything, in Your great mercy allow us to call upon Your holy name with an unashamed conscience. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the Evil One; and in Your providence grant all that is beneficial to us. For to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is due all glory, honor, and adoration, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, O Lord, You hold all things together in Your spotless hands; You are long-suffering toward us all; You grieve at our wickedness. Remember Your compassion and mercy, and visit us in Your goodness. Grant that for the rest of this day we may escape from the manifold deceits of the Evil One; and keep our life free from every assault of the enemy, through the grace of Your all-holy Spirit. Grant this through the mercies and love for mankind of Your only-begotten Son with Whom You are blessed, together with Your all-holy, gracious, and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O great and wonderful God, You govern all things with Your indescribable goodness and rich providence. You have provided us with the goodness of this world and have assured us, through Your kindness, of attaining the promised kingdom. O Lord, through all the blessings already received this day, You have kept us away from evil; grant that we spend its remaining hours without blame before Your holy glory, and that we may sing Your praise, O You, the only gracious One Who loves mankind. For You are our God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O great and most high God, You alone are immortal and You dwell in a light which is unapproachable. You created all things in Your wisdom, dividing light from darkness, establishing the sun to govern the day and the moon and stars to rule the night. You have deemed us, poor sinners, worthy to reach this hour, to come into Your presence with our thanks, and to offer You our evening praise. O Lord Who loves mankind, let our prayers ascend to You as incense, and accept them as a sweet fragrance. Grant that this evening and the coming night may be spent in peace; clothe us with the armor of light; save us from the fears of the night and from things that lurk in darkness. Grant that the sleep You have given to refresh us from our fatigue may be free from every evil. Yes, O Lord and Giver of all good things, grant that, having found favor in Your sight, we may lie down to rest, remembering Your name throughout the night; and enlightened by the practice of Your commandments, may we rise in gladness of soul to praise Your goodness, offering prayers and supplications for our sins and those of Your people. Look down upon us with mercy, through the intercession of the Mother of God; for You are gracious Lord Who loves mankind, and we glorify You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

After the recitation of the Psalm 103, the priest returns to the sanctuary and stands before the altar; the deacon departs through the northern door, stands before the holy doors, and intones the litany. If there is no deacon, the priest intones the litany before the holy doors.

Litany of Peace

In peace let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (and after each petition).

For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.

For peace throughout the whole world, for the well-being of God's holy churches and for the unity of all, let us pray to the Lord.

For this holy church and for all who enter it with faith, reverence, and fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.

For our most holy universal Pontiff, N., Pope of Rome, let us pray to the Lord.

For our most blessed Patriarch, N., our most reverend Metropolitan, N., our God-loving Bishop, N., the reverend priesthood, the diaconate in Christ, and all the clergy and the people, let us pray to the Lord.

For our nation under God, for our government, and for all the military, let us pray to the Lord.

For this city (or For this village, or For this holy monastery), for every city and country and for the faithful who live in them, let us pray to the Lord.

For favorable weather, for an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and for peaceful times, let us pray to the Lord.

For seafarers and travelers, for the sick and the suffering, for those held captive, and for their salvation, let us pray to the Lord.

That we may be delivered from all tribulation, wrath, and misfortune, let us pray to the Lord.

Help us, save us, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.

Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest: For all glory, honor, and worship befit You, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

After the litany, the priest returns to the sanctuary and stands before the altar with the deacon at his right.

Blessed Is the Man

This hymn is sung at every Saturday Vespers and on all the feasts of the Most Holy Theotokos and the saints; on the feasts of our Lord, but only if they occur on Sunday or Monday.

Blessed is the man Alleluia* – who has not walked in the counsel of the wicked. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
For the Lord knows the way of the just,* but the way of the wicked shall be lost. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Serve the Lord with fear,* exalt in Him with trembling. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Blessed are those* who trust in Him! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Arise, O Lord,* save me, my God. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Salvation is of the Lord!* Upon Your people Your blessing. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Now and for ever and ever. Amen. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

After the hymn: Blessed is the man ... the deacon says the small litany before the holy doors, and after the doxology he returns to the sanctuary.

Small Litany

Again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord.
Help us, save us, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.
Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

Priest: For the kingdom and the power and the glory, are Yours, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.

Psalm 140

On Saturday evening and on all the feast days, the deacon, or the priest if there is no deacon, performs the incensing as prescribed by the typikon. The choir sings the first two verses of Psalm 140 according to the tone of the first sticherion.

O Lord, I have cried to You,* hear me; hear me, O Lord!* O Lord, I have cried to You, hear me;* receive the voice of my prayer* when I call upon You.* Hear me, O Lord!
Let my prayer rise like incense before You;* and the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice.* Hear me, O Lord!
Set a guard, O Lord, before my mouth* and a portal around my lips.
Incline my heart away from evil dealings,* from finding excuses for sinful deeds.
In company with those who work iniquity,* let me not partake of what they choose.
May the just chasten me with justice and reprove me;* may the oil of the wicked never touch my head.
Yet even then shall I pray for their welfare.* Their rulers were swallowed near the rock.
My words will be heard,* for they were sweet.
As a lump of clay broken on the ground,* so their bones were strewn near the grave.
To You, Lord, O Lord, my eyes are lifted up.* In You have I hoped; let not my soul be lost.
Keep me from the snare that was set for me,* and from the stumbling-blocks of the wicked.
The wicked shall fall into their own nets,* while I remain alone until I can escape.
