THIRD HOUR

Come, let us adore... (3x) – see page 150.

Psalm 16
(Monday and Thursday)

Lord, hear a cause that is just,* pay heed to my cry.
Turn Your ear to my prayer,* no deceit is on my lips.
From You may my judgment come forth.* Your eyes discern the truth.
You search my heart, You visit me by night.* You test me and You find in me no wrong.
My words are not sinful like human words.* I kept from violence because of Your word,
I kept my feet firmly in Your paths;* there was no faltering in my steps.
I am here and I call, You will hear me, O God.* Turn Your ear to me; hear my words.
Display Your great love,* You Whose right hand saves Your friends from those who rebel against them.
Guard me as the apple of Your eye.* Hide me in the shadow of Your wings from the violent attack of the wicked.
My foes encircle me with deadly intent.* Their hearts tight shut, their mouths speak proudly.
They advance against me,* and now they surround me.
Their eyes are watching to strike me to the ground, as though they were lions ready to claw* or like a young lion crouched in hiding.
Lord, arise, confront them, strike them down!* Let Your sword rescue my soul from the wicked;
Let Your hand, O Lord, rescue me from my enemy,* from those whose reward is in this present life.
You give them their fill of Your treasures;* they rejoice in abundance of offspring and leave their wealth to their children.
As for me, in my justice I shall see Your face and be filled,* when I awake, with the sight of Your glory.

Psalm 24
(Tuesday and Friday)

To You, O Lord, I lift up my soul;* I trust You.
Let me not be disappointed;* do not let my enemies triumph.
Those who hope in You shall not be disappointed,* but only those who wantonly break faith.
Lord, make me know Your ways* Lord, teach me Your paths.
Make me walk in Your truth, and teach me,* for You are God my Savior.
In You I hope all day long* because of Your goodness, O Lord.
Remember Your mercy, Lord,* and the love You have shown from of old.
Do not remember the sins of my youth.* In Your love remember me.
The Lord is good and upright.* He shows the path to those who stray,
He guides the humble in the right path,* He teaches His way to the poor.
His ways are faithfulness and love* for those who keep His covenant and will.
Lord, for the sake of Your name forgive my guilt,* for it is great.
To those who revere the Lord* He will show the path they should choose.
Their souls will live in happiness* and their children shall possess the land.
The Lord’s friendship is for those who revere Him;* to them He reveals His covenant.
My eyes are always on the Lord,* for He rescues my feet from the snare.
Turn to me and have mercy* for I am lonely and poor.
Relieve the anguish of my heart* and set me free from my distress.
See my affliction and my toil* and take all my sins away.
See how many are my foes,* how violent their hatred for me.
Preserve my life and rescue me.* Do not disappoint me, You are my refuge.
May innocence and uprightness protect me,* for my hope is in You, O Lord.
Redeem Israel, O God,* from all its distress.

Psalm 50
(Wednesday, Saturday, and Sunday)

Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness.* In Your compassion blot out my offense.
O wash me more and more from my guilt* and cleanse me from my sin.
My offenses truly I know them;* my sin is always before me.
Against You, You alone, have I sinned;* what is evil in Your sight I have done.
That You may be justified when You give sentence* and be without reproach when You judge.
O see, in guilt I was born,* a sinner was I conceived.
Indeed, You love truth in the heart;* then in the secret of my heart teach me wisdom.
O purify me, then I shall be clean;* O wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me hear rejoicing and gladness,* that the bones You have crushed may thrill.
From my sins turn away Your face* and blot out all my guilt.
A pure heart create for me, O God,* put a steadfast spirit within me.
Do not cast me away from Your presence,* nor deprive me of Your holy spirit.
Give me again the joy of Your help;* with a spirit of fervor sustain me.
That I may teach transgressors Your ways* and sinners may return to You.
O rescue me, God, my helper,* and my tongue shall ring out Your goodness.
O Lord, open my lips* and my mouth shall declare Your praise.
For in sacrifice You take no delight,* burnt offering from me You would refuse.
My sacrifice, a contrite spirit.* A humbled, contrite heart You will not spurn.
In Your goodness, show favor to Zion:* rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will be pleased with lawful sacrifice, burnt offerings wholly consumed,* Then You will be offered young bulls on Your altar.

The choir concludes the psalms in the following manner:
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
Now and for ever, and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory to You, O God! (3x)
Lord, have mercy. (3x)

Then the prescribed troparion. During the Great Fast, (see below).

Now and for ever: O Mother of God, you are the true vine laden with the Fruit of Life;* wherefore, we implore you, O Lady,* to intercede together with the apostles and all the saints* that we may obtain mercy for our souls.

During the Great Fast, the following troparion is taken:

(Tone 6) At the third hour, O Lord,* You sent Your Holy Spirit to Your apostles.* Do not take Him from us, O gracious One,* but rather, renew Him within us as we pray to You.
Verse: A pure heart create for me, O God, put a steadfast spirit within me.
Verse: Do not cast me away from Your presence, nor deprive me of Your holy Spirit.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Mother of God... (see above)

Blessed is the Lord God! Blessed is the Lord day by day! May the God of our salvation* smooth our path. Our God is the God of salvation.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the kontakion.

During the Great Fast, instead of the kontakion, the following troparia are taken:

(Tone 8) Blessed are You, O Christ our God.* You filled the fishermen with wisdom,* sending down upon them the Holy Spirit.* Through them You have caught the whole world in your net.* O Lover of mankind, glory be to You!

Glory be: When the Most High descended and confused tongues,* He scattered the people;* but when He distributed the tongues of fire, He called all to unity.* Therefore, with one voice,* let us praise the most Holy Spirit.

Now and for ever: O most pure Mother of God,* you are a hope, a stronghold, and a refuge for Christians;* you are an unconquerable wall and a peaceful haven for the weary.* Through your unceasing intercession you are saving the world;* and we ask you to also remember us, O Virgin worthy of all praise.

Lord, have mercy (40x);

O Christ our God, in all times and places You are worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You are long-suffering and generous in Your mercy and compassion. You love the just and show mercy to the sinner, calling all people to repentance through the promise of blessings to come. Deem, O Lord, at this very hour, to receive our supplications and to direct our lives in the path of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies; set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all affliction, trouble, and distress; surround us with Your holy angels so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unspeakable glory. For You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

Lord, have mercy. (3x), Glory be, Now and for ever, More honorable... to the prayer of the First Hour, see p. 156.

Prayer of the Third Hour

O God our Master, almighty Father; only-begotten Son, Lord Jesus Christ; and You, O Holy Spirit, one God and one Might, have mercy on me a sinner, and save me, Your unworthy servant, according to the ways of Your wisdom. For You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

If the Sixth Hour is to follow, then immediately begin: Come, let us adore...; if not, then the small dismissal is taken:

Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You!
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers; and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.
