(Part II)

Come, let us adore... (3x).

Psalm 50 (see p. 44)

Psalm 101

O Lord, listen to my prayer* and let my cry for help reach You.
Do not hide Your face from me,* in the day of my distress.
Turn Your ear towards me* and answer me quickly when I call.
For my days are vanishing like smoke,* my bones burn away like a fire.
My heart is withered like the grass.* I forget to eat my bread.
I cry with all my strength* and my skin clings to my bones.
I have become like a pelican in the wilderness,* like an owl in desolate places.
I lie awake and I moan* like some lonely bird on a roof.
All day long my foes revile me;* those who hate me use my name as a curse.
The bread I eat is ashes;* my drink is mingled with tears.
In Your anger, Lord, and Your fury,* You have lifted me up and thrown me down.
My days are like a passing shadow* and I wither away like the grass.
But You, O Lord, will endure for ever,* and Your name from age to age.
You will arise and have mercy on Zion:* for this is the time to have mercy; yes, the time appointed has come.
For Your servants love her very stones,* are moved with pity even for her dust.
The nations shall fear the name of the Lord* and all the earth’s kings, Your glory,
When the Lord shall build up Zion again* and appear in all His glory.
Then He will return to the prayers of the helpless;* He will not despise their prayers.
Let this be written for ages to come* that a people yet unborn may praise the Lord;
For the Lord leaned down from His sanctuary on high.* He looked down from heaven to the earth
That He might hear the groans of the prisoners* and free those condemned to die.
The sons of Your servants shall dwell untroubled* and their race shall endure before You
That the name of the Lord may be proclaimed in Zion* and His praise in the heart of Jerusalem,
When peoples and kingdoms are gathered together* to pay their homage to the Lord.
He has broken my strength in mid-course;* He has shortened the days of my life.
I say to God: Do not take me away before my days are complete,* You, Whose days last from age to age.
Long ago You founded the earth* and the heavens are the work of Your hands.
They will perish but you will remain.* They will all wear out like a garment.
You will change them like clothes that are changed.* But You neither change, nor have an end.
The sons of Your servants shall dwell untroubled* and their race shall endure before You.

Prayer

Lord almighty, God of our fathers Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and of their righteous descendants, Who made heaven and earth with all their adornment, Who encompassed the sea with the word of Your command, Who closed the deep and sealed it with Your fearful and glorious name, Whose presence all things revere and before Whose power they quake, because the magnificence of Your glory is unendurable, and irresistible the wrath of Your threat against sinners: the kindness of Your promise is both immeasurable and inscrutable, for You are the Lord most high, compassionate, long-suffering and most merciful, offering atonement for the evils of men.
You, O Lord, in the abundance of Your goodness, promised repentance and forgiveness to those who sinned against You; and in the abundance of Your compassion, You decreed repentance for sinners, that they may be saved. Therefore, O Lord, God of the righteous, You appointed repentance, not for the righteous, not for Abraham and Isaac and Jacob who did not sin against You, but for me a sinner, for I committed more sins than there are grains of sand in the sea. My transgressions are multiplied, O Lord, they are multiplied! I am not worthy to look up and see the height of heaven because of the multitude of my iniquities, being weighed down by many iron chains so that I cannot raise my head; and there is no release for me because I have provoked Your anger and have done what is evil in Your sight, not doing Your will nor keeping Your commandments, but setting up abominations and multiplying offenses.
Now I kneel in my heart, beseeching Your kindness: I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned, and I acknowledge my transgressions; I pray and beg You: release me, Lord, release me! Do not destroy me together with my transgressions! Do not remember forever our wrongs! Do not condemn me to the depths of the earth! For You are God, the God of those who repent, and in me You will show all Your kindness: for unworthy as I am You will save me according to the abundance of Your mercy, and I will praise You continually all the days of my life. For all the hosts of heavens sing Your praise, and Yours is the glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and kontakion of the feast (of the Nativity, (p. 1334); of the Theophany, (p. 1278); or of the Annunciation (p. 1289). During the Great Fast, the following troparia are taken: Have mercy on me...etc., (p. 59).

Lord, have mercy (40x).
Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word; O true Mother of God, we magnify you.
Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us.
Choir: Amen.

Prayer

O God, our Master, almighty Father; only-begotten Son, Lord Jesus Christ; and You, O Holy Spirit, one God and one Might, have mercy on me a sinner, and save me, your unworthy servant, according to the ways of Your wisdom. For You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

(Part III)

Come, let us adore... (3x).

Psalm 69 (p. 45)
(Monday and Wednesday Evening)

Psalm 142 (p. 46)
(Tuesday and Thursday Evening)

On the eve of the feasts of the Nativity and Theophany of our Lord, and on the eve of the feast of the Annunciation, after Psalm 142, the lesser doxology, (p. 47), is taken. Then litiya begins.

During the Great Fast, the canon to the Mother of God, (p. 49), is taken; and after the canon: It is truly right...; Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father. Then the following troparion is taken:

(Tone 6) Lord of powers, be with us, for in times of distress we have no other help but You;* Lord of powers, have mercy on us!
Verse: Praise God in His holy place, praise Him in His mighty heavens.
After each verse, we sing: Lord of powers....
Verse: Praise Him for His powerful deeds, praise His surpassing greatness.
Verse: Praise Him with sound of trumpet, praise Him with lute and harp.
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance; praise Him with strings and pipes.
Verse: Praise Him with resounding cymbals; praise Him with clashing of cymbals. May everything that lives and that breathes give praise to the Lord.
Glory be: O Lord, had we not Your saints to intercede for us and your bounty to have mercy on us, how would we dare, O Savior, to sing to You Whom the Angels endlessly praise? O You Who know the heart, spare our souls!
Now and for ever: Great is the number of my transgressions, O Mother of God. It is in you, all-chaste One, that I seek refuge in my need for salvation. Visit my diseased soul and intercede with your Son, our God, that He deign to forgive the evil I have done, O you who alone are blessed.
Most holy Mother of God, forsake me not all the time of my life, entrust me not to human protection, but take care yourself of my safety, and have mercy on me.
To you I entrust all my hope, O Mother of God; keep me under your protection.

Lord, have mercy (40x); the rest as in Small Compline, (p. 56); O Christ our God..., Lord, have mercy (3x); Glory be: Now and for ever: More honorable than the cherubim... Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!

Priest: May God be merciful to us and bless us; may His countenance shine upon us, and may He have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

The priest says the prayer of St. Ephrem: O Lord and Master..., and O God, be merciful to me..., (p. 40).

Then: Holy God; and after the Our Father: Lord, have mercy (12x); and the prayers: O Lady, Bride of God... and Now that we are.... (pp. 57-59).

Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing!

Instead of the dismissal, the priest recites the prayer: O most merciful Master.... (p. 33).
