1996 ENG RAW Ordo Celebrationis

The Order for the Celebrations of Vespers, Orthros and the Divine Liturgy
According to the Ruthenian Recension

A translation of

Ordo Celebrationis Vesperarum, Matutini et Divinae Liturgiae Iuxta Recensionem
Ruthenorum

originally published in Latin by the Sacred Congregation for the Eastern
Churches

Rome 1944

Serge Keleher Jack Figel

Eastern Christian Publications PO Box 146 Fairfax, Virginia 22038-0146

www.ecpubs.com

1996

Ordo Celebrationis

This translation is dedicated to the memory of

Father Cyril Korolevsky (1878-1959)

English translation of the text of Ordo Celebrationis and commentary ©
Copyright 1996 Eastern Christian Publications, Inc.

First Printing: July 1996 Second Printing: January 1997 Third Printing:
October 2008

Liturgical texts quoted from various sources including The Divine Liturgy of
Saint John Chrysostom, Inter-Eparchial Liturgical Commissions of Pittsburgh and
Passaic, 1965; Christ With Us: The Divine Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom,
Diocese of Stamford, 1954; The Divine Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom, Synod of
the Hierarchy of the Ukrainian Catholic Church, 1987; Liturgy of the
Presanctified Gifts, Diocese of Parma, 1987; The Office of Vespers, Liturgical
Commission of the Sisters of Saint Basil the Great, 1982; The Office of Matins,
Liturgical Commission of the Sisters of Saint Basil the Great, 1989.

ISBN: 0-9640512-4-9

ii

Table of Contents

Foreword v

I. Preliminary Notes 1

II. The Order of Vespers When There is No Vigil 7

III. The Order of Vespers With All-Night Vigil 15

IV. The Order of Orthros for Sundays and Feast Days 23

V. The Order of the Divine Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom and Saint Basil the
Great 31

VI. The Order of Divine Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts 85

Glossary 99

Appendix I. Circular of the Sacred Congregation for the Eastern Churches to
Ruthenian Ordinaries 111

II. Letter of Bishop Daniel Ivancho to Cardinal Tisserant Requesting Certain
Exceptions 116

III. Response from the Sacred Congregation for the Eastern Church to Bishop
Ivancho’s Request 120

IV. Letter of Promulgation of Bishop Emil Mihalik 123

Notes 131

iii

Ordo Celebrationis

Pope Pius XII

“... far from its being the mind of the Apostolic See to damage the integrity or
hinder the preservation of this rite, [the Holy See] rather caused the Ruthenian
Church to cherish most religiously the traditions in liturgical matters handed
down from antiquity. An outstanding sign of this zealous favour towards the
Ruthenian rite may be seen in the new Roman edition of its liturgical books
begun in our pontificate and already in part happily accomplished. In this
edition the Apostolic See, gladly assenting to the wishes of the Ruthenian
bishops, has endeavoured to restore their liturgical rites in accordance with
their venerated ancient traditions.”

Paragraph 37, Orientales Omnes, 1945

Pope Pius XII on the Ruthenian Recension liturgical books

iv

Foreword

The Ordo Celebrationis is an official publication of the Sacred Congregation for
the Eastern Churches. It is intended as a manual for the use of the clergy in
conducting Byzantine divine services according to the “Ruthenian” usage. The
Ordo Celebrationis accompanies the “Ruthenian” Liturgicon published by the
Oriental Congregation in 1942. The aim of these publications, and others in the
same series, was to provide the Greek-Catholic Churches of the “Ruthenian”
tradition with an authentic set of typical liturgical books, replacing the
heavily latinized books previously in use. The Holy See undertook this project
at the direct request of the hierarchs concerned, who had been unable to agree
among themselves on the principles of liturgical restoration.

The first publications of the “Ruthenian Recension” appeared during World War
II. Metropolitan Andrew (Sheptytsky) of Kiev-Halych and Bishop Theodore (Romza)
of Uzhorod accepted the books immediately and reprinted the Divine Liturgy of
Saint John Chrysostom for distribution to the clergy. However, the persecution
which broke out in Eastern Europe disturbed the process.

In the United States, Bishop (later Metropolitan) Constantine (Bohachevsky) of
Philadelphia immediately accepted the books, and even contributed towards the
printing costs. Metropolitan Constantine made it clear that the faithful
observance of these books is a matter of obligation for the clergy. The
Pittsburgh Exarchate, however, was far less willing to receive the “Ruthenian
Recension” books. Eventually, Bishop Emil (Mihalik) of Parma promulgated the
Ordo Celebrationis for his diocese (since the diocese of Van Nuys was later
created from the Parma diocese the promulgation holds in the Van Nuys diocese as
well).[1] The situation in the Archdiocese of Pittsburgh and the Diocese of
Passaic is not clear; while the official translation of the Divine Liturgy of
Saint John Chrysostom published by those dioceses in 1964 and still in use is
explicitly made from the “Ruthenian Recension”

[1] Letter of Bishop Emil Mihalik to the clergy of the Eparchy of Parma, 8
April 1970, Protocol No. G.79/70H (see full text in the Appendix).

v

Ordo Celebrationis

edition of 1942, there has been no formal promulgation of the corresponding
Church-Slavonic books, nor of the Ordo Celebrationis, in either of those
dioceses.

Shortly before his sudden departure from Pittsburgh, Bishop Daniel Ivancho
prepared to promulgate the “Ruthenian Recension” service-books, and for this
purpose Kyr Daniel commissioned Father Eugene Hornyak, Father Eugene Chromoga,
and Father Paul Tigyer to produce an English translation of the Ordo
Celebrationis, which the bishop then had mimeographed ad usum auditorum on 22
February 1954. Included in this comb-bound booklet are two letters, one from
Bishop Daniel to the Oriental Congregation, and the reply from the Congregation
to Bishop Daniel, granting certain dispensations from the strict observance of
the Ordo. Since these dispensations were granted on a temporary basis more than
forty years ago, and since the expected promulgation did not occur, the
dispensations have lapsed. Nevertheless, we have included these two letters in
the Appendix of this present edition, as documents of interest to historians of
the liturgy.

In Canada, Metropolitan Maxim (Hermaniuk) of Winnipeg also promulgated the
“Ruthenian Recension” service-books. The Eparchy in Australia, and the
Exarchate in England, Scotland and Wales, were both created after the
publication of the “Ruthenian Recension” service-books, so these books
automatically are in force in those dioceses.

In the original letter from Cardinal Tisserant announcing the new series of
books (we provide an English translation of this document in the Appendix of
this edition), there is a reference to the liturgical prescriptions of the Synod
of Zamost’ (1720) and the Synod of L’viv (1891). The liturgical prescriptions of
the Synod of Zamost’ have never been in force anywhere in the English-speaking
world. The so-called “liturgical prescriptions” of the Synod of L’viv (1891),
consisting of the proposed Title V and an Appendix, were never enacted nor
promulgated by that Synod and have no juridical value or authority.

Besides the mimeographed translation of the Ordo Celebrationis prepared by order
of Bishop Daniel Ivancho, Matthew A. Berko also translated the Ordo
Celebrationis into English. This translation was published in Canada by
Redeemer’s Voice Press in 1958, with the

vi
Imprimatur of Archbishop Constantine (Bohachevsky) and is still in print. Two
generations of clergy have made grateful use of Father Berko’s translation.

Both translations, however, share a common difficulty for those who wish to use
them. The translators assumed that the divine services would be celebrated in
Church-Slavonic. On that assumption, while the rubrics are given in English,
both translations give the actual texts, or portions of texts, of the liturgical
prayers in Church-Slavonic (the Pittsburgh mimeographed version does this in the
Latin alphabet using Slovak phonetics; Father Berko’s version does this in the
modern Ukrainian alphabet). This seriously reduces the utility of the book for
many clergy in the English-speaking world, where it is increasingly common to
serve in English. Thus we considered it appropriate to prepare a new English
translation of the Ordo, giving texts as well as rubrics in English. In so
doing, we are faithful to the original (in which both texts and rubrics appear
in Latin).

That, however, raised the vexed question of which English translation of the
Divine Liturgy we should cite in this present publication. The Oriental
Congregation approved[2] an English translation of the “Ruthenian Recension”
Divine Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom prepared by Metropolitan Ambrose
(Senyshyn) and published in Stamford in 1954; this edition is still in print
(and available from Eastern Christian Publications). The English translation
prepared by the Inter-Eparchial Liturgical Commissions of Pittsburgh and Passaic
also received the approval of the Oriental Congregation.[3] Another English
translation published by the Basilian Press, Toronto, on the authority of the
Synod of the Hierarchy of the Ukrainian Catholic Church, also received the
approval of the Oriental Congregation.[4] In addition, there are any

[2] Letter of Eugene Cardinal Tisserant to Bishop Ambrose Senyshyn, 15
November 1950, Protocol No. 708/48.

[3] “... publication made upon the confirmation of the Sacred Oriental
Congregation, Prot. N. 380/62; December 10, 1964.”

[4] “... permission to publish this English translation was granted by a Decree
of the Congregation for the Oriental Churches in the Vatican, Prot. No. 353/67,
on the

vii

Ordo Celebrationis

number of unofficial translations, and some of them are at least de facto in
liturgical use.

This requires a Solomon’s decision. Since the 1965 Pittsburgh-Passaic
translation is probably more commonly used than any of the others, we have
generally tried to follow that version, both for the text and for the rubrics.
In a few instances, which are indicated in the footnotes, we have chosen to
follow either the Stamford translation or the concurrence of the Stamford
translation and the Basilian translation.

In addition, we have used excerpts of the English liturgical texts from the
series of books for Vespers and Orthros published for private use by the Sisters
of Saint Basil, Uniontown, Pennsylvania.

Since this is a book of rubrics, and not a service-book, no one will actually
celebrate from it. We hope that the clergy who refer to this present book will
have no difficulty in locating the cited texts in the translations of their own
choice and preference.

On 6 January 1996 the Congregation for the Eastern Churches published an
Istruzione per l’Applicazione delle Prescrizioni Liturgiche del Codice dei
Canoni delle Chiese Orientali; an English translation of this document, titled
Instruction for Applying the Liturgical Prescriptions of the Code of Canons of
the Eastern Churches appeared in May 1996. It is essential to read this
important document in its entirety, with great attention. In particular, unlike
the Ordo Celebrationis, the Instruction gives important theological explanations
of many of the liturgical directives; this represents a significant advance. As
the Instruction itself states (No. 13), “the value of Eastern theologies and
spiritualities, understood as part of the undivided heritage of the Universal
Church, is a fairly recent discovery... The practice of the Eastern liturgy
without its entire heritage flowing into it, as into its highest expression,
would risk reducing it to pure superficiality.”

Several times, the Instruction strongly emphasizes that Eastern Catholics should
retain and follow the liturgical usages of the corre-

10th day of August 1984.”

viii

Foreword

sponding Orthodox Church; that divergent practices are not to be introduced or
encouraged for the sake of “showing the difference,” but instead that existing
liturgical differences should be eliminated. The Instruction [§ 74, pp. 62-63]
says that “if the Eastern Catholic Churches have a special duty of fostering
unity among all Eastern Churches, among other ways, through religious fidelity
to the ancient traditions, it would not seem helpful to introduce a
differentiation of usage with respect to the Orthodox Churches, all
participating in the same common origin. Every change that has been improperly
introduced in more or less recent times should be reëxamined based on these
principles.”

In the footnotes to this present translation of the Ordo Celebrationis, we have
attempted to indicate certain matters which are affected by the dispositions of
the Instruction.

The original Ordo Celebrationis in Latin has no footnotes whatever. All the
footnotes and illustrations in this present edition are our own, given for the
sake of elucidation, and have no juridical authority.

Neither does this translation, or any other translation, have any intrinsic
juridical authority; the Latin text remains always normative. We have attempted
to note some discrepancies between the actual Liturgicon and the Ordo
Celebrationis. Where these occur, we may offer an opinion but we do not claim to
know which takes precedence. Our chief goal in making this translation is to
produce an English version which will be clear, useful, and accurate. To that
end, we have not hesitated to change sentence structure and grammar. The
original text is not poetry, nor scripture, nor liturgical prayer.

We wish to offer our particular thanks to Father Peter Galadza, of the
Metropolitan Andrew Sheptytsky Institute for Eastern Christian Studies, for his
valued assistance in reading the drafts of this translation and offering many
hepful observations. Responsibility for any errors remains, of course, our own.

Finally, we ask the prayers of all those who find this work helpful.

ix

Ordo Celebrationis

x

The Order for the Celebrations of Vespers, Orthros and the Divine Liturgy
According to the Ruthenian Recension

xi

Ordo Celebrationis

xii

I. Preliminary Notes

The Sanctuary and the Holy Table

In order to celebrate divine services properly and suitably, certain points
regarding the sanctuary and the Holy Table must be noted:

1. It is customary to build the sanctuary at least one step higher than the nave
of the church. Within the Altar itself, there should be no further steps leading
to the Holy Table.

2. The Holy Table is square and detached from the wall. The Holy Table is
located in the center of the Altar so that one may walk all around it. The
Prothesis (Proskomede) table is placed against the northern wall[1] while
another table for the sacred vestments is placed against the southern wall.

3. The artophorion or tabernacle, which is in the center of the Holy Table,
should be made in the image of a small church or sepulcher. It should not be so
high or wide as to obstruct or interfere with the liturgical actions of the
celebrant or concelebrants.[2]

4. Candelabra placed on the Holy Table should not overcrowd it; one single
candelabrum having one, two or three candles may go on each side of the cross or
the artophorion. A candelabrum having seven distinct oil-fed lights may be used;
this seven-branched candelabrum is placed behind the Holy Table.[3]

5. Reliquaries, natural or artificial flowers, and other things which are not
used in the Divine Sacrifice should not be placed on the Holy Table. The book of
Divine Service may be kept on a pillow upon the Holy Table, but not on a stand
unless the book is kept on an analogion, to one’s left side.[4]

6. The iconostasis has an image of the Savior to the right of the central doors,
and an image of the Theotokos to the left; the other icons are arranged
according to the various local customs.

1
Ordo Celebrationis

Parecclesiae[5] and chapels should have their own iconostases. A Holy Table
which lacks an iconostasis is not considered truly suitable for divine
services.[6]

7. No one except priests, deacons, clerics and servers may enter the Altar.[7]
Laymen who do not partake in the divine worship[8] have no place in the Altar,
much less women, regardless of their particular status, or what reason might be
adduced.[9]

8. The diskarion should be sufficiently large and provided with a rim; it may
have a small stem-base.[10]

9. The thurible has short chains so that it may be swung at full length more
easily.[11]

10. Liturgical vestments and linens, other than those indicated in this book for
each divine service, should not be used;[12] the use of little bells, large or
small organs, so-called harmoniums, is excluded.[13]

General Rules

11. The small bow, inclining the head and shoulders slightly while making the
sign of the Cross without extending the hand to the knees or to the ground
either before or after the sign of the Cross, is used on these occasions:

a) when one first enters the Altar to approach the Holy Table, and when one
finally departs from the Holy Table and leaves the Altar; while making the bows,
one also kisses the Holy Table;[14]

b) at the beginning of any office when one says: Blessed is our God... or, if
there is no priest, when one says: Through the prayers of our holy Fathers...;

c) at the Trisagion (three times), and also when one says: We bow to Your Cross
...;[15]

d) at: Come, let us worship... (three times);[16]

2

I. Preliminary Notes

e) when one says three Alleluias at the end of the stichologia[17] (three times,
bowing once at each three-fold Alleluia);

f) whenever the three Persons of the Life-giving Trinity are mentioned together;

g) whenever one receives a blessing from the priest;[18]

h) as often as one comes before the royal doors for reading or chanting,[19] and
when one departs from this place after this reading or chanting;

i) as often as one passes before the Holy Table[20] and before the iconostasis;

j) as often as prescribed by the rubrics.

At the beginning and at the end of the Gospel it is proper to make the sign of
the Cross upon oneself without inclining the head and shoulders.

It is also proper for the deacon to show reverence by inclining his head and
shoulders a little to the celebrating priest before leaving the Altar to sing
the ektenies,[21] and when the deacon returns to the Altar.[22]

12. The great bow or the great metany, whereby one makes the sign of the Cross
upon himself, and prostrates his entire body to the ground, is used only during
Great Lent and in the Service of the Presanctified Gifts.[23]

13. Prayers are said with extended and elevated hands only when expressly
prescribed, namely, at: No one who is bound by carnal desires...,[24] at the
Cherubic Hymn,[25] at: Let us lift up our hearts,[26] and at the Lord’s
Prayer.[27] While extending the hands one’s elbows should not touch his sides,
but the hands themselves should be freely extended on high.

14. When no special posture is prescribed, the hands may be held in various
ways: either upon the Holy Table,[28] holding the book

3

Ordo Celebrationis

of divine services, under the phelonion or (crossed) upon one’s breast, but not
joined fingers to fingers.

15. While the deacon recites the ektenies, he raises the orarion with three
fingers of his right hand even though this is not always expressly stated in the
rubrics. The priest may begin reading the silent prayer proper to each ektene as
soon as the deacon has begun the petitions.

16. When the deacon says: Bow your heads to the Lord all incline their heads and
shoulders.

17. The servers do not kneel in the Altar during the Divine Liturgy, however,
the people may kneel if they so desire.

18. When the priest blesses, he places the thumb of his right hand over the ring
finger, extends the index finger, and bends the middle and little fingers
slightly.

In receiving the blessing, all bow their heads and shoulders and sign themselves
with the sign of the Cross.

19. These general rules are to be observed in opening and closing the doors of
the iconostasis and the veil (curtain)[29] of the royal doors:

a) The side doors are always closed unless one must pass through them;

b) The royal doors are opened when the priest censes at the beginning of the
Vespers with All-Night Vigil and are closed when Psalm 103 is begun;[30] they
are opened also during the time of all Entrances whether at Vespers, Orthros[31]
or the Liturgy, and also when the Holy Gospel is carried and when one says the
Dismissal.

c) At Orthros the royal doors are opened before the Prokeimenon and are closed
after the ekphonesis: By the mercy and compassions... They are opened also when
the Great Doxology (Glory to God in the Highest ...) is sung, and then they are
closed after the Dismissal.

4

I. Preliminary Notes

d) At the Divine Liturgy the royal doors are opened before the Little Entrance
and are closed after the reading of the Holy Gospel. They are opened again
before the Great Entrance and are closed after it. Finally, they are opened
after the Communion of the celebrant and deacon and are closed at the end of the
Divine Liturgy. In some places, however, it is the custom to open and close
these doors more often.

e) The royal doors and the side doors remain open during the entire paschal week
(Bright Week) even during the Communion of the celebrant.

f) The royal doors always remain open while a bishop celebrates.[32]

g) The veil of the royal doors is open throughout all of Vespers and Orthros. In
the Divine Liturgy, the veil is opened after the Prothesis and closed after the
Great Entrance; it is opened again when the deacon exclaims: The doors, the
doors... and it is closed at the ekphonesis: Holy Things to the Holy; finally,
the veil is opened before the Communion of the faithful and remains open until
the end of the Liturgy.

In some regions, it is customary to keep the royal doors and veil open from the
beginning to the very end of the Divine Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom and St.
Basil, and in the Service of the Presanctified Gifts, after the solemn offering
of incense: Let my prayer arise ... the royal doors and veil are not closed
after the Entrance at Vespers. This practice is not to be extended to other
regions; on the contrary, it is to be urged that people everywhere should become
accustomed to a more accurate observance of the rite.[33]

20. The priest is not the only one who may put incense into the thurible; on the
contrary, it is customary for the server or deacon to do this and then present
the thurible to the priest for the blessing.[34] It is laudable that the priest
or deacon, while holding the thurible in the right hand, makes the sign of the
Cross with the thurible before censing.

5

Ordo Celebrationis

When censing any person or object he shows reverence by slightly inclining his
head and shoulders.[35]

21. When a priest blesses the incense for the first time in any divine service
he says the prayer: We offer incense to You...; however, for all the other times
during the same service he says: Blessed is our God ...

22. Whenever the clergy put on the sacred vestments, the vestments are blessed
and kissed as set forth at the beginning of the Prothesis (§ 103-106). The same
procedure is followed in the other services but the prayers are omitted.

23. When a priest who is about to function in any liturgical service does not
wear the sticharion, he should be clothed over the cassock with that outer
garment which has large sleeves, and in Greek is called the rason and in
Slavonic riasa.[36]

24. No one is allowed to wear a sacred vestment proper to an Order superior to
his own.[37]

25. While serving the priest, the deacon stands at the priest’s right unless
something else is expressly prescribed; if there are two deacons, the first
stands to the priest’s right and the second to the priest’s left.

26. It is unlawful for clerics who have not been ordained to the diaconate to
function in the office of a deacon.

27. Those phrases which are said in a raised voice by the priest or deacon are
not to be recited in a subdued voice by the other concelebrants except the
ekphoneses which conclude prayers and unless otherwise prescribed.[38]

28. The complete ceremonies are explained in the section describing the service
with one deacon. In the other sections which explain the service with two
deacons, without a deacon, and with concelebrating priests, only matters proper
to those headings are fully explained.

6

II. The Order of Vespers When There Is No Vigil[39]

With the Ministry of One Deacon

29. The deacon, holding the sticharion and the orarion approaches the priest and
with his head bowed says: Master, bless the sticharion and orarion. The priest,
blessing, says: Blessed is our God, ... The deacon: Amen, and then[40] he dons
the sticharion; having kissed the orarion, he places it on his left
shoulder.[41]

The priest blesses the sticharion and orarion

30. The priest, who is already wearing the rason, blesses the epitrachelion, and
puts it on. He leaves the Holy Table by the north door and stands before the
closed royal doors, where he makes a small bow and says: Blessed is our God, ...
After the Our Father ... he exclaims: For Thine is the kingdom ...

7
Ordo Celebrationis

31. During the reading or chanting of Psalm 103, the priest quietly reads all
the Prayers of Light[42] before the royal doors.[43]

After the recitation of Psalm 103, the deacon departs via the northern door and,
having shown reverence to the priest by making a small bow, begins: In peace,
let us pray to the Lord.

Upon completion of the Psalm, the priest returns to the Altar and, standing
before the Holy Table, finishes the recitation of the Prayers of Light if he did
not complete them before. After the priest’s exclamation: For to You is due all
glory, ... the deacon makes a small bow, returns to the Altar through the
southern door and stands at the priest’s right.

32. When the Kathisma[44] is finished, the deacon departs via the northern door
and says the Small Synapte. Following the exclamation of the priest: For Yours
is the might ... he makes a small bow and returns to the Altar.

33. When the choir begins to sing O Lord, I have cried to You, ... the deacon
takes the thurible, presents it to the priest for blessing, and censes the Holy
Table from four sides, then the apsidal icon, the icons in the Altar, and the
priest. Then, having left the Altar via the northern door, he comes before the
Royal Doors, makes a reverence and censes the icons of the southern part of the
iconostasis beginning with the icon of the Savior. Having again made a reverence
before the royal doors, he censes the northern part of the iconostasis beginning
with the icon of the Theotokos, and then the right and left choirs. He censes
the people from the soleas,[45] and finally enters the Altar via the southern
door.

34. When the choir begins to sing the last stichera, the priest blesses and
kisses the phelonion and vests in it; at the Glory ... he and the deacon come
before the holy table. The royal doors are opened. The deacon takes the thurible
and receives the priest’s blessing over it; preceded by candlebearers, the
deacon and the priest, who lets his phelonion hang freely,[46] walk around the
holy table starting from its right side, and then depart via the northern door.

They stand before the royal doors: the candlebearers facing one another, one
near the icon of the Theotokos and the other near the icon

8

II. The Order of Vespers When There Is No Vigil[39]

of the Savior, the deacon in the center, and behind him the priest. Both bow
their heads, and after the deacon, holding the orarion with three fingers, has
said: Let us pray to the Lord in a subdued voice, the priest, secretly says the
Prayer of Entrance: O gracious King, You love mankind ...[47]

However, when the vigils of the Lord’s Nativity and Epiphany fall on a Saturday
or a Sunday,[48] the deacon takes both the thurible and the Gospel[49] for
making the Entrance.[50]

After the Prayer of the Entrance, the deacon, pointing his orarion eastward,
says to the priest: Master, bless the holy entrance. Facing east and blessing,
the priest says: Blessed is the entrance ... Then the deacon proffers the Holy
Gospel (if he carries it) to the priest for kissing; standing in the royal doors
in front of the priest, when the choir has finished the stichera, the deacon
makes the sign of the Cross with the thurible or he raises the Holy Gospel,[51]
exclaiming: Wisdom! Stand aright! While O Joyful Light ... is sung, the deacon
and the priest enter the Altar to return to the Holy Table, and the
candlebearers return through the side doors. Then the deacon censes everything
as prescribed at O Lord, I have cried to You, ... (See § 33).[52]

The deacon censes the iconostasis

9

Ordo Celebrationis

With the censing done and the hymn finished, the deacon comes to the royal doors
and looking toward the people, exclaims: Let us be attentive! The priest,[53]
facing the people, blesses: Peace be with all.[54] The deacon: Wisdom! Be
attentive! And the priest remaining there with hands crossed over his breast
awaits the end of the Prokeimenon.[55] Then,[56] if any lessons are to be
read,[57] he makes a small bow before the Holy Table and proceeds to his chair.
Where the custom prevails, the priest proceeds to his chair immediately after
the deacon’s exclamation: Wisdom! Be attentive! The deacon, however, remains at
the royal doors, and before the title of each lesson exclaims: Wisdom! to the
people, and after the title he also exclaims: Let us be attentive!

35. After the lessons,[58] the priest returns to the Holy Table; the deacon,
having shown a reverence to the priest, walks around the Holy Table and departs
via the northern door; coming before the royal doors, he says the ektene: Let us
all say ... The priest exclaims: For You are a merciful and gracious God, ...
and after: O Lord, keep us this evening ...[59] the deacon says the Aitisis:[60]
Let us complete our evening prayer ... The priest exclaims: For You, O God, are
... The choir: Amen. The priest, blessing: Peace be with all! The choir: And to
your spirit. The deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord. The choir: To You, O Lord.
And while the priest recites the Prayer of the Inclination of the Head, all bow
their heads until the ekphonesis: May the might of Your kingdom ... After the
ekphonesis, the deacon returns to the Altar via the southern door.

36. The choir begins to sing the Aposticha, then: Now You may dismiss your
servant ... Trisagion;[61] and after: Our Father ... the priest exclaims: For
Thine is the kingdom ...

After the troparia, the royal doors are opened.[62] The deacon leaves via the
southern door and stands near the icon of the Savior; looking towards the people
and elevating the orarion with the first three fingers of his right hand, he
exclaims: Wisdom! The choir: Give the blessing! The priest: Blessed is the
One-Who-Is ... The choir: Amen. O God, strengthen ... The priest: O most holy
Theotokos ... The choir: More honorable than the Cherubim ... The priest, facing
the east: Glory to You, O Christ, ... The choir: Glory to the Father ... now and
ever ... Lord, have mercy (three times) ... Master, bless![63] The priest,

10

II. The Order of Vespers When There Is No Vigil[39]

facing the people and standing in the center of the royal doors, says the
Dismissal.

While the priest says the Dismissal, the deacon raises his orarion. Then the
priest returns through the royal doors, and the deacon re-enters the Altar via
the southern door. The deacon closes the royal doors; the priest and deacon make
a small bow before the Holy Table and they proceed to unvest.[64]

With the Ministry of Two Deacons

37. After the recitation of Psalm 103, the first deacon departs via the northern
door and, having made a small bow and shown reverence to the priest, he says the
Great Synapte; after the ekphonesis of the priest For to You is due all glory
... he makes a small bow and returns to the Altar via the southern door.

38. After the Kathisma, the second deacon departs via the northern door and says
the Small Synapte; following the ekphonesis: For Yours is the might ... he makes
a small bow and returns the Altar via the southern door.

39. When the choir begins to sing: O Lord, I have cried to You, ... the
deacons,[65] having taken the thuribles and placed incense into them, approach
the priest; after the priest’s prayer of benediction, both deacons cense the
Holy Table: at first from the front and then the first deacon the right side,
the second deacon the left, and again both together from the east; after this,
the apsidal image and the other images in the Altar, then the priest. Then they
leave the Altar, the first deacon through the southern door, the second deacon
through the northern door. They come before the royal doors and, having made a
reverence, they cense the icons on the iconostasis; the first deacon beginning
with the icon of the Savior, the second deacon with the icon of the Theotokos,
then the first deacon the right choir, the second deacon the left. They cense
the people while remaining on the soleas, one from the right and the other from
the left.[66] Finally, they return to the Altar, the first deacon through the
southern door and the second through the northern door.

40. When the choir begins to sing the last stichera, the priest and the deacons
come before the Holy Table at the Glory ... The royal

11

Ordo Celebrationis

doors are opened. The deacons take the thuribles,[67] receive the priest’s
blessing over the incense and leave via the northern door thus: second deacon,
then the first deacon, and after him the priest. They stand before the royal
doors, the second deacon at the priest’s left and the first deacon at his right.
The first deacon says: Let us pray to the Lord. The priest says the Prayer of
the Entrance. Then the first deacon, who also carries the Gospel (when
prescribed), points towards the east with the orarion and says: Master, bless
the holy entrance! After the blessing, both deacons proceed to the royal doors,
where the second deacon takes his place first, and behind him the first
deacon.[68] The stichera having been completed by the choir, the first deacon,
making the sign of the Cross with the thurible, or elevating the Holy Gospel,
exclaims: Wisdom! Stand aright! After this, they enter the Altar and cense
everything as prescribed at: O Lord, I have cried to You, ... (See § 39).

When the censing[69] and the hymn are completed, the deacons proceed to the
royal doors, facing the people, and the first exclaims: Let us be attentive! The
priest: Peace be with all.[70] The second deacon: Wisdom! Be attentive! The
choir sings the Prokeimenon.[71] Then before the title of each lesson, the first
deacon exclaims: Wisdom! to the people, and following the title, the second
deacon likewise exclaims: Let us be attentive! to the people.

41. After the readings,[72] the priest returns to the Holy Table. The deacons,
having shown reverence to the priest, leave via their doors, i.e., the second
deacon via the northern door and the first deacon via the southern door.
Standing before the closed royal doors, the first deacon says the ektene: Let us
all say ... The second deacon: Let us complete our evening prayer ... After
this, the first deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord. And after the ekphonesis,
they return to the Altar by way of their respective doors and stand at the
priest’s side.[73]

42. Following the troparia, the royal doors are opened, the deacons leave, each
via his own door, and they stand before the royal doors facing one another,
i.e., one at the right, and the other at the left. The first deacon, who stands
near the icon of the Savior, looks towards the people and raising the orarion,
exclaims: Wisdom! When the priest says the Dismissal both keep their oraria
raised until the Dismissal is completed. Then they re-enter the Altar via their
own doors. The royal

12

II. The Order of Vespers When There Is No Vigil[39]

doors are closed and having made a small bow before the Holy Table, all unvest.

Without the Ministry of a Deacon

43. The priest serving Vespers without the ministry of a deacon performs or
recites all those parts which are proper to the deacon excepting the
invitations: Let us pray to the Lord;[74] Master, bless ...[75] and bearing in
mind the procedure set forth in the paragraphs which follow (§ 44-49).

44. He says the Great Synapte before the royal doors, and after the ekphonesis
he returns to the Altar via the southern door.

45. After the Kathisma, he says the Small Synapte and at: O Lord, I have cried
to You, ... he censes as prescribed (See § 33). When the censing is done, he
enters the Altar via the southern door and puts the thurible aside.[76]

46. At the Entrance, he takes the thurible or the Holy Gospel, proceeds from the
right side of the Holy Table, and leaves via the northern door. Bowing his head
before the royal doors, he says the Entrance Prayer: O gracious King, ...
blesses the Entrance with his right hand and kisses the Gospel (if he is
carrying it). Making the sign of the Cross with the thurible or elevating the
Holy Gospel with both hands, he exclaims: Wisdom! Stand aright! and enters the
Altar through the royal doors. While O Joyful Light ... is being sung, he censes
as prescribed (see § 33)[77] and returning into the Altar, stands before the
Holy Table.[78]

47. After the hymn O Joyful Light ..., the priest comes to the royal doors[79]
and facing the people, exclaims: Let us be attentive!, and blessing the people:
Peace be with all,[80] and also: Wisdom! Be attentive! Then if any lessons are
prescribed, he turns toward the Holy Table and proceeds behind it from the right
side, from there he exclaims: Wisdom! before the title of each reading, and: Let
us be attentive! after the title.[81]

48. Following the lessons, he returns to the Holy Table and there says the
ektene: Let us all say ... and the aitisis: Let us complete our evening prayer
...[82]

13

Ordo Celebrationis

49. After the troparia, he faces the people and says: Wisdom!, and standing in
the royal doors says the Dismissal as stated earlier.

With Concelebrating Priests

50. The concelebrating priests, who are usually of an even number, vest in the
epitrachelion and phelonion over the rason just before the Entrance, and they
take their places at the sides of the Holy Table, but not in front where only
the principal celebrant and deacon stand. They stand according to the order of
dignity or priestly ordination; the first concelebrating priest at the right
side of the Holy Table and the second at its left, the third at the right, and
so on.

51. At the Entrance, all make a small bow and, with phelonia hanging freely and
hands lowered, the younger priests preceding, the clergy leave via the northern
door; they stand in double file, one to each side of the royal doors;[83] the
principal celebrant, however, stands in the center and behind the others, and
alone recites the Entrance Prayer.

After the exclamation of the deacon: Wisdom! Stand aright!,[84] all enter
through the royal doors immediately following the deacon, and resume their
places at the sides of the Holy Table.[85] As the deacon walks around the Holy
Table for the censing, the concelebrants withdraw a little from the Holy Table
in order to facilitate his passage.

52. The ekphonesis: For You are a merciful God ... is said by the main
celebrant; the other: For You, O God, are gracious ... may be said by the first
concelebrant, and the other: May the might of Your kingdom ... by the main
celebrant. Following the Dismissal, all make a small bow before the Holy Table,
depart and unvest.

14
III. The Order of Vespers With All-Night Vigil[86]

With the Ministry of One Deacon

53. The deacon, holding the sticharion with the orarion, approaches the priest
and with his head bowed says: Master, bless the sticharion and the orarion. The
priest, blessing, says: Blessed is our God ... The deacon: Amen, and then he
puts on the sticharion. After kissing the orarion, the deacon puts it on his
left shoulder.[87]

54. The priest, vested over the rason in the epitrachelion which he has blessed,
and in the phelonion which he has blessed and kissed, opens the royal doors. The
deacon, having departed via the northern door, stands before the royal doors
with a lighted candle and exclaims: Command! He returns to the Altar via the
southern door. Then the priest, preceded by the deacon bearing a candle, takes
the thurible, over which he says the prayer of benediction, and censes the Holy
Table from four sides, the apsidal icon and the other icons in the Altar, the
Prothesis, the icons of the iconostasis, first the right and then the left side
the choirs, and the people as prescribed. Then, facing the royal doors, he says
in a moderate tone of voice: Bless, O Lord, so that he may be heard.

After this, they enter the Altar, the deacon through the southern door and the
priest through the royal doors. They put aside the thurible and candle. The
priest stands before the Holy Table and exclaims: Glory to the holy and life
giving Trinity, One in Essence and undivided... The choir: Amen. Come let us ...
(three times), and Psalm 103, Bless the Lord, O my soul ...[88]

55. However, where the custom prevails,[89] the deacon returns to the Altar
after the exclamation: Command!, and having taken the thurible and received the
blessing from the priest, he himself (the deacon) performs this censing while
the priest waits at the altar.

15

Ordo Celebrationis

56. The priest closes the royal doors and removes his phelonion. Vested in the
epitrachelion he leaves via the northern door, and, standing before the royal
doors, he reads the Prayers of Light.[90]

The rest follows as stated in the “Order of Vespers with the ministry of One
Deacon” until the Prayer of the Inclination of the Head: O Lord our God, You
lowered the heavens ...

57. After the ekphonesis: May the might of Your kingdom ..., the priest with the
hand cross and the deacon with the thurible depart via the northern door, or,
where according to custom the royal doors are open,[91] the priest goes through
the royal doors and the deacon through the northern door. Then, preceded by the
choir and candlebearers, they proceed to the narthex or, where there is none, to
the main doors of the church.[92] The deacon, having received the incense
blessing, censes the holy icons, if there are any, in the narthex, then the
priest, the choir and those present. When the Stichera for the Litany are
finished, the deacon, in a loud voice, says the petitions: O God, save Your
people ...[93]

At the end the priest exclaims: Hear us, O God ... and blesses the people: Peace
be with all. The deacon exclaims: Let us bow our heads... the priest, in a loud
voice, says the prayer: Sovereign Lord Most Merciful... When the prayer is
finished, all return[94] into the church proper, to the tetrapod on which five
loaves, wheat, wine, and oil are placed for blessing. The priest and deacon
stand before it, the candlebearers to the right and the left, facing each other.

While the Apolytikion[95] is sung, the deacon, having received the blessing for
the thurible, censes the tetrapod from four sides, then only the superior[96]
and the priest.

58. After the deacon has exclaimed: Let us pray to the Lord, and the choir has
responded: Lord, have mercy the priest takes one loaf, with which he blesses the
other loaves, then having returned it, he says in a raised voice the prayer:
Lord Jesus Christ, Our God... But when he says the words: do Thou bless... he
points with his right hand to the loaves, wheat, wine, and oil.

59. After the prayer is completed, the choir sings: Blessed be the Name of the
Lord... and the priest and the deacon enter the Altar via the southern door, or
the priest goes through the royal doors and the

16

III. The Order of Vespers With All-Night Vigil[86]

deacon via the southern door,[97] and they stand before the holy table. Then the
choir says the 33rd Psalm: I will bless the Lord at all times ... to ... but
those who seek the Lord shall not lack any good things.

Following this, the royal doors are opened (if they are not already open[98])
and the priest blesses the people from the royal doors, saying: The blessing of
the Lord be upon you... The choir: Amen, and the Dismissal takes place with the
deacon beginning: Wisdom! as was prescribed for the end of “Vespers without the
All-Night Vigil” (see § 36).

60. If Orthros is served immediately after Vespers as part of the All-Night
Vigil, the priest closes the holy doors after the ekphonesis: The blessing of
the Lord be upon you... and then removes his phelonion.

The lector prays aloud Glory to God in the Highest... (three times) and Lord,
You shall open my lips... (twice) and the Six Psalms. The priest leaves via the
northern door and secretly recites the Orthros Prayers before the royal
doors.[99]

With the Ministry of Two Deacons

61. The priest is clothed in the epitrachelion and phelonion, the deacons in the
sticharion and orarion. The priest opens the royal doors and the first deacon
departs with a lighted candle via the southern door, before the royal doors he
makes a small bow and exclaims: Command! and returns to the Altar via the
southern door (see § 54).

Then the priest, preceded by the first deacon with a candle, incenses as
prescribed above and finishes by saying in a moderate tone of voice: Bless, O
Lord.

After this, the deacon and priest enter the Altar via the southern and royal
doors respectively, having laid aside the thurible, the priest stands before the
Holy Table and exclaims: Glory to the holy and life giving Trinity, One in
Essence and undivided... The choir: Amen. Come let us ... (three times) and
Psalm 103: Bless the Lord, O my soul!... Where it is customary,[100] the deacons
take the thuribles, receive

17

Ordo Celebrationis

the priest’s blessing, and perform the censing themselves (see § 55) while the
priest remains at the Altar.

62. The priest closes the royal doors and removes the phelonion; clothed in the
epitrachelion he departs via the northern door and stands before the royal doors
where he reads the Prayers of Light. The rest follows as prescribed for “Vespers
Without All-Night Vigil with the Ministry of Two Deacons.”

Two deacons saying the ektenies after the lessons

63. After the exclamation: May the might of Your kingdom ... the priest with the
hand cross and the deacons with their thuribles,[101] depart via the northern
door; or, where the royal doors are customarily open, the priest departs through
the royal doors and the deacons via their own doors. Preceded by the choirs and
candlebearers, they proceed to the narthex or, if there be none, to the main
doors of the church. Their thuribles having been blessed, the deacons cense,
each from his own side, the holy icons (if there be any in the narthex),[102]
the priest, the choir and the people present.

18

III. The Order of Vespers With All-Night Vigil[86]

Upon completion of the Stichera for the Litany the deacons alternately say the
petitions:

First deacon: O God, save Your people... Second deacon: Again we pray for His
Holiness...[103] First deacon: Again we pray [for the hierarchy]... Priest: Hear
us, O God... Peace be with all! Second deacon: Let us bow our heads before the
Lord...

After the ekphonesis, they return into the church proper.

64. While the Apolytikion is sung, the deacons cense the tetrapod from its four
sides thus: first, both deacons together from the front, then the first deacon
proceeds to the right side, the second to the left, and each censes his own
side, then both proceed behind the tetrapod where they cense together; finally,
they cense only the Superior and then the priest.[104]

65. At the blessing of the loaves, the first deacon exclaims: Let us pray to the
Lord.

66. The prayer having been completed, the choir sings: Blessed be the name of
the Lord ... The priest and first deacon enter the Altar via the southern door,
the second via the northern door; or the priest may enter by way of the royal
doors, the first deacon via the southern door, the second via the northern door,
and they stand before the holy table. The choir says Psalm 33: I will bless the
Lord at all times ...

After this, the royal doors are opened, if they were not already open, and the
priest blesses the people: The blessing of the Lord be upon you... The choir:
Amen. And the Dismissal is said with the first deacon beginning: Wisdom!

Without the Ministry of a Deacon

67. The priest, clothed in the epitrachelion and phelonion, opens the royal
doors, then censes the altar from four sides and the rest as prescribed above
(see § 54). And turning toward the royal doors, he says in a moderate tone of
voice: Bless, O Lord.

19

Ordo Celebrationis

68. While Psalm 103 is being said, the priest, having closed the holy doors and
put off of the phelonion but retaining the epitrachelion, departs via the
northern door; he stands before the royal doors from where he reads the Prayers
of Light and also says the Great Synapte.

The rest follows as outlined in the “Order of Vespers With the Ministry of One
Deacon” but the priest says the other ektenies[105] before the Holy Table.

69. After the ekphonesis: May the might of Your kingdom ... the priest, holding
the hand cross,[106] departs via the northern door, or, if it is customary,
through the royal doors. Then he goes all the way to the narthex or to the main
doors of the church. The choirs and the candlebearers remain in the narthex
while the priest takes the thurible and censes the holy icons (if there be any
in the narthex) the choir, and the people present. The Stichera for the Litany
having been completed, the priest says the petitions in the narthex and then
proceeds to the tetrapod. Here he censes from the four sides and then only the
Superior.

The rest follows as outlined in the “Order of Vespers With All-Night Vigil and
the Ministry of One Deacon.”

With Concelebrating Priests

70. The concelebrants make the Entrance, after which they return to the sides of
the Holy Table as stated above in the “Order of Vespers Without Nocturnal Vigil”
(see § 51). Having made a small bow, they do not depart but await the time of
the Litany. The ekphonesis: For You are a merciful God... is said by the
principal celebrant; the other: For You are a Good and Man-Befriending God...
may be said by the first concelebrant, however: May the might of Your kingdom
... is said by the principal celebrant.

71. At the Procession for the Litany, all make a small bow before the altar and,
with phelonia[107] suspended freely and hands lowered, the younger clergy
preceding, depart via the northern door; or if it is customary all depart
through the royal doors. They take their places in the narthex or in a place
close to the main doors of the church, standing in double file, one on each
side, with the main celebrant standing in the center behind all, while the
deacon(s) stand near him.

20

III. The Order of Vespers With All-Night Vigil[86]

Candlebearer Candlebearer

Priest 6 Priest 5

Priest 4 Priest 3

Priest 2 Priest 1

Second Deacon Celebrant First Deacon

Arrangement of clergy in the Narthex

If only one deacon performs the censing, then, after he has censed the icons in
the narthex, he censes the main celebrant first, then the concelebrants standing
to the right, then those to the left of the main celebrant. If two deacons
perform the censing, each censes those standing on his side. In case there are
no deacons, the principal celebrant censes the concelebrants beginning with
those on his right.

The ekphonesis: Hear us, O God ... is said by the principal celebrant.

72. For the blessing of the loaves, the concelebrating priests arrange
themselves in the order indicated. After the blessing of the loaves, they
proceed toward the Altar in double file with the younger clergy preceding, and
they stand before the soleas. Having proceeded to the royal doors, the celebrant
blesses the people saying: The blessing

21

Ordo Celebrationis

of the Lord be upon you ... After the Dismissal, the concelebrating priests
return to the Altar with the younger clergy preceding. All make a small bow
before the Holy Table. Then they unvest and depart.

Candlebearer Candlebearer

Priest 6 Priest 5

Priest 4 Priest 3

Priest 2 Priest 1

Celebrant Deacon

Arrangement of clergy at the Blessing of the Loaves

73. If Orthros immediately follows Vespers, the clergy unvest and do not leave
the altar but sit in the apsidal chairs[108] until the singing of the Polyeleos:
Praise ye the Name of the Lord ...

22
IV. The Order of Orthros for Sundays and Feast Days

With the Ministry of One Deacon

74. If there was no All-Night Vigil, Orthros begins in this way:

The priest, vested over the rason in an epitrachelion which he has blessed,
stands before the royal doors and begins thus: Blessed is our God, ... The
choir: Amen. Glory to You, Our God, glory to You! O Heavenly King ... Our Father
... The priest: For Thine is the kingdom ... The choir: Amen. Lord have mercy
(12 times), Glory to the Father ... now and ever ... Come, let us adore ...
(three times).

The priest enters the altar via the southern door, says the Prayer of Incense,
and, taking the thurible, censes the Holy Table from four sides, the apsidal
icon and the other icons in the Altar. Then, departing from the Altar via the
northern door, he comes before the royal doors, he makes a reverence and then
censes the icons on the southern side of the iconostasis, beginning with the
icon of the Savior, then the icons of the northern side, beginning with the icon
of the Theotokos, then the right and left choirs. He censes the people either
from the soleas or by proceeding down the aisle of the temple while the choir
chants Psalm 19: May the Lord hear you ... and Psalm 20: The King shall
rejoice... When the choir begins the Trisagion, the priest, facing east then
censes them, and after: Our Father ..., exclaims : For Thine is the kingdom ...,
he enters the Altar via the southern door, stands before the Holy Table, and
after the singing of the troparia: O Lord, save Your people ... says the ektene
for the civil rulers. After the ekphonesis: For to You is due all glory ... the
choir responds with: Amen.[109] In the Name of the Lord, Father bless. The
priest exclaims: Glory to the holy, and life-giving ... and the choir responds:
Amen. The lector says three times: Glory to God in the highest ... (making a
small bow with each recitation), and says twice: O Lord, You shall open my lips
... The Hexapsalm (How many are my foes, O Lord ... ) is then read.

75. (omitted in original Latin text.)[110]

76. During the recitation of the Six Psalms, the Priest, standing before the
Holy Table, begins to say the Orthros prayers; however, after

23

Ordo Celebrationis

the first three psalms have been read, he departs via the northern door and
stands before the holy doors where he continues the recitation of the Orthros
prayers. When the Psalms are completed, the priest acknowledges the reverence
shown by the deacon, returns to the Altar via the southern door and stands
before the Holy Table.

Toward the end of the Six Psalms, the deacon, vested in the sticharion and
orarion, departs via the northern door, shows a reverence to the priest, and
stands in his customary place from which he says the Great Synapte. The priest
exclaims : For to You is due ... When the choir sings: God is the Lord... the
deacon says the verses; then, having made a small bow, he returns to the Altar
via the southern door.

The deacon says the Great Synapte

77. Following the troparia, the lector reads the current Kathisma, after which
the deacon says the Small Synapte before the royal doors, and the priest
exclaims: For Yours is the might, ... Then the lector reads the second current
Kathisma after which the deacon again says the Small Synapte and the priest
exclaims: For You, O God, are gracious ...

After the troparia: The Assembly of the Angels ...[111] (on Sundays) or after:
We magnify You ... (on feast days),[112] the deacon again says the Small Synapte
and the priest exclaims: For blessed and glorified...

24

IV. The Order of Orthros for Sundays and Feast Days

78. Following the Hymns of Ascent, the royal doors are opened and the deacon,
coming to the royal doors and facing the people, exclaims: Let us be attentive!
The priest, vested in the phelonion, blesses the people: Peace be with all. The
deacon: Wisdom! Be attentive! The choir sings the Prokeimenon.[113] The deacon:
Let us pray to the Lord. The choir: Lord, have mercy. The priest exclaims: For
You are holy, O our God, ... The deacon censes the Holy Table from four sides,
and the rest as prescribed (see § 33).[114] The choir sings: Let everything that
breathes ...

The deacon says the two verses and the choir repeats: Let everything that
breathes ...

Then the deacon exclaims: That we may be deemed worthy...; the choir sings:
Lord, have mercy (three times). The priest, having taken the Gospel and gone
through the royal doors, stands a little before them on the soleas and there
places the Gospel, which he reads facing the people, upon the analogion.[115]
The deacon: Wisdom, let us stand and listen to a reading of the Holy Gospel; the
priest: Peace be with all. Choir: And with your spirit. Priest: A reading of the
Holy Gospel according to St. [Name]. Choir: Glory to You ... Deacon: Let us be
attentive!, and the priest reads the Orthros Gospel.

79. After the reading, the priest kisses the closed Gospel and takes it to the
center of the church where he places it upon the tetrapod. He returns to the
Altar through the royal doors.[116] If it is Sunday, the deacon reads:[117]
Having beheld the resurrection of Christ ... The lector reads Psalm 50: Have
mercy on me, God, in your kindness ...

Following the stichera, the deacon, in his customary place, says: Save O God,
Your people ..., the choir responds with: Lord, have mercy (12 times). The
priest exclaims: Through the mercies and compassions ... and the choir responds
with: Amen and then begins the Canon. If there was no All-Night Vigil, the royal
doors are closed.[118]

80. If there was an All-Night Vigil, then after the exclamation: Through the
mercies ..., the priest, carrying the hand cross,[119] departs through the holy
doors; the deacon takes the oil (which had been blessed at Vespers) and a
quill,[120] and leaves via the northern door, then stands to the right of the
tetrapod. There the priest anoints cruciformly the

25

Ordo Celebrationis

foreheads of those who come to kiss the Gospel. The anointing having been
completed, the priest and deacon return to the Altar through the royal doors and
the southern door, respectively; the Royal Doors are closed and the priest takes
off the phelonion.

81. After the third and sixth Odes, the deacon says the Small Synapte standing
either before the royal doors or, if the anointing of the faithful is not yet
completed, near the tetrapod. The priest says the ekphonesis either from the
Altar, or near the tetrapod. When the Katavasia of the eighth Ode has been
sung,[121] the deacon takes the thurible and, standing before the icon of the
Theotokos, exclaims: The Theotokos and the Mother of Light let us magnify in
songs! Having entered the Altar via the southern door, he then censes the holy
table from four sides and the rest as prescribed (see § 33). After the ninth
Ode, the choir sings: It is truly proper ... on days other than Sunday, or the
Irmos, if it be Sunday or a Feast Day. Then the deacon says the Small Synapte in
the customary place. The priest exclaims: For all the heavenly powers ... The
choir chants the Exaposteilarion.

82. At the Glory ... at the Stichera of Lauds the deacon opens the royal doors.
The priest, clothed in the phelonion, stands before the altar. The deacon stands
at the right side of the priest. Following the last stikhira, the priest, facing
the east, exclaims in a raised voice: Glory to You, Who have shown us the Light.
The Great Doxology is sung. Then the Troparion is also sung according to custom.
Preceded by the deacon, the priest takes the Holy Gospel from the tetrapod to
the Altar and places it upon the Holy Table.[122]

83. Then, the deacon, standing in his customary place, says the ektene: Have
mercy upon us, O God ... and: Let us complete our morning prayer ... The priest
blesses the faithful: Peace be with all. The choir: And with your spirit. The
deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord. The choir: To You, O Lord. And the priest
secretly says the prayer: Holy Lord, You live on high ... after which he
exclaims: For it is You alone ... And the Dismissal is intoned with the deacon
beginning: Wisdom! (see § 36).

84. After the Dismissal, the lector immediately reads the First Hour: Come, let
us adore ... (three times) and the Psalms. After: Our Father ..., the priest,
vested in the epitrachelion intones: For thine is

26

IV. The Order of Orthros for Sundays and Feast Days

the Kingdom ... The lector: the Kontakion and: Lord, have mercy (forty times).
The priest leaves the Altar via the northern door; standing before the royal
doors and facing the east, he reads in a raised voice the prayer: Thou who at
all times and every hour ... The lector: Lord, have mercy (three times); Glory
... now and ever ... More Honorable than the Cherubim...In the Name of the Lord,
bless, Father. The priest: O God, be gracious to us and bless us... The lector:
Amen. The priest says the prayer: O Christ, the True Light ...Glory to You, O
Christ, our God and our Hope... The lector: Glory ... now and ever ... Lord have
mercy (three times), Give the blessing. The priest says the Small Dismissal,
then returns to the Altar and removes the epitrachelion.

With the Ministry of Two Deacons

85. Towards the end of the Six Psalms the first deacon leaves the Altar via the
northern door and says the Great Synapte and also the verses at God is the Lord
..., then he makes a small bow and returns to the Altar via the southern door.

Following the first Kathisma, the second deacon says the Small Synapte and
following the second Kathisma, the first deacon says the Small Synapte in the
same manner.

After the troparia : The Assembly of the Angels ... or the We magnify You ...,
the second deacon says the Small Synapte in the same manner.

After the Hymns of Ascent, the first deacon says: Let us be attentive! Priest:
Peace be with all. Second deacon: Wisdom! Let us be attentive! First deacon: Let
us pray to the Lord. Both cense the altar, the iconostasis, the choir and the
people as prescribed in the “Order of Vespers with the Ministry of Two Deacons”
(see § 39). At Let everything that breathes praise the Lord, the first deacon
says the first verse, the second deacon the other.

The first deacon exclaims: And that He would enable us ... and again Wisdom,
Arise, let us hear the Holy Gospel. The second deacon says: Let us be attentive!
Following the Gospel, the first deacon

27

Ordo Celebrationis

reads: Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ ... (if it is Sunday); after the
stikhira, the second deacon: O God, Save Your people.

86. The first deacon proceeds with the priest for the anointing of the faithful,
the second deacon says the Small Synapte after the third and sixth Odes.

The Katavasia of the eighth Ode having been completed, the first deacon takes
the thurible and departs via the northern door; he stands before the icon of the
Theotokos and exclaims: The Theotokos and the Mother of Light let us magnify in
songs! Then having returned to the Altar via the southern door, he censes,
together with the second deacon, the Holy Table and the rest as stated above
(see § 39). The censing having been completed, the first and second deacons
enter the Altar via the southern and northern doors respectively. Following the
ninth Ode, the first deacon says the Small Synapte.

87. Following the Stichera of Lauds the royal doors are opened. The first deacon
stands before the altar to the priest’s right, and the second deacon to the
left; the Great Doxology having been completed, all make a small bow and proceed
to the tetrapod; there, the priest takes the Holy Gospel and, preceded by the
deacons, returns to the Altar.

88. Then the deacons leave – the first via the southern door, the second via the
northern; the first deacon says the Ektene: Have mercy on us, O God ... The
second deacon says the Aitisis: Let us complete our morning prayer to the Lord
... The first deacon says: Let us bow our heads to the Lord. The Dismissal is
said with the first deacon beginning: Wisdom!

Without the Ministry of a Deacon

89. The priest serving Orthros without a deacon performs or recites all those
prayers which are proper to the deacon, but bearing in mind the following:

90. Following the Six Psalms, he does not return to the Altar, but stands before
the royal doors and says the Great Synapte and ekphonesis: For to You are due
all glory... and also the verses when the choir sings: God is the Lord ... These
completed, he makes a small bow and returns to the Altar via the southern door.

28

IV. The Order of Orthros for Sundays and Feast Days

If time is lacking for the priest to say all the Orthros Prayers before the
doors, he completes them in the Altar while the Kathismata are read.

Following the Prokeimenon, he exclaims: Let us pray to the Lord. He says the
verses for: Let everything that breathes ..., and after the reading of the
Gospel he says: Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...

Following the third and sixth Odes of the Canon he says the Small Synaptes and
ekphoneses either before the Holy Table[123] or from the place where he performs
the anointing. The anointing having been completed, he returns to the Altar
through the royal doors and divests of the phelonion.

91. The Katavasia of the eighth Ode having been completed, he departs via the
northern door clothed in the epitrachelion. Standing before the icon of the
Theotokos he exclaims: The Theotokos and the Mother of Light let us magnify in
songs! and censes as prescribed above (see § 33). Following the censing, he
returns to the Altar via the southern door and says the Small Synapte and
ekphonesis.

92. After the Stichera of Lauds at: Glory ..., clothed in the phelonion, he
opens the royal doors; the last stichera having been completed, he exclaims:
Glory to You Who have shown us the Light. All the rest follows as stated above
(see § 82-83).

93. After the Dismissal, the royal doors are closed, the priest takes off the
phelonion and the First Hour is read.

With Concelebrating Priests

94. The concelebrating priests, of even number, vest over the rason in the
epitrachelion and phelonion while the Kathisma is read, and they take their
places at the sides of the Holy Table as in Vespers (see § 50). While the
Polyeleos is sung, all make a small bow and, with phelonia hanging freely and
hands lowered, depart through the royal doors, the younger clergy leading. The
first two priests carry the icon of the Feast or Saint and place it on the
tetrapod (if it has not already been placed on the left side of the tetrapod
between the two choirs). All arrange themselves in double file facing one
another at the sides of the

29

Ordo Celebrationis

tetrapod. The principal celebrant stands in the center before the tetrapod and
the deacon is on his right.

95. Then all sing the We magnify You ... When the choir repeats the We magnify
You ..., the priest, preceded by a deacon with a lighted candle, censes the icon
of the Feast day or Saint on the tetrapod from four sides, the Holy Table, the
Altar, the iconostasis, the concelebrating priests, both choirs, the people and
again the icon of the Feast, but only from the front. However, if the customary
censing is performed before the Gospel, the priest censes only the icon at the
We magnify You ... The choir: Glory ... and again the We magnify You ... The
choir: now and ever ... We magnify You ... Finally the celebrant with the
concelebrants again repeat the We magnify You ...

Candlebearer Candlebearer

Priest 6 Priest 5

Priest 4 Priest 3

Priest 2 Priest 1

Celebrant Deacon

At the “We Magnify You ...”

96. Following the We magnify You ..., all return to the altar through the royal
doors, the younger clergy preceding.[124] Following the reading of the Gospel,
all make a small bow, depart and unvest.[125]

30
V. Order of the Divine Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom and Saint Basil the
Great

With One Deacon Serving

97. According to the ancient usage of the Eastern Church, on any one day it is
customary to celebrate only one Holy Liturgy on one and the same Holy Table.
Nevertheless, it is permissible to deviate from this rule if the repetition of
the Divine Liturgy would be beneficial for the people. However, if there are one
or more side chapels (paracclesiae), then the more solemn Liturgy should be
celebrated in the main sanctuary; it is definitely more appropriate to celebrate
the other Liturgies in the side chapels.

98. It is not absolutely necessary that the Eucharistic bread be baked on the
very day on which the Sacrifice is offered. The same loaf may be kept for
several days and even be used for several Liturgies as long as all the
ceremonies of the Prothesis (Proskomede) are performed on the loaf, or on part
of the loaf, by cutting the bread and extracting the Lamb and the particles as
prescribed. Nor is it always necessary to use five separate prosphoras, since
the Lamb and all the particles may be extracted from one and the same loaf.[126]
The use of five prosphoras may be reserved, if desired, for more solemn
celebration of the Liturgy.

99. The priest who is about to perform the Divine Mystery, should, first of all,
be reconciled with everyone and have nothing against anyone. To the best of his
ability he should keep his heart free from evil thoughts. He should abstain from
the previous evening, keep the fast until the time of celebration,[127] and
prepare himself for the Sacrifice with prayers.

100. When the time approaches, the priest enters the temple and, facing east
together with the deacon, makes three small bows before the royal doors.

Then, in a moderate voice, the deacon says: Master, give the blessing. The
priest: Blessed is our God ... The deacon: Amen.

31

Ordo Celebrationis

The deacon begins:

Glory to You ... Heavenly King, Comforter, ... Holy God ... (three times)
Glory... now and ever ... Most Holy Trinity ... Lord, have mercy (three times)
Glory to the Father ... Our Father...

Priest: For Thine is the kingdom ...

Deacon: Amen.

The priest and deacon praying before the the Iconostasis

Then they say together: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us ... Glory...
Lord, have mercy on us ... Now and ever, ... Open unto us ...

Approaching the icon of Christ, they venerate it with a small bow and kiss it
saying: We bow before Your sacred image ...

32

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

After bowing before the royal doors, they venerate and kiss the icon of the
Theotokos in a similar manner, saying the troparion: O Mother of God, fount of
mercy ...

101. Then the priest and deacon both come before the royal doors and bow their
heads while the priest says the prayer: O Lord, send forth Your hand ...

Then the priest and deacon bow to the right and left choirs, and enter the
Altar, the priest via the southern door and the deacon via the northern door,
saying: I will come into Your house ...

102. On entering the Altar, they make three small bows before the Holy Table.
The priest kisses the Holy Gospel, and the deacon the Holy Table, and if it is
customary both of them kiss the hand cross which lies on the Holy Table. After
they come to the place where the sacred vestments are placed, each takes his
sticharion into his hands and, facing the East, they make three small bows
saying privately: O God, be merciful ...

103. Holding the sticharion with the orarion and the epimanikia in his right
hand the deacon then approaches the priest, bows his head and says: Master,
bless ... While blessing, the priest says: Blessed is our God ... The deacon:
Amen.[128]

104. After this, the deacon goes to another area of the Altar and vests in the
sticharion, praying: My soul shall rejoice ... ; kissing the orarion, he places
it on his left shoulder. While putting the epimanikion on his right hand he
says: Your right hand ... and for the left hand: Your hands have ...

Then, going to the table of the Proskomede, he unfolds the eiliton,[129] places
the holy diskarion on the left side, the chalice on the right side, and then he
prepares the lance, asterisk, veils, and covers necessary for the Sacrifice.

105. The priest vests in the right of the Altar. After taking the sticharion
into his left hand, he makes three small bows towards the East, as stated, and
blesses the sticharion saying: Blessed is our God ... Then he puts it on,
saying: My soul shall rejoice ... Having taken and blessed the epitrachelion, he
puts it on saying: Blessed is God Who

33

Ordo Celebrationis

pours out ... After taking the zone,[130] he girds himself saying: Blessed is
God Who girds me ... While placing the epimanikion on his right hand he says:
Your right hand ... and for the left one: Your hands have ... Then, if he has an
Epigonation, he blesses and kisses it, and places it upon his right thigh
saying: Fasten Your sword ... After this, he takes and blesses the phelonion,
then kisses it saying: Your priests, O Lord...

106. The vesting may be done in the sacristy.

107. Thus robed in the sacred vestments, the priest and the deacon go to the
Preparation Table, where they wash their hands saying: I will wash my hands
among ...

108. Then they make three small bows before the Preparation Table and say: O
God, be merciful to me a sinner. You have redeemed us...

The deacon says: Master, give the blessing, and the priest begins: Blessed is
our God ... Deacon: Amen.

The priest and deacon at the Preparation Table

After this, the priest holds the prosphora in his left hand and the holy lance
in his right; with the lance he signs the prosphora seal[131] three times saying
each time: In remembrance of our Lord God ...

34

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

And immediately he cuts with the lance into the right side of the seal saying:
Like a lamb that is led to slaughter ... Cutting on the left he says: And like a
sheep without blemish ... Cutting the upper part of the seal he says: In his
humiliation, judgment of him was taken. and cutting the lower part: Who shall
declare his generation?

The deacon, reverently viewing this mystery, holds the orarion in his right hand
and says: Let us pray to the Lord at each incision. After this he says: Master,
take it out. Inserting the lance into the prosphora from the right, the priest
cuts underneath and extracts the holy bread saying: For his life is being cut
off from the earth. After inverting the lamb upon the diskarion as the deacon
says: Master, offer it, he cuts into it in the form of a cross, saying: The Lamb
of God ... Then he turns the Lamb over so that the seal is visible and the
deacon says: Master, pierce it.

The priest says: One of the soldiers pierced ... and with the lance he pierces
the holy bread in the upper right corner, where the letters "IC" are imprinted.

109. The deacon takes the cruets of wine[132] and water and says to the priest:
Master, bless this holy union. After the cruets are blessed, the priest or the
deacon, as lawfully prescribed, pours the wine and a little water into the
sacred chalice.[133]

110. Then the priest takes the second prosphora into his hand [if this and the
other prosphoras are lacking, then the prescribed liturgical actions are
performed over one and the same prosphora] and says: In honor and memory ...;
and cutting out the particle,[134] he places it to the right of the holy Lamb
(the priest’s left) and near its center, saying: The Queen stood ...

111. Taking the third prosphora, the priest says:

[1] Of the honored, celestial, incorporeal powers,[135] and extracts the first
particle[136] which is placed to the left (priest’s right) of the holy Lamb,
thus beginning the first column (downward).

[2] The honored and glorious prophet ..., extracts particle 2 and places it
under particle 1.

35

Ordo Celebrationis

[3] The holy, glorious and illustrious apostles ..., extracts particle 3 and
places it under particle 2.

[4] Of our fathers among the Saints,[137] the hierarchs: ..., extracts
particle 4 and places it adjacent to particle 1, thereby beginning a second
column.

[5] The holy apostle, first martyr and archdeacon Stephen ..., extracts
particle 5 and places it under particle 4, which is the top particle in
column 2.

[6] Our venerable and God-bearing[138] Fathers: ... extracts particle 6 and
places it under particle 5 to complete the second column.

[7] Of the holy and wonder-working unmercenaries:[139] ... extracts particle 7
and places it adjacent to particle 4, thereby beginning a third column.

[8] The holy and just forebears of God, ..., extracts particle 8 and places it
under particle 7.

[9] And in memory of Saint [Name] (the Saint of the church and of the Day), and
all the saints ..., extracts particle 9 and places it under particle 8 thereby
completing the third column.

Position of Lamb and Particles on the diskarion (Numbers correspond to
commemorations in paragraph 111)

36

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

112. Taking the fourth Prosphora, he says: Remember, O loving and kind Master,
... and places the extracted particle below the holy Lamb. He then commemorates,
by name, any of the living he so desires; extracting a particle for each name,
he says: Remember, O Lord, [Name] ... and places it adjacent to the previous
particle, thereby beginning the first horizontal row under the holy Lamb.

113. Taking the fifth prosphora, the priest says: For the blessed memory ...
then he mentions by name his ordaining bishop and the other deceased he may wish
to commemorate. For each name, he extracts a particle, saying: Remember, O Lord,
the soul of Your departed servant [Name]; and in conclusion he says: And of all
our fathers and brethren ... And he takes out a particle. Thereafter he says:
Remember also, O Lord, my unworthiness, and according to Your great mercy ...
And he takes out a particle.

It should be noted that additional particles may be added for the living and the
dead at any time up to the Great Entrance.

114. The particles which are on the diskarion are gathered below the holy Lamb,
so that they may not fall off.

115. The deacon takes the thurible, sets incense into it, and says to the
priest: Master, bless the incense and immediately thereafter Let us pray to the
Lord. In blessing, the priest says the Prayer of Incense: We offer incense to
You ...

The deacon: Let us pray to the Lord. The priest censes the asterisk[140] by
holding it over the thurible and then he sets it over the holy bread, saying:
And a star came and stood ...

The deacon: Let us pray to the Lord. Master, cover. After censing the first veil
in the same manner, the priest covers the holy bread and diskarion, saying: The
Lord has reigned, He is clothed ...

The deacon: Let us pray to the Lord. Master, cover. Having censed the second
veil in the same manner, the priest covers the chalice saying: Your glory, O
Christ, has covered ...

The deacon: Let us pray to the Lord. Master, cover. After censing the large
veil, called the aer, in the same manner, the priest says: Shelter us under the
cover of Your wings; drive away ... while

37

Ordo Celebrationis

covering both other veils. Then the priest takes the thurible, censes the
Prothesis, and bowing reverently together with the deacon, says: Blessed is our
God, Who was thus well pleased. The deacon responds: Always, now and ever ...

Censing the asterisk before placing it over the diskarion

The priest may return the thurible to the deacon either now or after the prayer
of the Proskomede.

116. Then the deacon says: For the precious gifts offered, let us pray to the
Lord. The priest says the prayer of the Proskomede without any indication of a
blessing:[141] O God, our God, Who have sent forth ... and from the same
location concludes with the Dismissal saying: Glory to You, O Christ, ... The
deacon: Glory ... now and ever ... Lord, have mercy (three times) Give the
blessing.

If it is Sunday, the priest says the Dismissal thus: Christ, our true God, Who
has risen from the dead, ... otherwise: Christ our true God, through the prayers
... The deacon: Amen.

38

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

117. After the Dismissal of the Proskomede, the priest proceeds to the Holy
Table. The deacon censes the Prothesis in strokes of three and then the Holy
Table from four sides while saying privately: When your body was in the tomb,
... and the 50th Psalm; he also censes the apsidal icon and other icons. The
deacon leaves the Altar via the northern door and comes before the royal doors.
After bowing before the royal doors, he censes the images on the southern part
of the iconostasis, beginning with the icon of the Savior, then the images on
the northern part beginning with the icon of the Theotokos, then the right and
left choirs. He censes the people from the soleas or, if it is customary, by
going through the temple to the narthex. Returning to the Altar via the southern
door, he again censes the Holy Table in strokes of three, but only from the
front, and censes the celebrant.

118. Returning the thurible to the server, the deacon goes to the right side of
the priest. Standing together before the Holy Table, they say: Heavenly King,
Comforter, ... Then making three small bows they say: Glory to God ... (twice) O
Lord, You will open my lips, ... (once). Then the priest kisses the Holy Gospel
and the deacon kisses the Holy Table.

After this, bowing his head toward the priest and holding the orarion with three
fingers of his right hand, the deacon says: It is time to sacrifice ... The
priest blessing him, says: Blessed is our God, always ... Then the deacon:
Master, pray for me. The priest: May the Lord direct your steps. The deacon:
Holy Master, remember me. The priest: May the Lord God remember you ... The
deacon: Amen.

The deacon makes a small bow and, holding the orarion with the first three
fingers of his right hand, departs via the northern door because the royal doors
are not opened until the Entrance. Taking his place before the royal doors, he
reverently makes three small bows, saying privately with each bow: O Lord, You
will open my lips, ...

Then, raising the end of the orarion in his right hand, the deacon intones:
Master, give the blessing.

119. The priest, standing in the center before the Holy Table and making the
sign of the Cross over the Holy Table with the Holy

39

Ordo Celebrationis

Gospel, commences in a raised voice: Blessed is the Kingdom ... The choir: Amen.

The deacon says the Great Synapate: In peace, let us pray to the Lord. The
priest quietly recites the prayer of the first antiphon: O Lord, our God, Whose
might... then the ekphonesis (aloud): For to You is due all glory and honor ...
The choir: Amen.

The deacon saying the Great Synapte

The chanters sing the first antiphon or the typical psalm. The deacon bows
before the royal doors and stands before the icon of Christ, holding the orarion
with three fingers of his right hand,.

120. When the antiphon is finished the deacon returns to his customary place
before the royal doors, bows and says: Again and again, ...[142] The priest
quietly says the prayer of the second antiphon: O Lord, Our God, save Your
people ... then the ekphonesis: For Yours is the might, and ... The choir: Amen.

The chanters sing the second antiphon or the typical psalm. The deacon does as
during the first antiphon, but now he stands before the icon of the Theotokos.

40
V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

After the antiphon, the choir sings: Glory ... now and ever, ... O only-begotten
Son ... The priest says nothing privately nor does he make an inclination at:
... to become incarnate ...

121. Then the deacon, again standing in his customary place, says: Again and
again ... The priest quietly says the prayer of the third antiphon: You, Who
promised to grant ... then the ekphonesis: For You, O God, are gracious... The
choir: Amen.

The deacon returns to the Altar via the southern door. The royal doors are now
opened.

122. The chanters sing the third antiphon or the Beatitudes, if it is Sunday.
When the chanters come to Glory...[143] the priest and deacon, standing before
the Holy Table, make three small bows. Then the priest takes the Holy Gospel and
gives it to the deacon. The priest allows his phelonion to hang freely.[144]
Preceded by the candlebearers, the deacon and priest go to the right and pass
behind the Holy Table and go out of the Altar through the north door to make the
Little Entrance. When they come before the royal doors, the candlebearers, one
near the icon of the Theotokos and the other near the icon of the Savior, stand
facing each other. The priest is in the center and the deacon slightly in front
of him and to his right; both bow their heads. In a subdued voice, the deacon
says: Let us pray to the Lord, after which the priest quietly says the Prayer of
the Entrance: O Lord, our Master and God, Who ...

The Entrance with the Gospel around the Holy Table

41

Ordo Celebrationis

When the priest has finished the prayer, the deacon, holding the orarion with
three fingers and pointing eastward with his right hand, says in a subdued
voice: Master, bless the holy entrance. Blessing towards the east, the priest
says: Blessed is the entrance ... Then the deacon presents the Holy Gospel to
the priest, who kisses it. At the completion of the antiphon or the Beatitudes,
the deacon proceeds to the center and stands before the priest; raising his
hands a little and displaying the Holy Gospel, the deacon says loudly: Wisdom!
Stand Aright! Holding the Gospel Book, the deacon enters the Altar through the
royal doors and places the Holy Gospel upon the Holy Table. The priest follows
the deacon into the Altar through the royal doors. Coming together before the
royal doors, the candlebearers make a reverence and return to their places. The
chanters sing: Come, let us worship ... wondrous in Your saints, ... or, if it
is Sunday, ... risen from the dead, ... , and then the usual troparia.

The Entrance with the Gospel

42

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

123. The priest quietly says the Prayer of the Trisagion: O holy God, Who abide
in the saints, ... When the chanters come to the last troparion, the deacon
inclines his head towards the priest and, holding the orarion in three fingers
of his hand, says: Bless, Master, the time...[145] Blessing him the priest
exclaims: For You are holy, our God,...

The deacon goes close to the royal doors; facing the people, he elevates the end
of his orarion with three fingers of his right hand and, in a raised voice,
says: And unto ages of ages.[146] The choir: Amen.

During the singing of the Trisagion, the priest and deacon also recite it,
simultaneously making three small bows before the Holy Table.

The priest and deacon recite the Trisagion

124. The deacon says to the priest: Master, command. And they go to the throne
behind the Holy Table. As he goes the priest says: Blessed is he ... Then the
deacon: Master, bless the high throne. The priest: Blessed are You on the throne
... And he blesses the apsidal throne.

Note that the priest does not ascend the throne nor sit upon it, but he should
sit to the south side of the throne.

43

Ordo Celebrationis

125. When the Trisagion is finished, the deacon comes near the royal doors,
holds up the orarion with the first three fingers of his right hand says: Let us
be attentive! Blessing the people, the priest announces: Peace be with all.[147]
And the deacon again: Wisdom! Be attentive! and returns to the priest.

The choir sings the Prokeimenon from the Psalms of David.[148] After the
Prokeimenon, the deacon announces: Wisdom! The lector, clothed in the
sticharion[149] and standing before the soleas in the center of the church,
sings the title of the Epistle: A reading from ..., and again the deacon: Let us
be attentive!

Following the reading of the Epistle, the priest says: Peace be with you.[150]
The deacon: Wisdom! Be attentive! The choir: Alleluia, with the psalm verses for
the day.

126. While the Alleluia is sung,[151] the deacon takes the thurible, sets
incense into it and approaches the priest saying: Master, bless the incense. The
priest says: Blessed is our God ...; having received the blessing, the deacon
censes around the Holy Table, the entire Altar, the priest, the icons of the
iconostasis, both choirs, and the people.

The deacon censing during the Alleluia

44

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

Standing before the Holy Table, the priest quietly says the prayer before the
Gospel: O gracious Master, infuse in our hearts ...

The deacon returns the thurible to its customary place, and comes to the priest.
Bowing his head, the deacon holds his orarion with the tips of his fingers and,
pointing towards the Holy Gospel, says in a raised voice: Master, bless the
announcer ... The priest, blessing him, says: May God, through the prayers ...,
and gives him the Holy Gospel. The deacon responds: Amen, shows reverence to the
Holy Gospel and takes it through the holy doors to the ambo or the place from
which the Gospel lesson is to be read. Candlebearers leave the altar by the side
doors and precede the deacon. At the ambo the deacon sets the Gospel Book on an
analogion, so that he may read the Gospel facing the people.

The deacon reads the Gospel

Standing before the Holy Table and looking towards the west, the priest
exclaims: Wisdom! Let us stand and listen to the holy gospel, then, blessing,
Peace be with all. The choir: And with your spirit. The deacon: A reading from
the holy Gospel according to Saint [Name]. The choir: Glory to You, O Lord,
glory to You. The priest: Let us be attentive!

45

Ordo Celebrationis

When the deacon has finished the Gospel reading, the priest says to the deacon:
Peace be with you who have announced the holy Gospel. The choir: Glory to You, O
Lord, glory to You.

After proceeding to the holy doors, the deacon returns the closed Holy Gospel to
the priest, who kisses and places it in the center of the Holy Table in front of
the artophorion, or he lays it on the right side of the Holy Table.[152] The
holy doors are closed again.

127. The deacon stands in his usual place, and begins: Let us all say ... The
priest quietly prays: Accept, O Lord our God,... and then says (aloud) the
ekphonesis: For You are a merciful and gracious God,... The choir: Amen.[153]

Then the deacon: Catechumens, pray ... The priest quietly says the prayer: O
Lord our God, You Who dwell ..., then the ekphonesis: That with us ... The
choir: Amen. And the priest unfolds the eiliton.[154]

In a loud voice the deacon says: All catechumens depart! Catechumens depart! All
catechumens depart! Let none of the catechumens remain; all the faithful...

128. The priest quietly says the first prayer of the faithful: We thank You...

Deacon: Protect us, save us, ... The choir: Lord, have mercy.

Deacon: Wisdom! Ekphonesis (by the priest): For to You... Choir: Amen.

Deacon: Again and again, ... The priest quietly says the second prayer of the
faithful: Again and again, we fall down ...

Deacon: Protect us, save us, ... Choir: Lord, have mercy. Deacon: Wisdom! And
the deacon enters the Altar via the northern door.

Without turning toward the people, the priest exclaims: That, being ever
protected by Your power, ... Choir: Amen. The holy doors are now opened.

46

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

129. At the beginning of the Cherubic Hymn, the deacon takes the thurible, sets
incense into it and approaches the priest saying: Master, bless the incense.
Having received the blessing: Blessed is our God ... he quietly recites the 50th
Psalm while censing around the holy Table and the entire Altar, the iconostasis,
the choirs, and the people. For this incensation the deacon leaves the Altar via
the north door and returns through the south door. On his return to the Altar,
the deacon censes the priest.

As the deacon censes, the priest raises his outstretched hands[155] and quietly
says the prayer: No one who is bound ...

Upon completing the censing, the deacon takes his place at the priest’s right
and holds the thurible with the ring finger of his left hand. Both deacon and
priest, with hands elevated on high,[156] together say the Cherubic Hymn three
times, and make a small bow after each recitation. Where it is customary, the
priest and deacon kiss the Holy Table[157] and, if they so desire, the hand
cross; then the deacon leads the priest to the Prothesis table. There the priest
takes the thurible and censes the holy gifts in strokes of three while praying
quietly: O God, be merciful to me a sinner. The priest returns the thurible to
the deacon, who holds it with one of the fingers of his right hand.

The priest and deacon recite the Cherubic Hymn

47

Ordo Celebrationis

Then the deacon says to the priest: Lift up, O Master; the priest takes the
large veil called the aer and places it upon the left shoulder of the deacon,
saying: Lift up your hands ...[158]

Then the priest, with full attention and reverence, takes the diskarion covered
with its veil, and places it upon the head[159] of the deacon, holding the end
of the orarion in his left hand, the deacon holds the diskarion to his forehead
with both hands. The priest himself takes into his hands the chalice, covered
with a small veil, and holds it before his breast. The candlebearers, the
deacon, and the priest all depart in order through the north door. The
candlebearers proceed to the royal doors where they stand facing one another.

The Great Entrance with the Holy Gifts

Going out, the deacon exclaims: May the Lord God remember all you orthodox
Christians...[160] and proceeds through the royal doors into the Altar where,
standing on the right, he awaits the priest.

48

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

After the deacon, the priest exclaims: May the Lord God remember in His kingdom
our holy ecumenical ... and coming before the royal doors, he turns towards the
people as he concludes: ... and all you orthodox Christians...[161] Then he
enters the Altar. The choir responds: Amen, and sings: That we may welcome ...

130. After passing through the holy doors, the priest sets the chalice on the
Holy Table, then he takes the diskarion from the deacon and, in like manner,
sets it on the Holy Table to the left of the chalice.[162] He removes the small
veils from the diskarion and chalice, and lays them to one side on the Holy
Table. Then he takes the large veil, called the aer, from the shoulder of the
deacon, censes the aer above the thurible[163] and covers the holy gifts,
saying: The noble Joseph... Then, taking the thurible from the hands of the
deacon, he censes the holy gifts in three strokes, saying: Deal favorably, O
Lord, ...

While this is being said the holy doors are closed;[164] the candlebearers bow
together before the royal doors and return to their places.

131. Having returned the thurible, the priest lets his phelonion hang freely
and, with bowed head, says to the deacon: Remember me, brother and
fellow-celebrant. The deacon says to him: May the Lord God remember your
priesthood ... Then the priest: Pray for me my fellow-celebrant. Then the deacon
also bows his head and, holding his orarion with three fingers of his right
hand, says to the priest: The Holy Spirit shall come upon you ... The priest:
May the Spirit Himself join with us ... And the deacon says to the priest:
Remember me, holy Master. The priest: May the Lord God remember you ... The
deacon: Amen.[165]

132. The deacon shows reverence to the priest, goes out via the north door and,
standing in his usual place, says: Let us complete our prayer to the Lord. The
priest quietly says the Prayer of the Offering after the Holy Gifts have been
placed on the Holy Table: O Lord God Almighty... then the ekphonesis: Through
the mercies ... The choir: Amen.

Facing the people, the priest blesses: Peace be with all. The choir: And with
your spirit. The deacon: Let us love one another ...

49

Ordo Celebrationis

The priest bows three times, saying silently with each bow: I will love You, O
Lord, ... The priest kisses the holy gifts, which are still covered:[166] first
the diskarion, then the chalice, and finally the edge of the Holy Table
immediately in front of him. From where he stands, the deacon makes three small
bows, kisses the cross on his orarion and exclaims: The doors, the doors, in
wisdom let us be attentive![167]

The priest elevates the large veil, called the aer, holds it over the Holy
Gifts, and, with the people, says the profession of faith: I believe in one God,
..., without making an inclination at ... and was incarnate...; then kissing the
aer, he lays it to one side on the Holy Table.[168]

During the Profession of Faith

133. The deacon: Let us stand aright, ... The choir: The mercy[169] of peace ...
The deacon makes a small bow, enters the Altar through the south door, and takes
his place at the right of the priest; if there is need, the deacon takes the
ripidion and reverently fans the Holy Gifts. If there is no ripidion, he does
the same with the small folded veil.[170]

50
V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

The priest exclaims: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,... and blesses the
people. The choir: And with your spirit.

Facing eastward and elevating his hands,[171] the priest exclaims: Let us lift
up our hearts! The choir: We have them lifted up to the Lord.

Then, crossing his hands upon his breast and bowing before the Holy Table, the
priest says: Let us give thanks to the Lord. The choir: It is proper and just
...

Then the priest quietly[172] says the prayer: It is proper and just to sing
hymns ... then the ekphonesis: Singing, shouting, ...

The deacon comes to the left side of the priest and, taking the asterisk into
his right hand, he strikes the upper part of the diskarion, then the lower, the
left and right, making the sign of the Cross over it; then he kisses the
asterisk and places it on the Holy Table.[173]

The priest does not bless himself with the asterisk[174] while the choir sings:
Holy, holy, holy ...

The deacon and priest point to the diskarion

134. Then the deacon comes to the priest’s right; if there is need he takes the
ripidion or the folded small veil into his hands and, with full attention and
fear, fans around the Holy Gifts in silence.[175]

The priest quietly says the prayer: With these blessed powers, O loving and kind
Master, ... At the words: ... He took bread into His holy and all pure and
immaculate hands, gave thanks and blessed ... he does not take the holy
diskarion into his hands, nor does he elevate it, but only blesses the holy
diskarion once.

51

Ordo Celebrationis

Then with bowed head and extending his palm toward the holy diskarion — the
deacon does the same with his orarion — the priest says in a loud voice: Take,
eat ... The choir: Amen. Making the sign of the Cross upon themselves, the
priest and deacon bow low.

The priest says quietly: Likewise the chalice ... and blesses the chalice only
once.

Then, with bowed head and extending his palm towards the holy chalice — the
deacon does the same with his orarion — the priest says in a loud voice: Drink
of this, all of you, ... The choir: Amen. And making the sign of the Cross upon
themselves, the priest and deacon again bow low.

The deacon and priest point to the chalice

The deacon elevates the Holy Gifts

135. The priest quietly says the prayer: Remembering, therefore, this salutary
command, ... With his forearms crossed, the deacon takes the holy diskarion in
his right hand and the holy chalice in his left, and elevates them slightly,
making the sign of the Cross over the eiliton as the priest exclaims: We offer
to You ... The choir: We praise You, we bless You, ... The priest and deacon
again bow.

The priest quietly says the prayer: Moreover, we offer to You...

52

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

The deacon puts aside the ripidion or the veil and comes nearer the priest; both
make three small bows before the Holy Table. The deacon then bows his head and
pointing with his orarion to the holy Bread says in a low voice: Master, bless
the holy bread. Standing erect, the priest blesses the holy Bread, saying: And
make this bread ... The deacon: Amen.

Again pointing his orarion to the holy chalice, the deacon says: Master, bless
the holy chalice. While blessing the holy chalice, the priest says: And that
which is in this chalice ... The deacon: Amen.

Again pointing his orarion towards both Holy Gifts, the deacon says: Master,
bless both. Blessing both Holy Gifts, the priest says: Changing them by Your
Holy Spirit. The deacon: Amen, amen, amen.[176]

With head bowed towards the priest, the deacon returns to the place where he
previously stood, and taking the ripidion, fans the Holy Gifts as he did before.

136 The priest quietly says the prayer: That to those who partake..., and takes
the thurible. Censing the Holy Gifts from the front of the Holy Table three
times, the priest exclaims: Especially for our most holy, most pure, most
blessed ... Then he covers the chalice with the small veil or lention.[177] The
choir sings: It is truly proper ... or instead, the Irmos[178] of the current
feast.

While the chanters are singing, the deacon censes around the Holy Table and
commemorates by name those of the dead whom he wishes to remember.[179]

The priest quietly says: For the holy prophet, precusor and Baptist John, ...
and commemorates by name those of the dead whom he wishes to remember, then
continues: And grant them rest ...

After the singing of It is truly proper ... the priest exclaims: Among the
first, O Lord, ... The deacon commemorates the living.[180] The choir: And
remember all Your people.[181]

The priest prays quietly: Remember, O Lord, this city ... and mentions the names
of those of the living whom he desires to remember. The ekphonesis: And grant
that we... The choir: Amen.

53

Ordo Celebrationis

The priest faces west but does not withdraw from the center of the Holy
Table,[182] and blesses, saying: And may the mercies ... The choir: And with
your spirit.

137. Taking leave of the priest, the deacon makes a small bow, goes around the
Holy Table and leaves via the northern door. Standing in his usual place, he
says: Now that we have remembered all the saints ...

The priest quietly prays: In You, O gracious Master, ... The ekphonesis: And
grant, O Lord, that we ...[183] The choir: Our Father ... While the Lord’s
Prayer is sung, the priest elevates his hands on high and then says: For Thine
is the kingdom, ... The choir: Amen.

During the Lord’s Prayer

Without departing from the center of the Holy Table,[184] the priest turns
towards the west and blesses, saying: Peace be with all. The choir: And with
your spirit. The deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord. The choir: To You, O Lord.

54

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

The priest prays quietly: We give You thanks, ... then aloud the ekphonesis:
Through the grace, the mercies ... The choir: Amen. The priest quietly says the
prayer: Look down, O Lord ... Standing before the royal doors, the deacon binds
his orarion about himself in the form of a cross, if he had not already done so
during the Lord’s Prayer.[185]

Then the priest, and the deacon (who remains in his place) make three small
bows, saying quietly [each time]: O God, be merciful to me a sinner. The priest
uncovers the chalice.[186]

When the deacon sees the priest extending his hand to take the holy Lamb, the
deacon says loudly: Let us be attentive! Elevating the holy Lamb slightly for a
short time, the priest exclaims: Holy things to the holy! The choir: One is
holy, One is Lord ... and then sings the communion verse of the day or of the
saint.

138. After making a small bow, the deacon enters the Altar via the southern
door; taking his place at the right of the priest, he again makes a small bow
and says: Master, break the holy Bread. The priest, reverently and attentively
breaking the Lamb into four Parts, says: Broken and distributed ... First he
divides the Lamb vertically into two Parts; in his right hand he holds the Part
bearing the inscription: XC KA, and places this Part on the diskarion. The Part
which he holds in his left hand he then divides vertically between IC and NI,
and places the particle IC towards the upper edge[187] of the diskarion, and the
particle NI towards the left edge. Then once again he takes the other Part of
the holy Lamb and divides this Part vertically between the letters XC and KA and
places the Particle XC towards the lower edge of the diskarion and the Particle
KA towards the right edge, thus forming the sign of the Cross on the
diskarion.[188]

Arrangement of the Particles on the diskarion

55

Ordo Celebrationis

Pointing to the holy chalice with his orarion, the deacon says: Master, fill the
holy chalice.

Taking the Particle IC which lies at the upper edge of the diskarion, the priest
makes the sign of the Cross with the IC over the holy chalice, saying: The
fullness of the Holy Spirit, and places the Particle into the holy chalice. The
deacon: Amen. Then the priest purifies his fingers over the diskarion.[189]

139. When the ceremony of the Zeon takes place,[190] the deacon, proffering the
hot water,[191] says to the priest: Master, bless this hot water. Blessing, the
priest says: Blessed be the fervor ... and the deacon pours a little water into
the holy chalice in the form of a cross, saying: The fervor of the faith,... and
putting away the vessel of hot water, he steps aside a little.

140. The deacon goes around the Holy Table and, if need be, washes the palm of
his right hand.[192] When the priest says: Deacon, approach! he comes to the
left of the priest and bows his head reverently, asking forgiveness.[193]

The priest breaks the Particle XC of the holy Lamb and will offers a Portion of
it to the deacon. The deacon extends his hands, with the right hand, palm
uppermost, superimposed on his left hand, forming a Cross, and says to the
priest: Master, give me the precious ... The priest gives the deacon the Holy
Bread into the deacon’s right palm, saying: The precious and holy and most pure
Body ...

The deacon withdraws behind the Holy Table, bowing his head, and prays together
with the priest, saying: O Lord, I believe and profess ...

Likewise the priest, having made a small bow, takes the other part of the
particle XC with the first two fingers of his right hand and says: The precious
and holy and most pure Body ...

And thus, with fear and great care, first the priest and then the deacon receive
the Holy Bread, each from his own hands.

141. Standing erect, the priest then takes the chalice into his right hand, and
the little lention[194] which he holds under his chin, into his left hand; and
he partakes of the Blood from the chalice, saying:

56

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

I, a servant of God, priest [N], partake ... and then he wipes his lips and the
edge of the holy chalice with the small lention, saying: Behold, this has
touched my lips,...

Then he summons the deacon, saying: Deacon, approach! The deacon approaches and
makes a small bow, saying: Behold, I approach... and: Give me, Master, the
precious and holy blood ...

With his right hand, the priest takes the lention and also holds the chalice by
the node; he holds the base of the chalice with his left hand. The deacon holds
the end of the lention under his chin with both of his hands, as the priest
proffers the chalice saying: The servant of God, deacon [N], partakes ... After
the communion of the deacon, the priest says: Behold, this has touched your lips
...[195]

Holding the diskarion over the chalice, the deacon carefully wipes the Portions
off into the chalice with the sponge (if its use is prescribed), so that not
even the smallest Particle remains on the diskarion. If Communion is not to be
given to the faithful, the deacon covers the chalice with the lention and the
small veil, and also places the folded asterisk and folded veils upon the
diskarion. The holy doors are opened.

142. The deacon makes a small bow and reverently accepts the chalice from the
priest; he then proceeds to the holy doors and, raising the holy chalice,
extends it toward the people, saying: Approach with fear of God and with faith.
The choir: Blessed is He Who comes ...

The deacon invites the faithful to Holy Communion

Having accompanied the deacon, the priest takes the holy chalice from him and,
with it, blesses the people from the royal doors: Save Your people, O God,...
after which both return to the Holy Table.

57

Ordo Celebrationis

However, if Communion is to be given to the faithful,[196] the deacon places the
spoon into the chalice, which he covers with either the lention or the chalice
veil, or both; he makes a small bow and reverently receives the chalice from the
priest. He then proceeds to the holy doors and, raising the chalice, extends it
toward the people saying: Approach with fear of God and with faith. The choir:
Blessed is He Who comes ... Having accompanied the deacon, the priest takes the
holy chalice from him and says the prayer: O Lord, I believe...[197] Meanwhile,
the deacon takes the diskarion from the Holy Table. After the prayer is
completed, the priest uncovers the holy chalice, holds the veil and lention with
his left hand, and gives Communion[198] with the spoon, saying: The servant of
God...[199] The deacon holds the diskarion[200] under the chin of the
communicant. After Communion, the priest covers the chalice with either the
lention or veil or both, leaving the spoon in the chalice.[201] He blesses the
people with the chalice:[202] Save Your people, O God, ... And both return to
the Holy Table.

It is also permissible to follow this procedure: the deacon covers the holy
chalice with the lention and chalice veil; he makes a small bow and reverently
receives the chalice from the priest; then he proceeds to the holy doors and,
raising the holy chalice, extends it toward the people, saying: Approach with
fear of God and with faith. The choir: Blessed is He Who comes ...

The deacon returns to the Holy Table upon which he places the chalice, and
removes the small veil. The priest takes the holy chalice with the spoon and
lention, the deacon takes the diskarion, and they leave the Altar; those who
desire to receive Communion then approach. After the prayer: O Lord, I believe
and profess ..., the faithful approach one-by-one and, with all humility and awe
make a small bow with their hands crossed upon their breasts and in this manner
they receive Holy Communion; or they receive Communion in a way customary to the
region.[203] Distributing Communion, the priest says to each communicant: The
servant of God ...

Following the Communion of the faithful, the priest leaves the spoon in the
chalice and covers the chalice with the lention; then, returning to the Altar
with the deacon, he places the Holy Gifts on the Holy Table. The deacon covers
the holy chalice with its veil. The priest

58

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

again takes the chalice and, from the royal doors, blesses the people with it,
exclaiming: Save Your people, O God, ...The choir: We have seen the true light,
... And both return to the Holy Table.

143. The priest sets the chalice on the Holy Table and censes three times,
saying to himself: Be exalted above the heavens, ... Then he returns the
thurible to the deacon, and taking the holy diskarion, places the diskarion upon
the head of the deacon. Holding the diskarion reverently to his forehead and
looking out beyond the doors, the deacon, saying nothing, proceeds between the
Holy Table and the royal doors to the Proskomede table, where he places the holy
diskarion. Then he awaits the priest in his place. After making a small bow and
taking the holy chalice, the priest turns toward the doors and looks towards the
people while saying quietly: Blessed is our God; and then aloud: Always, now and
ever. The choir: Amen. May our lips be filled ... Then the priest withdraws to
the Prothesis table while the deacon censes the Sacred Mysteries and the priest.
The priest places the Holy Gifts on the Prothesis table, makes a small bow, and
returns to the Holy Table.[204]

The deacon leaves the Altar to say the Ektene of Thanksgiving

59
Ordo Celebrationis

144. Having loosed the orarion, as is the custom, the deacon goes out via the
northern door and, standing in his usual place, says: [Stand aright!][205]
Having received the divine, ...[206]

The priest quietly says the prayer of thanksgiving: We give thanks to You, O
Master, ... Holding the Holy Gospel vertically, he makes the sign of the Cross
over the folded eiliton and lays the Book upon the eiliton. Then he exclaims:
For You are our sanctification, ... The choir: Amen.

Walking down through the royal doors, the priest says: Let us go forth in peace.
The choir: In the name of the Lord.

The deacon: Let us pray to the Lord. The choir: Lord, have mercy.

The priest goes through the royal doors into the Nave[207] and stands between
the two choirs; then in a loud voice he says the prayer behind the ambo: O Lord,
blessing those who bless You,... The choir: Amen. Then: Blessed be the name of
the Lord, ... and where it is customary, Psalm 33: I will bless the Lord...[208]

During the prayer behind the ambo, the deacon with head bowed, stands at the
right side extending his orarion toward the icon of Christ the Lord until the
prayer is concluded. When the prayer is finished the priest enters through the
holy doors and immediately turning towards the Prothesis table, says the prayer
for consuming the Holy Gifts: You, O Christ, Our God, ...[209] The deacon enters
via the northern door and,[210] with awe and every caution, consumes the Holy
Gifts.

Where it is customary, the priest comes out through the holy doors and
distributes the antidoron to the people, unless this is customarily done after
the Dismissal.[211]

145. Following the Psalm and distribution of antidoron, the priest stands in the
center before the holy doors, and blessing the people says: The blessing of the
Lord be upon you, ... The choir: Amen.

Facing eastward, the priest says: Glory to You, O Christ ... The choir: Glory
... now and ever ... Lord, have mercy. (three times) Give the blessing.

60

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

Once again facing the people, the priest says: Christ our true God ... The
choir: Amen.

Dismissal at the conclusion of the Divine Liturgy

At more solemn and extraordinary Liturgies,[212] the priest facing the people,
intones the polychronia (“Many Years”) in a raised voice, as is the custom.

Then the priest enters the Altar[213] and the holy doors are closed.

Finally, the priest and deacon unvest either in the Altar or in the sacristy,
saying: Now You may dismiss...[214] and wash their hands in the usual place.
After the Small Dismissal is completed, they give thanks to God for all things,
kiss the Holy Table and depart.

146. In seminaries, houses of studies, and other places where there are numerous
priests, the priest who functions in the capacity of a deacon, discharges his
diaconal ministry completely. Therefore in the Liturgy in which he serves as
deacon, he receives Holy Communion from the celebrant and consumes whatever
remains after Communion.[215]

61

Ordo Celebrationis

With the Ministry of Two Deacons

147. Two deacons assist the celebrating priest or concelebrating priests only on
more solemn feast days.[216]

148. When the time approaches, the priest enters the church together with the
two deacons. They stand before the royal doors facing east and all make three
small bows simultaneously. Then they do everything as in the Liturgy with the
ministry of one deacon, however, both deacons respond to the priest. After the
prayer: O Lord, send forth Your hand ... the priest and the deacons bow toward
the right and left choirs, and they enter the Altar thus: the priest and first
deacon via the southern door, and the second deacon via the northern door,
saying: I will come into Your house,... After entering the Altar, they make
three small bows before the Holy Table; the priest kisses the Holy Gospel, and
the deacons kiss the Holy Table; then, if it is customary, all of them kiss the
hand cross which lies on the Holy Table. After vesting, the deacons wash their
hands and prepare everything for the Prothesis. The first deacon alone says:
Master, give the blessing, and the other phrases; the Proskomede is done as
usual.

149. Following the Dismissal of the Proskomede, the deacons cense the Prothesis
with three strokes. Then, together with the priest, they come before the Holy
Table saying privately: When Your Body was in the tomb and the other phrases.
Both cense the Holy Table together from the front; then the first deacon the
right side, the second deacon the left, and again, both together from the east;
then the apsidal icon and the other icons in the Altar; the first deacon the
Cross and the second deacon the icon of the Theotokos, if these are found behind
the Holy Table. Then they leave the Altar, the first deacon through the southern
door, and the second deacon through the northern door. They come before the
royal doors and cense the images on the iconostasis, the first deacon beginning
from the icon of the Savior, and the second deacon from the icon of the
Theotokos. Then the first deacon censes the right choir, and the second deacon
the left choir. They cense the people from the soleas, one from the right and
the other from the left; or, if it is customary, by proceeding down the aisle of
the church to the narthex. Then they enter the Altar, the first deacon through
the southern door, the second deacon through the northern. Again, they cense the
Holy

62

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

Table (in strokes of three), but only from the front, and then the celebrant.

150. Then, having returned the thuribles to the servers, both deacons approach
the priest and do everything as it is done in the Liturgy with the ministry of
one deacon. The first deacon departs via the southern door, and the second via
the northern door;[217] taking their places before the royal doors, they make
three small bows, saying privately with each bow: O Lord, you will open my lips
... Following this, the first deacon begins to sing: Master, give the blessing.

The deacons in front of the royal doors

151. The first deacon says the Great Synapte. When the first antiphon or typica
are sung by the cantors, he makes a small bow, departs from his place and,
holding the orarion with three fingers of his right hand, stands before the icon
of Christ as usual.

Upon completion of the antiphon, the second deacon goes forth[218] and, standing
in the usual place, says: Again and again ... When the second antiphon or typica
are sung by the cantors, he repeats the actions prescribed for the first deacon
during the first antiphon and stands before the icon of the Theotokos.

63

Ordo Celebrationis

Following the second antiphon, the choir sings: Glory ... now and ever ... O
only-begotten Son ... The priest says nothing privately; and neither he nor the
deacons make a bow at: ... and became incarnate...

Then the first[219] deacon returns to his usual place and says: Again and again
... After the synapte is completed, both return to the Altar: the first via the
southern door, the second via the northern, and they stand to the priest’s right
and left, respectively.

152. When the cantors, singing the third antiphon or the Beatitudes, come to:
Glory ... or the last verse of the Beatitudes, the priest and the deacons make
three small bows.[220] Then the priest gives the Holy Gospel to the first deacon
and freely unfolds his phelonion; the priest and the first deacon go around the
Holy Table starting from the right side, while the second deacon takes the
thurible. Preceded by the candlebearers, all leave via the northern door: first
the second deacon censing, then the first deacon carrying the Gospel, and
finally the priest. When they come to the royal doors, the candlebearers stand
facing one another, one near the icon of the Theotokos and the other near the
icon of our Savior. The first deacon stands on the right, the second on the
left. The priest stands in the center and behind them.

The Entrance with the Gospel Book and Thurible

64

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

The first deacon says: Let us pray to the Lord, and the priest quietly recites
the Prayer of the Entrance. After the prayer is completed, the first deacon
holds the orarion with his right hand extending it toward the east,[221] and
says to the priest: Master, bless the holy entrance. The priest blesses, after
which the first deacon proffers the Holy Gospel to him for kissing. After the
last verse of the antiphon or the Beatitudes is sung, the second deacon proceeds
to the center:[222] the first deacon stands behind him and says: Wisdom! Stand
Aright! Then all enter the Altar. The second deacon returns the thurible. The
first deacon places the Holy Gospel upon the Holy Table.

153. When the chanters come to the last troparion, the first deacon says:
Master, bless the time for the thrice-holy hymn. The priest: For You are
holy,... The first deacon says: And unto ages of ages. While the Trisagion is
sung, the priest and the deacons also recite it. Then, proceeding to the apsidal
throne with the deacons, the priest says: Blessed is he who comes ... The first
deacon: Master, bless the throne.

154. After the Trisagion hymn is completed, the deacons come near the holy
doors; the first deacon says: Let us be attentive! The priest: Peace be with
all![223] The second deacon: Wisdom! Be attentive! After the Prokeimenon, the
first deacon: Wisdom! The lector sings the title of the Epistle, after which the
second deacon says: Let us be attentive!

Shortly before the end of the Epistle reading, the deacons return before the
Holy Table with the priest.

Following the reading of the Epistle, the priest says: Peace be with you. The
first deacon: Wisdom! Be attentive!

155. While the Alleluia is sung, the deacons take the thuribles, place incense
into them, and approach the priest saying: Master, bless the incense. Having
received the blessing, they both cense the Holy Table together; at first from
the front, then the first deacon the right side, the second deacon the left, and
again both together from the east; then the apsidal icon and the other icons in
the Altar. Then the second deacon censes the Prothesis, and both cense the rest,
as is the custom.

65

Ordo Celebrationis

Then the deacons return the thuribles to the usual place and approach the
priest; in a raised voice the first deacon says: Master, bless the announcer of
the Gospel ... The priest: May God, through the prayers ... and gives him the
Holy Gospel. The first deacon passes through the royal doors and stands at the
appointed place, either on the ambo or a little before the royal doors; there he
places the Holy Gospel, which he will read facing the people, upon the
analogion. From the Altar, the second deacon exclaims: Wisdom! Let us stand and
listen to the holy Gospel. The priest: Peace be with all. The first deacon: A
reading from the holy Gospel according to Saint [Name]. The second deacon: Let
us be attentive! After the Gospel is read, the priest says to the first deacon:
Peace be with you who have announced the holy Gospel. After proceeding to the
royal doors, the first deacon returns the Holy Gospel to the priest. The holy
doors are closed.

156. Then the deacons depart, each via his own door,[224] and stand in their
customary place; the first deacon begins: Let us all say ... Then the second
deacon: Catechumens, pray to the Lord. First deacon:[225] All catechumens,
depart! Second deacon: Catechumens, depart! And again the first deacon: All
catechumens, depart! Let none of the catechumens ... The choir: Lord, have
mercy. The first deacon: Protect us, save us, have mercy ... Wisdom! The second
deacon: Again and again, let us pray ...; Protect us, save us, have mercy ...
Wisdom! Then both enter the Altar through their respective doors. The Holy Doors
are opened.

157. While the Cherubic Hymn is sung, the deacons take the thuribles and place
incense into them; after receiving the blessing, they begin to recite the 50th
Psalm and cense the Holy Table, the Altar and the rest as stated above (see
§ 149).

Upon completion of the censing, the deacons take their respective places, one on
each side of the priest; holding the thuribles on the ring finger of their left
hands and elevating their hands[226] on high with the priest, they say the
Cherubic Hymn together three times and make a small bow after each recitation.

Then, where the custom exists, the priest kisses the Holy Table and the hand
cross as the deacons kiss the edge of the Holy Table; and with the deacons
preceding, they go directly to the Prothesis table.

66

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

There the priest takes the thurible from the first deacon and censes the Holy
Gifts.

The two deacons cense the iconostasis during the Cherubic Hymn

The first deacon says to the priest: Lift up, master. The priest takes the large
veil and, giving it to the second deacon who holds the thurible with the ring
finger of his right hand, says: Lift up your hands...

Then taking the diskarion, the priest places it on the head of the first deacon,
who holds it to his forehead with both hands, while simultaneously holding the
end of the orarion in his left hand. The priest himself takes the chalice.
Preceded by the candlebearers, all depart via the northern door. The second
deacon, who departs first, exclaims: May the Lord God remember all you orthodox
Christians...[227] Following him, the first deacon repeats the same. Then the
priest exclaims: May the Lord God remember in His kingdom,...

The deacons enter the Altar and stand just inside the holy doors; they face one
another: the second on the left and the first on the right. After saying: ...
and all you ... the priest enters the Altar and with the deacons proceeds to
place the holy chalice on the Holy Table. Taking

67

Ordo Celebrationis

the holy diskarion from the first deacon, he places it on the Holy Table to the
left of the chalice. He takes the large veil from the second deacon, censes it
(by fumigation in the smoke from the thurible), and covers the Holy Gifts. Then,
taking the thurible from the hands of the second deacon, he censes the Holy
Gifts.

Meanwhile the holy doors are closed, and then the usual dialogue between the
priest and both deacons follows. The deacons show reverence to the priest and
depart, each via his own door;[228] they stand in their usual place and the
first deacon says: Let us complete our prayer ...

158. The second deacon: Let us love one another ... From where they stand, the
deacons make three small bows just as the priest does. The deacons kiss one
another on the left shoulder.[229]

The first deacon exclaims: The doors, the doors ... Neither the deacons nor the
priest make a bow at ... and was incarnate...

The first deacon: Let us stand aright, ...

The deacons make a small bow, enter the Altar through their respective doors and
stand at either side of the priest. If there is need, the first deacon takes the
ripidion or the folded small veil and reverently fans the Holy Gifts.

At the Triumphant Hymn: Singing, shouting ... the second deacon takes the
asterisk into his right hand and touches the holy diskarion as described above;
and kissing the asterisk, he places it upon the Holy Table.

159. During the Institution Narrative, the deacons join the priest by pointing
their oraria towards the holy diskarion and then the holy chalice.

After the Institution Narrative of both the holy Bread and the holy chalice, the
deacons and the priest bow profoundly, making the sign of the Cross.

After the priest has quietly said the prayer: Remembering, therefore, ... the
first deacon takes the holy diskarion in his right hand and the second deacon
the holy chalice in his right hand, so that the

68
V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

right hand of the first deacon lies over the right hand of the second deacon.
Then they raise the Holy Gifts slightly for a short time, making the sign of the
Cross over the eiliton, and the priest exclaims: We offer to You ... After the
diskarion and chalice are set down, the priest and deacons make a small bow.
Then the priest quietly says the prayer: Moreover, we offer to You ...
Meanwhile, the first deacon fans the Holy Gifts, if there is need.

After the prayer has been completed, the first deacon puts aside the ripidion or
veil, and both deacons come nearer the priest. They all make three small bows
before the Holy Table. Then pointing his orarion towards the Holy Bread, the
first deacon says: Master, bless the holy bread. After the blessing, the deacons
say: Amen.

Pointing his orarion towards the holy chalice, the first deacon says: Master,
bless the holy chalice. The deacons respond to the blessing: Amen.

Pointing his orarion to both Holy Gifts, the first deacon says: Master, bless
both. Following the blessing, the deacons: Amen, amen, amen. And having bowed
their heads to the priest, both deacons return to where they previously stood;
taking the ripidion, the first deacon fans the Holy Gifts just as before, if
there is need.

160. While the chanters are singing It is truly proper ... the deacons cense the
Holy Table from the sides and from the east, each one from his side, and they
mention by name those of the dead whom they wish to remember.

And after: Among the first, O Lord ... the deacons make a commemoration of the
living.

After the ekphonesis: And may the mercies ... the deacons make a small bow, take
leave of the priest, and depart via their respective doors; they stand in their
customary place.[230] The second deacon says: Now that we have remembered all
the saints ...

After the priest has said: Peace be with all, the choir: And with your spirit.
The second deacon exclaims: Bow your heads to the Lord.

While the priest quietly says the prayer: We give You thanks, O King ... the
deacons, standing before the holy doors, bind their oraria

69

Ordo Celebrationis

about themselves in the form of a cross, if they had not already done so during
the Lord’s Prayer.[231]

After uncovering the chalice, the priest, and the deacons (who remain in their
places), make three small bows, saying quietly: O God, be merciful to me a
sinner.

The first deacon exclaims: Let us be attentive!

The deacons enter the Altar via their respective doors and, standing at the
sides of the priest, they make a small bow. The first deacon says: Master, break
the holy bread.

After the fraction of the Holy Bread, the first deacon says: Master, fill the
holy chalice. Following the commixture the same deacon says (where the infusion
of hot water is practiced): Master, bless the hot water, and pouring a little
water he continues: The fervor of the faith, ...

161. The priest invites the deacons to receive Holy Communion, saying: Deacons,
approach! And Communion is given to the deacons according to the rule (see § 140
and 141).

After the Communion of the priest and the deacons, the first deacon carefully
absterges the holy diskarion over the holy chalice; if Communion is not to be
given to the faithful, the priest and deacons do exactly as stated above (see
§ 142). If Communion is to be given out, they follow the first procedure
described above except that the priest gives the veil and the lention to the
second deacon before Communion.

162. Following the incensation, the priest returns the thurible to the second
deacon and places the holy diskarion with the folded asterisk and the folded
veils upon the second deacon’s head. Holding these to his forehead and looking
back towards the doors, the second deacon, saying nothing, proceeds between the
Holy Table and the holy doors directly to the Prothesis table upon which he
places the diskarion; there he awaits the priest. After making a small bow and
taking the holy chalice, the priest departs, as prescribed, to the Prothesis
table, while the second deacon censes the Holy Gifts and the priest. Following
the priest’s recital of the prayer: You, O Christ, Our God ... the second

70

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

deacon, with awe and full caution, consumes the Holy Gifts which remain after
Communion; then he unbinds his orarion.

163. Having loosed his orarion, as is the custom, the first deacon goes out via
the northern door and, standing in his usual place, says: [Stand aright!] Having
received the divine, holy, ... After the ekphonesis: For You are our
sanctification ... the priest says: Let us go forth in peace! The choir: In the
name of the Lord. The first deacon: Let us pray to the Lord. The choir: Lord,
have mercy.

During the prayer behind the ambo, the first deacon stands at the right,
extending his orarion toward the icon of the Savior. Following the prayer, he
enters the Altar via the southern door. Finally, the Dismissal is said according
to custom, after which all unvest.

Without the Ministry of a Deacon

164. The priest celebrating without the assistance of a deacon performs or
recites all those parts which are proper to the deacon, bearing in mind the
procedures set forth below (§ 165-174).

165. He omits the invitations: Master, give the blessing; Let us pray to the
Lord; Master, bless the incense: etc. except for the invocation: Let us pray to
the Lord, which he says before the prayer behind the Ambo.

166. Following the Dismissal of the Proskomede, the priest censes just as the
deacon would; from the soleas, he censes the iconostasis, the choirs and the
people.

167. The priest recites the prayers which conclude the great and small synaptes
before, not after, the respective ekphoneses.

168. At the Small Entrance, the priest takes the Holy Gospel and, starting from
the right side, goes around the Holy Table and comes out through the northern
door. Bowing his head before the royal doors, he says the Entrance Prayer: O
Lord, our Master and God, ... after which he blesses the Entrance with his right
hand; he kisses the Gospel and raises it exclaiming: Wisdom! Stand Aright! Then
he enters the Altar through the royal doors.

71

Ordo Celebrationis

He concludes the Trisagion Prayer with the ekphonesis: For You are holy, our
God, ... and does not turn around to face the people. After saying the
Trisagion, he proceeds behind the Holy Table saying the formula of blessing and
sits to the south of the apsidal throne.

169. After the choir completes the Trisagion Hymn, the priest exclaims: Let us
be attentive! and the blessing: Peace be with all.[232] Wisdom! Be attentive!
The choir sings the Prokeimenon. The priest: Wisdom! The lector reads the title
of the Epistle. The priest: Let us be attentive! Following the Epistle reading,
he says to the lector: Peace be to you. and immediately thereafter: Wisdom! Be
attentive! The choir: Alleluia! with the verses.

Then the priest blesses the incense and, taking the thurible, censes about the
Holy Table and the entire Altar; from the soleas, he censes the iconostasis,
both choirs and the people. He quietly recites the prayer before the Gospel: O
gracious Master, infuse in our hearts ... either during the incensation, or
after it.

When the Alleluia and verses are completed, he exclaims: Wisdom! Let us stand
and listen to the holy Gospel, and blessing the people: Peace be with all. The
choir: And with your spirit. The priest: A reading from the holy Gospel ... Then
taking the Book of Gospels, he places it on the analogion just outside the holy
doors and reads the Gospel facing the people. After the reading, he kisses the
closed book and place it in the center or on the right side of the Holy Table.

170. After saying the Prayer of the Cherubic Hymn, the priest blesses the
incense; then he censes around the Holy Table, the apsidal icon, the Prothesis,
and from the soleas he censes the iconostasis, both choirs and the people. He
returns to the Holy Table where, keeping the thurible on the ring finger of his
left hand[233] and raising his hands on high, he recites the Cherubic Hymn three
times. Then he proceeds to the Prothesis; there he censes the Holy Gifts in
strokes of three while praying privately: O God, be merciful to me a sinner.
Taking the large veil, the priest places it on his left shoulder, saying: Lift
up your hands ...; then taking the diskarion in his left hand and the chalice in
his right, he departs via the northern door, exclaiming: May the Lord God
remember in his kingdom ...; and after passing through the royal doors, he
places the Holy Gifts upon the Holy Table as usual. Saying:

72

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

The noble Joseph..., the priest censes the large veil by holding it over the
thurible which the server extends toward the priest. He then takes the thurible
from the hands of the server and censes the Holy Gifts, in strokes of three,
saying: Deal favorably, O Lord,...

171. After returning the thurible, he says the aitisis: Let us complete our
prayer... During the Symbol of Faith, he raises the large veil, and holds it
above the Holy Gifts, according to the custom. At the ekphonesis: Singing,
shouting, ... he touches the holy diskarion with the asterisk in the same manner
as the deacon would; then he kisses the asterisk and places it upon the Holy
Table.

Having said the prayer: Remembering, therefore, this salutary command ..., and
crossing his forearms, he takes the holy diskarion with his right hand and the
holy chalice with his left; then he raises the sacred vessels slightly for a
short time and distinctly makes the sign of the Cross over the eiliton while
exclaiming: We offer to You Yours ... After the ekphonesis: Especially for our
most holy, most pure, ... he censes the Holy Table only from the front, without
going around it. Before elevating the Lamb, he says: Holy things to the holy!
and pours the hot water into the chalice himself, as prescribed.

Elevatrion of the Lamb by the priest

73

Ordo Celebrationis

172. After the priest has put all the Particles from the diskarion into the
chalice, he covers the chalice with either the lention or the small veil or with
both; he places the folded asterisk, the small veil and the aer upon the
diskarion. The curtain of the iconostasis is drawn aside and the royal doors are
opened. The priest places the spoon on top of the chalice; or else he places it
in the chalice.[234] After making a small bow, he takes the chalice, proceeds to
the royal doors and, raising the chalice, exclaims: Approach with fear of God
... [Following the choral response], the priest immediately continues: O Lord, I
believe and profess ... After the prayer is completed he uncovers the chalice
and distributes Communion with the spoon. When the Communion of the faithful has
been completed, the spoon is left in the chalice,[235] which is covered with the
lention and small veil; blessing the people, the priest says: Save Your people,
O God,... Then he returns to the Holy Table, places the chalice on it, and
censes in strokes of three, saying: Be exalted... After making a small bow, he
takes the holy chalice with his right hand and the holy diskarion with his left,
saying first in a subdued voice: Blessed is our God; then in a raised voice:
Always, now and ever ..., turning toward the people, he departs for the
Proskomede table upon which he places the sacred vessels. After making a small
bow, he returns to the Holy Table.

173. It is also permissible to follow this procedure: after communicating
himself, the priest absterges the Particles off the diskarion while holding the
diskarion over the chalice; then he covers the chalice with either the small
veil or the lention, or with both. He makes a small bow, takes the chalice and
extends it toward the people, saying: Approach with fear of God ... Having
returned to the Holy Table, he sets the chalice down and removes the small veil
from it; then he takes the chalice with his left hand and holds the diskarion
between the middle and ring fingers of the same hand. Taking the spoon with his
right hand, he proceeds to distribute Communion to the faithful. Following the
Communion, he leaves the spoon in the chalice and returns to the Holy Table upon
which he places the diskarion and chalice. Then he covers the latter with the
small veil, again takes the chalice and, turning towards the people, blesses
them with it, saying: Save Your people, O God, ... After placing the chalice on
the Holy Table, he censes it in strokes of three, saying: Be exalted above the
heavens ... Then he places the

74
V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

lention under the small veil with which the chalice is covered; he also places
the folded asterisk, the second small folded veil and the aer upon the
diskarion. After making a small bow and taking the chalice, he turns towards the
doors and looks at the people, saying quietly: Blessed is our God; then
exclaims: Always, now and ever ... Following this, the priest takes the
diskarion from the Holy Table with his left hand and proceeds to the Prothesis
table, where he places the sacred vessels. He then makes a small bow and returns
to the Holy Table.[236]

174. Saying the small Synapte of Thanksgiving: Having received the divine ...,
the prayer and ekphonesis: For You are our sanctification..., the priest folds
the eiliton as is customary. Following the Dismissal, he returns to the Altar
and closes the holy doors; then he proceeds to the Prothesis table and, with awe
and every caution, consumes the Holy Gifts. The priest washes his hands and,
giving thanks to God for all things, departs.

The priest says the Synapte of Thanksgiving

75

Ordo Celebrationis

The Order of the Divine Liturgy Celebrated Without Solemnity or as a Simple
Rite[237]

175. All the rites and ceremonies of the solemn Liturgy should likewise be
executed in the Liturgy with simple ceremonies, or what is customarily called a
private Liturgy.[238] Those phrases which are to be expressed in a raised voice
should be said so that they are heard not only by the lector or cantor, i.e., by
him who serves, but also by all present.

176. If at all possible, the lector should be vested in a sticharion. His proper
place is outside[239] of the Altar. He stands erect near either the right or
left side of the iconostasis. When it is necessary for him to enter the Altar,
for instance to bring incense or hot water to the priest, he may pass only
through the side doors. The priest himself opens and shuts the royal doors and
the curtain.

177. In the Liturgy celebrated without any solemnity, the use of incense is not
imposed strictly but its use is laudable.[240]

178. If time is lacking for the recitation of all the preparatory prayers before
the iconostasis, the priest, however, should never omit the prayer: O Lord, send
forth Your hand; entering the Altar, he should say the Psalm: I will come into
Your house; after kissing the Holy Table, the Gospel and, if it is customary,
the hand cross, he then clothes himself in the sacred vestments.

179 The priest does not perform the Proskomede in the sacristy but at the
Prothesis which is located near the Holy Table. The use of five prosphoras is
not required; on the contrary, it is permissible to use just one prosphora for
several Liturgies, even though the seal of the Lamb is not stamped upon the part
to be used. Nevertheless the bread must be cut and the particles extracted by
the priest at each Liturgy as if the bread were a whole prosphora, thus
abrogating the use of so-called dried-out hosts, and the abuse of cutting out
the Lamb and particles beforehand by the server.[241]

180. The Little Entrance is made with the Gospel according to prescription, by
walking around the Holy Table and leaving the Altar by way of the northern door.

76

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

181. Following the Trisagion Prayer, the priest may omit the blessing of the
apsidal throne. Turning towards the west, he listens to the reading of the
Epistle, with his phelonion hanging freely and his hands beneath it. He may read
the Gospel without an analogion, in which case, if it is customary, the book is
supported by the head of the server who stands before the royal doors.[242]

182. The Great Entrance is made as prescribed, by departing through the northern
door.

183. The priest does not fan the Holy Gifts unless there would be a danger of
something falling into the chalice. If it cannot be done conveniently, the
infusion of hot water is omitted.

184. The priest says the Prayer behind the Ambo outside the royal doors; when he
blesses and says the Dismissal, he stands directly in the royal doorway.

The Ambo Prayer

185. Following the Dismissal, the priest does not recite any other prayer[243]
but immediately closes the royal doors.

77

Ordo Celebrationis

With Concelebrating Priests[244]

186. Properly speaking, priests “concelebrate” when they pronounce the
Institution Narrative with the principal celebrant; but when they do not
pronounce these words, this is mere assistance or a concelebration improperly
so-called. There is nothing which would prevent concelebrating priests from
being joined by assisting priests in a solemn concelebration;[245] however, this
is not so in the celebration of a Liturgy with the simple ceremony.

187. Each priest who concelebrates fully, in either a Solemn or Simple Liturgy,
satisfies the primary intention for which he has accepted a stipend.

188. Concelebrating priests are bound to recite all the hieratic prayers and
also their conclusions or ekphoneses up to and including the Prayer of
Thanksgiving: We give thanks to You ... following Communion. Each of them either
recites according to his turn or just listens to the ektenies; each says the
prayers while the deacon or another priest recites the ektene in a raised voice.
Priests who merely assist are not bound to recite the hieratic prayers since all
of these are said by the principal celebrant, but they say only the ekphoneses
in proper order.

189. The ceremonies and blessings are executed by the principal celebrant alone;
however, all make the indicated bows together. They elevate the hands[246] when
prescribed and when it can be done conveniently.

In Solemn Form

190. It is recommended that the preparatory prayers before the iconostasis be
recited simultaneously by all,[247] but the principal celebrant alone
customarily kisses the icons.[248]

191. All the concelebrants recite the proper prayers when clothing themselves in
the prescribed priestly vestments. Having his own small Liturgicon in his
hands,[249] each priest assumes his place at the side of the Holy Table or even
behind it,[250] but not in front where only the principal celebrant takes his
place with the deacon. The concelebrants take their places according to their
order of dignity or of priestly ordination. The first of the concelebrants or
assisting priests

78

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

takes up a position to the right of the principal celebrant, the second to his
left, the third again to his right, and so on.

192. One of the concelebrants performs the Proskomede and he alone recites the
Prayer of the Prothesis. All of the concelebrants may extract particles
according to their own intentions.[251]

193. The following ekphoneses are offered by the principal celebrant:

For to You is due all glory ... after the Great Synapte;

For You are holy, our God, ... after the Trisagion Prayer;

For You are a merciful ... after the ektene following the Gospel;

That, being ever protected ... after the second Prayer of the faithful;

Through the mercies ... after the Prayer of Oblation;

Singing, shouting, crying out ... before Holy, holy, holy...;

Especially for our most holy ... in the commemoration of the Theotokos;

And grant that we ... at the end of the Anaphora;

And may the mercies ... after the Anaphora;

And grant, O Lord, ... before the Lord’s Prayer;

For You are our sanctification ... after Communion.

All the other ekphoneses are said in due order by each of the concelebrants. To
assure the maintenance of better order, it is customary for the principal
celebrant to invite the concelebrants to offer the

79

Ordo Celebrationis

ekphonesis by inclining his head; then he who is to offer the ekphonesis assents
to the invitation by a bow of his head to the principal celebrant.

194. At the Small Entrance, all priests, their hands lowered under their
phelonia which are now freely unfolded, proceed via the northern door, the
younger priests leading; they arrange themselves in two ranks before the royal
doors, one rank facing the other, and the principal celebrant stands in the
center behind everyone. The principal celebrant alone recites the Entrance
Prayer. Following the deacon’s ekphonesis: Wisdom! Stand Aright! all go through
the royal doors after the deacon and, entering the Altar, resume their places at
the Holy Table.

195. The concelebrants sit at the apsidal throne in the order in which they
stand at the Holy Table, those who stand on the right of the principal celebrant
sit on his left, and they who stand on the left of the celebrant sit on his
right.

196. When the Gospel is sung, all remain in their proper places looking toward
the ambo or the place where the Gospel is being sung.

197. If it can be done conveniently,[252] all elevate their hands at the
Cherubic Hymn. However, all say the Cherubic Hymn and make the prescribed bows.
When the deacon censes the Holy Table, each of the concelebrants withdraws from
the Holy Table a little in order to facilitate his passage.[253]

198. Each takes from the Prothesis one of the articles which is used in the
Divine Sacrifice, such as the lance or the spoon, and holds it before his
breast. All leave via the northern door. First the deacon who makes the
commemoration: ... and all you ... comes forth and takes his place at the royal
doors in the Altar; then beginning with the youngest, all of the concelebrating
priests come forth – each making the commemoration: ... and all you ..., or one
or more other commemorations, if it be a custom.[254] They stand facing each
other outside the Altar and before the royal doors just as in the Small
Entrance. The celebrant says: May the Lord God remember ..., and stands before
the royal doors facing the west when he exclaims: and all you ... Then he enters
the Altar, the concelebrants follow him and each of them resumes his place at
the Holy Table.

80
V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

199. After completing the Great Entrance, if there is no deacon one of the
concelebrants recites the first petitions of the Aitisis: Let us complete our
prayer..., and another recites the second part, so that all may be given time to
recite the Prayer of the Offertory.

200. After the celebrant has kissed the Holy Gifts, the concelebrants approach
the Holy Table one after another according to the order of their dignity.
Withdrawing slightly from the Holy Table, the celebrant stands at the right side
thereof and faces the north; each of the concelebrants first kisses the Gifts,
then the left and right shoulders of the celebrant[255] and finally takes his
place at the celebrant’s left and a little behind him. The second priest first
kisses the Holy Gifts, then the main celebrant, and finally the first
concelebrant; then he takes his place at the right side of the first
concelebrant. The others act in like manner. The main celebrant says: Christ is
among us; and the one who receives the kiss answers: He is and always will be.
The others act in like manner, kissing one another alternately.

After the kiss of peace, the celebrant returns before the Holy Table. The first
concelebrant takes one side of the large veil, and the second takes the other
side, and thus they wave it gently over the Holy Gifts.[256] The others,
however, resume their places, and everyone recites the Symbol of Faith in a low
voice.

201. Each of the concelebrants who offers the Sacrifice points with his
palm[257] towards the diskarion and then towards the chalice, just as the
celebrant does; and, simultaneously, they chant the Institution Narrative slowly
and attentively.[258] They also offer the ekphonesis: We offer to You Yours of
Your own, ... simultaneously, but the main celebrant alone blesses the
Gifts;[259] this is applicable also to the Epiklesis.

Care must be taken, particularly in the Liturgy of St. Basil, so that when the
priests have completed the recitation of the prayer which immediately precedes
the Institution Narrative, all of them join the main celebrant in uttering the
Institution Narrative together, from the beginning to the very end. It is
therefore recommended that the main celebrant say the final words of that prayer
in a low voice, yet loud enough to be heard by the concelebrants; and he should
look to see whether all are prepared to utter the Institution Narrative
simultaneously.

81

Ordo Celebrationis

202. If there is no deacon, the first part of the Aitisis: Now that we have
remembered ... is said by one of the concelebrants, and the second part is taken
by another priest so that all may have sufficient time to recite the prayer: In
You, O gracious Master, we place our whole life ...

203. After the Fraction, the main celebrant summons the deacon and gives him a
particle of the Holy Lamb as prescribed. Then all say the prayer: O Lord, I
believe and profess ..., and the main celebrant communicates himself with the
Body of Our Lord. All of the concelebrants approach the Holy Table from the side
of the Prothesis according to the order of their dignity, while the main
celebrant stands alone on the opposite side. After each priest partakes of the
Lord’s Body, he withdraws to the northern side of the Holy Table and, if
necessary, there washes his fingers in a vessel placed on the Prothesis.[260]
Keeping order, they follow the first concelebrant and resume their places at the
Holy Table. Only after the priests have done so, does the deacon consume a
Particle of the Holy Lamb.[261] Having returned to the center, the main
celebrant partakes of the Precious Blood and withdraws slightly from the Holy
Table. Then the concelebrants approach the Holy Table according to rank; this
time from the southern side. After each priest has communicated himself from the
chalice, he resumes his proper place at the Holy Table by departing along the
side of the Prothesis. Finally the deacon receives the Precious Blood from the
main celebrant, as prescribed.

204. Each one wipes the edge of the chalice and his lips with the lention after
he has been communicated.

205. The Prayer behind the Ambon is said by the main celebrant[262] standing
between the two choirs. Only after the Dismissal is said and the doors have been
closed, does each concelebrant unvest. The deacon purifies the chalice as
prescribed.

In the Simple or Private Form

206. There is no concelebration improperly so-called or assistance in the
private ceremony.

207. What has been said concerning concelebration in the solemn form also holds
true for concelebration in the simple or private

82

V. Order of the Divine Liturgies

form, with the exception of those items mentioned in the following paragraphs
(§ 208-215).

208. In seminaries and religious houses there is nothing that would prevent a
deacon from fulfilling his office even in the concelebration of the Divine
Liturgy without solemnity; and a moderate chant may be used. However, the rules
given here are to be observed in a simple concelebration without the ministry of
a deacon.

209. If time is lacking for the recitation of all the preparatory prayers before
the iconostasis, which all of the concelebrants execute together or
individually, they should, however, never omit the prayer: O Lord, send forth
Your hand ...

After entering the Altar, they say the Psalm: I will enter Your house ... and,
after kissing the Holy Table, the Gospel and, if customary, the hand cross, they
clothe themselves in the sacred vestments.

210. The ektenies are distributed among the concelebrants and are said in such
manner that the priest who is not reciting an ektene may have enough time for
its corresponding prayer without reading hurriedly.

If there are two concelebrants, they say the ektenies of the Liturgy
alternately, reading at first, in a subdued voice, the prayer corresponding to
each ektene; however, the Prayer of the Great Synapte and the Prayer of
Thanksgiving following Communion are said in a subdued voice after the ektene
but before the ekphonesis. Furthermore, it must be noted that the first part of
the aitisis after the Great Entrance (Let us complete our prayer ...) and the
first part of the aitisis after the Anaphora (Now that we have remembered ...)
are said by the second priest, who afterwards recites the prayer in a subdued
voice; the other part together with the ekphonesis is said by the first priest.

If there are three concelebrants, the first (main) one says the Great Synapte;
the second says the first Small Synapte, the third says the second Small
Synapte; the first one again says the ektene after the Gospel; the second, the
synapte of the catechumens; the third, the first Small Synapte of the faithful;
the first, the second Small Synapte of the faithful; the second the first part
of the aitisis after the Entrance and after the Anaphora; the third one, the
second part of the same aitisis;

83

Ordo Celebrationis

finally, the first one says the synapte of the Thanksgiving Prayer following
Communion.

This manner of distributing the various ektenies among the concelebrants is not
absolutely prescribed, but is given only for the sake of greater convenience.

211. It is not necessary that all the concelebrants make the Small Entrance.
However, if they do participate, the more distinguished one of them carries the
Gospel, and he alone recites the Prayer of the Entrance and gives the blessing.
Those who stand before or at the right side of the Holy Table are always
required to walk around the Holy Table before leaving the Altar and actually go
outside the doors.[263]

212. The blessing of the apsidal throne is omitted and all remain at the Holy
Table while the Epistle is read.

213. It is not necessary that the Great Entrance be made by all. If the first
concelebrant alone makes the Entrance, then he himself places the large veil
upon his left arm and alone exclaims: May the Lord God remember in His kingdom
... If they all make the Entrance, it is not necessary that each priest take one
of the articles used in the Divine Sacrifice, but the second concelebrant takes
the diskarion which he holds to his forehead, and the first one takes the
chalice. The second exclaims: ... and all you ... and the first one: May the
Lord God remember in His kingdom ... The others say nothing.

214. The main celebrant alone kisses the Holy Gifts; and the kiss of peace
between the concelebrants is omitted. The main celebrant alone holds the large
veil over the Holy Gifts while reciting the Symbol of Faith together with the
others.

215. The remaining phrases and actions which were to have been said and done by
the deacon, are executed by the first (main) concelebrant according to what has
been stated concerning the celebration of the Liturgy without the ministry of a
deacon (see § 164-174). The priest who had performed the Proskomede purifies the
sacred vessels after Communion.

84

VI. Order of the Divine Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts

216. During the holy and Great Lent,[264] when performing the Proskomede of the
Liturgy of Sunday or another day[265] which immediately precedes the Office of
the Presanctified Gifts,[266] besides the Lamb to be consecrated that day, the
priest prepares additional Lambs according to the number of times that the
Presanctified Liturgy will be celebrated on the following days. After he has
cut, sacrificed and pierced the first Lamb, the priest performs the same
ceremonies over the other Lambs, saying over each: In remembrance of our Lord :
Like a lamb, ..., And like a sheep , The Lamb of God ... ; and ... One of the
soldiers ... He places them on the diskarion, either on top of each other or
next to each other. Then he pours wine and water into the chalice reciting the
usual prayers and completes the Proskomede as usual.

217. However, when the Breads are to be blessed at the invocation of the Holy
Spirit, he says: and make this bread... in the singular and not the plural, for
Christ is One.

218. At the elevation, he elevates all the consecrated Lambs simultaneously; he
breaks only the first Lamb, drops the Particle into the chalice and pours the
hot water, if this infusion is made. After this he takes the other Holy Lambs
and places them in the artophorion.[267]

219. Then the priest continues the prayers as usual, communicates, and completes
the Sacrifice according to the normal custom.

With the Ministry of One Deacon

220. For the reading of the Hours the priest vests over the rason in the
epitrachelion; and standing before the royal doors, he begins to say: Blessed is
our God, ... The lector: Amen. O Heavenly King, ..., etc. After Our Father, ...
the priest says the exclamation; then he enters the Altar via the southern door.
The Third, Sixth and Ninth Hours, and also the Typica are read.[268]

85

Ordo Celebrationis

221. Near the end of the Typica, the priest and deacon clothe themselves in the
sacred vestments as usual, but they say nothing except: Let us pray to the Lord
over each of the vestments.

222. After the Lector has completed the Typica and while saying the Trisagion,
Our Father ... Lord, have mercy (12 times) the prayer: All-Holy Trinity... the
royal doors are opened. The priest: Wisdom. The choir: More honorable ... The
priest: Glory to You ... The choir: Glory to the Father ... now and ever ...
Lord, have mercy (3 times), Give the blessing, and the priest says the
Dismissal, in which he commemorates the patron saint of the Church and the saint
of the day. The royal doors are again closed.

223. The priest, accompanied by the deacon, makes three small bows before the
Holy Table, saying only: O God, be merciful to me a sinner. They kiss the Holy
Gospel, the Holy Table and the hand cross. Then, having taken the priest’s
blessing, the deacon leaves via the northern door. Standing in his customary
place before the royal doors, the deacon makes three small bows (saying nothing)
and then exclaims: Master, give the blessing.[269] The priest, standing before
the Holy Table and making a sign of the Cross over it with the Holy Gospel, says
in a raised voice:[270] Blessed is the kingdom ... The choir: Amen. The Lector
immediately says: Come, let us adore ... (3 times), and then reads the
initial[271] Psalm (Bless the Lord, O my soul ...).

224. The deacon returns to the Altar through the southern door; however, the
priest stands before the royal doors and recites[272] the Prayers of Light[273]
from the fourth through the eighth,[274] because he will say the first three
afterwards, during the Antiphons.

225. Toward the end of the initial Psalm, the priest returns to the Altar[275]
via the southern door; the deacon leaves via the northern door and, standing in
his usual place, says the Great Synapte.[276] After the ekphonesis For to You is
due all glory ..., the deacon makes a small bow and enters the Altar via the
southern door. The Lector begins the 18th[277] Kathisma of the Psalter; small
bows are made at the Alleluia. When the Glory ... is said in each of the
antiphons, the deacon leaves the Altar via the northern door; standing in his
usual place, he says the Small Synapte while the priest secretly recites the
first, second and third Prayers of Light. Upon completing the Small Synapte, the
deacon

86

VI. Order of the Divine Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts

returns to the Altar via the southern door and the priest sings the usual
ekphonesis.

226. If the Presanctified Lamb is reserved in the artophorion on the Holy Table,
the transfer to the Prothesis table is made at the beginning of the stikhologia
(18th Kathisma) in this manner: the diskarion, asterisk, and small veil are
brought to the Holy Table by the deacon. The priest kisses the Holy Gospel and
places it to the right side on the Holy Table.[278] Then he places the diskarion
on the left part of the unfolded eiliton,[279] opens the artophorion, and makes
a small bow. He takes the ciborium or pyx in which the Lamb is kept and places
it in the center of the eiliton. Then, taking the Presanctified Lamb from the
vessel, he places the Lamb upon the diskarion with the greatest reverence; he
also takes out the Particles necessary for giving Communion to the
faithful.[280] After returning the ciborium or pyx to the artophorion, he closes
the artophorion. Then he places the diskarion in the center of the eiliton,
censes the asterisk and small veil,[281] and covers the diskarion. Preceded by
the deacon who bears a lighted candle, the priest takes the thurible and censes
around the Holy Table.[282] After returning before the Holy Table and giving the
thurible to the deacon, the priest bows profoundly[283] making the sign of the
Cross upon himself. Then, he takes the covered diskarion with both hands and,
holding it to his forehead, proceeds along the right side of the Holy Table to
the Prothesis table as the deacon leads with a lighted candle and censes.

227. The priest places the diskarion upon the unfolded eiliton[284] on the
Prothesis table. Then he pours wine and water into the chalice as prescribed,
saying nothing. After he has censed the chalice veil by holding the veil in the
smoke over the thurible, he covers the chalice with it; then he censes the large
veil in the same manner and, with it, covers the diskarion and the chalice
saying nothing except: Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ our God, have mercy on us. Amen. The priest and deacon make a profound
bow[285] and return to the Holy Table; there the priest[286] replaces the book
of Holy Gospels upon the folded eiliton.

228. If the Presanctified Lamb is kept in an artophorion on the Prothesis
table,[287] then the priest and deacon go to the Prothesis table

87
Ordo Celebrationis

at the beginning of the stikhologia. Both make a small bow; the priest opens the
artophorion and again makes a small bow after which he censes the Presanctified
Holy Gifts in strokes of three. Then he takes the Presanctified Lamb from the
artophorion and with great reverence places the Lamb upon the diskarion. He
pours wine and water into the chalice as usual, but says nothing. After taking
the thurible, he censes the asterisk and veils;[288] he then covers the
diskarion and chalice with their respective veils and then covers both vessels
with the large veil, saying only: Through the prayers ... He makes a profound
bow and returns to the Holy Table.

229. If the priest considers this opportune,[289] he performs the ceremony of
placing the Lamb on the diskarion when the first antiphon is read, the ceremony
of censing[290] while the second antiphon is read, and the ceremony of
transferring the Presanctified Gifts while the third antiphon is read.

230. If it is foreseen that many faithful will come for Communion, to the extent
that the Presanctified Lamb alone will not suffice, the priest places an
appropriate number of already consecrated Particles on the diskarion, and on
these he places the Holy Lamb Itself.[291]

231. Following the completion of the stikhologia, the choir begins the Psalm:
Lord, I have cried ... and the deacon censes as prescribed (see § 33), however,
he censes the Presanctified Gifts[292] three times, each time in strokes of
three.

232. When the: Glory ... now and ever ... is sung, the Holy Doors are opened and
the Entrance is made in the usual way; the deacon then censes. If the Gospel is
to be read,[293] the deacon makes the Entrance with the Gospel.

233. After the deacon has said: Let us pray to the Lord in a subdued voice, the
priest secretly recites the Entrance Prayer (In the evening, at dawn, and at
noon ...) with its conclusion (... for to You are due all honor ...); when the
stikhera are completed, the deacon exclaims: Wisdom! Stand Aright! The choirs: O
Joyful Light! ... And the priest and deacon enter the Altar. Then, standing at
the royal doors, the deacon exclaims: Let us be attentive! Facing the people and
blessing, the priest says: Peace be with all.[294] The deacon: Wisdom,

88

VI. Order of the Divine Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts

let us be attentive. The choir sings the Prokeimenon of the first Prophecy. The
deacon: Wisdom! The lector, standing midway between the two choirs and looking
toward the east: A reading from Genesis.[295] The deacon, Let us be attentive.
The lector reads the first Prophecy. Then the choir sings the second
Prokeimenon.

234. Immediately after the second Prokeimenon, the deacon, turning towards the
priest, exclaims: Command! Taking a lighted candle together with the thurible,
the priest holds them with both hands joined together and stands before the Holy
Table facing the east; making a distinct sign of the Cross with the candle and
thurible, he exclaims: Wisdom! Stand Aright! Then turning toward the west, in
the direction of the people, he again makes the sign of the Cross, saying in a
loud voice: The light of Christ ... And again turning toward the east, the
priest returns the candle and thurible to the server. After this, all those
present in the Altar and in the church make three great metanies.[296] The
lector: A reading from Proverbs.[297] The deacon: Let us be attentive. The royal
doors are closed and the second Prophecy is read.

235. After the reading of the second Prophecy is completed, the priest says:
Peace to you ... The deacon: Wisdom, let us be attentive.[298] The deacon takes
a lighted candle and approaches the priest. The lector, who stands midway
between the two choirs, or preferably the priest who stands in the Altar before
the Holy Table and censes, sings: Let my prayer ascend ... After this verse has
been sung by the lector or the priest, it is repeated by the choir.

The lector (or the priest who now, preceded by the deacon, stands at the
southern side of the Holy Table and there censes) then sings the first verse of
Psalm 140: O Lord, I have cried ... The choir repeats: Let my prayer ascend ...
The lector (or the priest who, preceded by the deacon, now stands at the eastern
side of the Holy Table and there censes) then sings the second verse of the
Psalm: O Lord, set a guard ... The choir repeats: Let my prayer ascend ... The
lector (or the priest who, preceded by the deacon, now stands at the northern
side of the Holy Table and there censes) then sings the third verse of the
Psalm: Let not my heart ... The choir repeats: Let my prayer ascend ... Once
again the lector (or the priest who, preceded by the deacon, now stands in front
of the Holy Table and there censes) then sings: Let my prayer

89

Ordo Celebrationis

ascend like incense, and the choir concludes: And the lifting up of my hands
like an evening sacrifice.

236. It should be noted that when the lector or priest sings: Let my prayer
ascend ... or any other verse, the priest censes the Holy Table in strokes of
three at the beginning and end of each verse which he sings; during that time,
the choir and people pray on bended knees. When the choir sings, the priest, who
returns the thurible to the server, and the others who serve in the Altar,
likewise pray on bended knees.[299] At the end, all make three great
metanies.[300]

237. If the feast of any Saint or the patron of the church falls during these
days of Lent, then the royal doors are opened and the deacon says: Let us be
attentive, and the lector reads the Prokeimenon of the Epistle. Then the Epistle
and Gospel are read as usual.

238. The Holy Doors are closed. The deacon takes leave of the priest, departs
via the northern door and, standing in his usual place, says the ektene: Let us
all say ...; and everything is performed as usual until the ekphonesis of the
Prayer for the Catechumens, after which the priest, having removed the Gospel,
unfolds the eiliton[301] on the Holy Table.

239. From the mid-Lenten Wednesday on, following the exclamation: That with us
... the deacon dismisses the catechumens and invites to prayer those who are
being prepared for Holy Baptism: All who are catechumens, depart; catechumens,
depart, You who are about to be enlightened ...[302] This is said in all
Presanctified Liturgies even if a feast day coincides, with the exception of
Saturday and Sunday. The prayers for the faithful follow as prescribed.

240. After the exclamation: Through the gift of Your Christ ... the choir sings:
Amen and then begins the hymn: Now the powers of heaven ... The deacon returns
to the Altar via the northern door, opens the royal doors and, after taking the
thurible, censes only the front of the Holy Table in three strokes; after that,
he censes the Prothesis table and the priest. Then he stands at the priest’s
right before the Holy Table, holding the thurible with the ring finger of his
left hand. With their hands[303] elevated on high,[304] the priest and deacon
together say: Now

90

VI. Order of the Divine Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts

the powers of heaven ... (3 times), and after each recitation they make a small
bow.

241. Then they go directly to the Prothesis table. The priest takes the thurible
and censes the Presanctified Gifts in strokes of three, still saying nothing.
Taking the large veil, the priest places it on the deacon’s left shoulder. After
this, the priest takes the veiled diskarion with his right hand and holds it to
his forehead; he takes the chalice bearing the wine in his left hand and holds
it before his breast.

242. However, if the diskarion lacks a stem base,[305] the priest places it upon
the veiled chalice which he holds in his left hand; and with his right hand he
keeps the veil over the diskarion and elevates the chalice as well as the
diskarion to his forehead.

243. Priest and deacon leave the Altar via the northern door; the deacon
precedes and, walking backwards, censes the Holy Gifts. While so proceeding,
they say nothing.[306] After entering the Altar via the Holy Doors, the priest
places the diskarion to the left side on the Holy Table, and the chalice to the
right; he removes the small veils from the diskarion and the chalice and lays
them to one side on the Holy Table. He takes the large veil from the deacon’s
shoulder, censes it over the thurible, and with it covers the Holy Gifts, saying
nothing, and censes only the Holy Gifts in strokes of three. After the cantors
have completed the hymn: Now the powers of heaven ..., all make three great
metanies.[307] Then the royal doors and their curtain are closed.[308]

244. The deacon shows reverence to the priest, departs via the northern door
and, standing in his usual place, says: Let us complete our evening prayer ...
Protect us, save us, have mercy ... The priest says the ekphonesis: And make us
worthy, O Lord ..., and the people: Our Father ... The deacon binds his orarion
about himself in the form of a Cross just as at the Liturgy of St. John
Chrysostom.

245. The bowing of the head is made as usual, and following the prayer: Look
down, O Lord Jesus Christ ... the priest and deacon make three small bows.[309]
Thus far, the priest does not uncover the Holy Gifts but, placing his hand under
the large veil, he touches the life-giving Bread with awe and veneration. The
deacon says: Let us be

91

Ordo Celebrationis

attentive!, after which the priest exclaims: The Presanctified Holy Gifts for
the holy!

The priest removes the large veil, which he folds and lays aside, and the
asterisk. The deacon enters the Altar through the southern door; standing at the
priest’s right, he makes a small bow and then says: Master, break the holy
Bread. The priest breaks the Lamb and arranges the four Parts on the diskarion
just as at the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom. Saying nothing, he drops the
Particle IC into the chalice. The deacon pours a little hot water into the
chalice (if this infusion is to be made), still saying nothing, and steps aside
slightly. The choir sings the Communion verse : O taste and see how good ...; if
the Epistle and Gospel of any Saint or of the titular patron of the Church were
read, the other verse is also sung.

246. The priest and deacon communicate themselves from the Holy Lamb as
prescribed. Then the priest absterges his fingers with the sponge if there is
one.[310] After the sponge has been kissed, the priest puts it in its proper
place.[311]

The deacon raises the diskarion over the chalice and wipes[312] the Particles
into the chalice, saying nothing. The acolyte opens the curtain of the royal
doors; the deacon bows three times and then opens the royal doors. The priest
bows, takes the chalice from the Holy Table, and gives the chalice to the
deacon. The deacon then proceeds to the holy doors and, elevating the chalice,
exposes it to the people’s view saying: Come to receive! The choir: I will bless
the Lord at all times. Alleluia. The Communion of the faithful is done just as
in the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom:[313] in distributing the Holy Bread, the
priest says the formula proper to this Office: The servant of God
[Name],...[314] The transfer of the diskarion is made just as in the Liturgy of
St. John Chrysostom. After making a small bow and taking the chalice, the priest
turns towards the doors and faces the people, saying secretly: Blessed is our
God, Who has enlightened and sanctified us, then exclaims: always, now and ever
...[315]

247. The remaining portions of this service are performed the same as in the
Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom. However, no author is to be mentioned in the
Dismissal of this service.[316] On the first three days of Great Week, the
Dismissal of the Vespers of Palm Sunday night

92
VI. Order of the Divine Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts

is said: May Christ our true God, Who by His own will came to His Passion for
our sake ... After the Presanctified Liturgy has been completed, the priest and
deacon unvest, saying nothing.[317]

With the Ministry of Two Deacons

248. After the reading of the Hours and the Dismissal at the end of the Typica,
the royal doors are closed; the priest and the deacons make three small bows
before the Holy Table, saying only: O God, be merciful to me a sinner, and they
kiss the Holy Gospel, the edge of the Holy Table, and the hand Cross as is
customary. Then the first deacon bows to the priest and departs via the northern
door. After taking his usual place before the royal doors, he makes three small
bows, saying nothing. Then he exclaims: Master, give the blessing. The priest:
Blessed is the kingdom... The choir: Amen.

And the lector reads the initial Psalm. The priest departs via the northern door
and recites the Prayers of Light from the fourth through the eighth. Towards the
end of the initial Psalm, the first deacon leaves via the northern door and says
the Great Synapte. After the ekphonesis: For to You is due all glory ..., the
deacon returns to the Altar.

249. The first deacon serves the priest when the priest places the Presanctified
Lamb on the diskarion and transfers the diskarion to the Prothesis table. The
second deacon leaves via the northern door and says the first small Synapte. The
first deacon says the second Synapte. And once again the second deacon says the
third Synapte.

250. The censing at the Psalm: O Lord, I have cried... and the Entrance takes
place in the same manner as customarily performed in Vespers with the ministry
of two deacons (see § 39). Upon returning into the Altar, the first deacon
exclaims: Let us be attentive! from the royal doors. Facing the people, the
priest says: Peace be with all.[318] The second deacon: Wisdom, let us be
attentive. The choir sings the Prokeimenon of the first Prophecy. The first
deacon: Wisdom! The lector: A reading from Genesis. The second deacon: Let us be
attentive. The lector reads the first Prophecy; then the choir sings the second
Prokeimenon.

93

Ordo Celebrationis

251. After the second Prokeimenon, the first deacon, turning towards the priest,
exclaims: Wisdom! Taking the candle and the thurible, the priest makes the sign
of the Cross with them as stated above. The lector: A reading from Proverbs. The
second deacon: Let us be attentive.

252. After the second reading of the Old Testament, both deacons proceed with
the priest when he censes the Holy Table and sings: Let my prayer ascend ...
with the verses of Psalm 140.

253. If the feast of some saint or the dedication of the church should occur,
then the second deacon says: Let us be attentive! Following the Prokeimenon of
the Epistle, the first deacon says: Wisdom!; and the title of the Epistle is
said by the lector, after which the second deacon says: Let us be attentive.

After the Epistle reading has been completed, the priest says: Peace be with
you. The first deacon: Wisdom, let us be attentive. And the Alleluia is
sung.[319]

The censing before the Gospel takes place just as at the Liturgy of St. John
Chrysostom when celebrated with the ministry of two deacons (see § 155). Then
the first deacon says: Master, bless the announcer of the Gospel ... The priest
says: May God, through the prayers..., and gives the Holy Gospel to the first
deacon. The second deacon: Wisdom! let us stand and listen to the Holy Gospel.
The priest: Peace be with all. Standing either on the ambo or just before the
Holy Doors, the first deacon says: A reading from the Holy Gospel according to
Saint N. The second deacon: Let us be attentive, and the rest is done as usual.

254. Following the reading of the Gospel, the deacons depart via their
respective doors and stand in the customary place. The first deacon begins: Let
us all say ... Then the second deacon: Catechumens, pray to the Lord ... The
first deacon: All Catechumens, depart, ... The second deacon: Catechumens,
depart, and again the first deacon: All Catechumens, depart; let none of the
Catechumens remain! All the faithful, ...

From the mid-Lenten Wednesday on,[320] they sing as follows: the first deacon:
All Catechumens, depart; the second deacon: Cate-

94

VI. Order of the Divine Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts

chumens, depart, and again the first deacon: All those preparing for Holy
Illumination, draw near! Pray, you who are about to be illumined! The choir:
Lord, have mercy. The first deacon: Ye faithful, let us pray for our brothers
who are preparing for holy Illumination ... The priest says the ekphonesis: For
You are our Illumination ... The first deacon: All those preparing for
Illumination, depart! the second deacon: Those preparing for Illumination,
depart! and again the first deacon: All Catechumens, depart; let none of the
Catechumens remain! All the faithful, ... Then the first deacon: Protect us,
save us, have mercy on us ... Wisdom! The second deacon: Again and again ...
Protect us, save us, have mercy on us ... Wisdom! And the deacons enter the
Altar via their respective doors.

255. While the hymn: Now the powers ... is sung, the royal doors are opened;
taking the thuribles, the deacons cense the Holy Table in strokes of three, but
only from the front, then the Prothesis table and the priest. After that, they
stand at the priest’s right and left, each holding a thurible with the ring
finger of his left hand; and they recite the hymn: Now the powers ... three
times, together with the priest.

Then they depart directly to the Prothesis table. There the priest censes the
Presanctified Gifts; taking the large veil, he places it upon the left shoulder
of the first deacon; and they go out in the usual way; walking backwards, both
deacons precede and cense the Holy Gifts.

256. After the holy diskarion and the holy chalice have been placed on the Holy
Table, the deacons[321] depart via their respective doors and stand in the usual
place. The first deacon says: Let us complete our evening prayer ... At the
Lord’s Prayer, the deacons bind their oraria crosswise about themselves. The
second deacon says: Bow your heads to the Lord. After the three small bows, the
first deacon exclaims: Let us be attentive! Following the priest’s exclamation:
The Presanctified Holy Gifts for the holy, they return to the Altar via their
respective doors. The first deacon: Master, break the holy Bread. The Communion
of the Holy Bread is served to the deacons according to the usual custom. After
the Communion of the priest and deacons, the first deacon raises the holy
diskarion, and from it absterges the Particles into the holy chalice; he
exclaims: Come to Receive! The rest is done just as in the Liturgy of St. John
Chrysostom.

95

Ordo Celebrationis

Without the Ministry of a Deacon

257. When this Liturgy is celebrated without the ministry of a deacon, the
priest does everything that is proper to the deacon as has already been stated
above, in the “Order of Vespers” and the “Divine Liturgy of St. John
Chrysostom.”

258. When the priest censes the Holy Table and transfers the Holy Gifts to the
Prothesis table, the server, holding a lighted candle, goes ahead of him. The
priest says the Small Synaptes and the ekphoneses, insofar as it is possible,
while standing before the Holy Table.

259. When: Let my prayer ascend ... is sung, the server precedes the priest with
a lighted candle.[322]

260. At the Great Entrance, if servers are present, they wait at the north door
and, arranged in order,[323] escort the Presanctified Lamb. When the priest has
entered the Altar, the two rows of acolytes meet before the royal doors, bow
once to the east, and then return to their places.[324]

With Concelebrating Priests

261. The rules for the concelebration of the Presanctified Liturgy are the same
as those for Vespers and for the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom.

The following should be kept in mind: Toward the end of the Typica, the
concelebrants clothe themselves in the sacred vestments, saying only: Let us
pray to the Lord for each vestment. The main celebrant says the ekphoneses: For
to You is due all glory... For You are a merciful and gracious God... Through
the Gift of Your Christ... For You are our sanctification... The others are said
by the concelebrants in due order. At Let my prayer ascend ... the concelebrants
remain in their places, only withdrawing from the Holy Table for a short time
when the main celebrant passes by; they kneel and stand when the main celebrant
kneels and stands.

The concelebrants do not carry anything during the Great Entrance; but the first
concelebrant may carry the chalice before the main celebrant.

96

VI. Order of the Divine Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts

97

Ordo Celebrationis

98

Glossary

This section is not part of the original version of the Ordo Celebrationis. As
Father Matthew Berko did in his edition, we provide a glossary here as a
reference convenience. Most of the terms are of Greek origin.

Acolyte — In principle, the acolytes should be adult men, who have been ordained
subdeacons, or at least readers and taper-bearers (cf. Instruction for Applying
the Liturgical Prescriptions ... chapter IX, “Sacred Ordination,” pp. 62-64).
The acolyte is vested in a full-length sticharion, made of vestment brocade,
identical to a deacon’s sticharion, and tailored to fit the wearer. The ordained
subdeacon also wears a crossed orarion over the sticharion.

The Church welcomes and encourages “altar boys” to serve as substitute acolytes;
as they grow they may take on greater responsibility and when they reach
maturity be ordained to the subdiaconate. In every way, such boys and young men
should be brought to realize that they have the privilege of sharing in an adult
ministry at the altar, and that they will never become “too old” to serve at the
altar. The late President of Ireland, Eamon de Valera, served Mass almost every
morning of his life.

Suitable full-length sticharia should be provided for altar boys and younger
acolytes, as well as for adult acolytes.

Aer — the large veil which covers both chalice and diskarion. The Aer and the
two smaller veils are made of vestment brocade.

Aitisis — literally “askings,” the set of petitions which end with the
exhortation “let us ask of the Lord,” to which the faithful respond “Grant this,
O Lord.” The Aitisis occurs twice during the Divine Liturgy, after the Great
Entrance and after the Anaphora.

Altar — the area of the temple enclosed by the iconostasis. The altar contains
the Holy Table, the Prothesis table, the High Place with the Bishop’s throne,
the synthronon or benches for the presbyters, and the diaconicon or side-table,
which may be used for the vestments.

Ambo — In Greek churches, the pulpit. In Slav churches, which do not usually
have a pulpit (although some large churches in Western Ukraine

99

Ordo Celebrationis

have elaborate pulpits), the term ambo is applied to the central part of the
soleas – the space immediately in front of the royal doors. Cf. Instruction for
Applying the Liturgical Prescriptions ...No. 105, p. 85, “The ambo.”

Analogion — A small desk, about four or five feet high, with a sloping top. The
Analogion is usually made of wood, and often fully covered with a cloth, which
may be changed according to the seasons or feasts. Analogia may hold
service-books for the clergy, the readers, and the singers, or icons or the
Gospel-Book for the veneration of the faithful.

Anaphora — the Eucharistic Prayer. The Byzantine Liturgy normally uses either
the Anaphora of Saint John Chrysostom or the Anaphora of Saint Basil the Great.
Rarely, the Byzantines also serve the Liturgy of Saint James; that service is
not described in the Ordo Celebrationis.

Anterion — the narrow-sleeved, ankle-length robe worn by the clergy of the
Eastern Churches. Similar to the Western cassock, but need not necessarily be
black.

Antidoron — portions of the prosphora which remain on the Prothesis Table after
the Lamb and other particles have been cut and set on the diskarion. Usually the
priest distributes the Antidoron to the faithful at the end of the Divine
Liturgy.

Antimension — a sacred cloth, usually depicting Christ in the tomb, into which
relics are sewn and which is signed by a bishop.

Apolysis — the Dismissal or conclusion of a liturgical office. In this
translation we have preferred the English word Dismissal.

Apolytikion — literally the “dismissal hymn.” The principal troparion of the day
is called the “dismissal hymn” because it is sung for the first time at the
Dismissal of Vespers, just after the Lord’s Prayer.

Aposticha — poetic verses sung at Vespers before Saint Simeon’s Prayer.

Artoklasia — [from Greek; literally “breaking of breads”] A ceremony occurring
at the end of Vespers on the eve of great feasts, and on certain other days when
there is a Litany; on Christmas Eve, Theophany Eve, and Annuciation Eve the
Artoklasia takes place at the end of Great

100
Glossary

Compline. Five loaves of bread (often made in the same way as the prosphora, or
bread for the Eucharist) together with small containers of wheat, wine, and oil
are set on a small table (tetrapod) in the nave. During the the apolytkion the
priest censes around this table, and then says the prayer of blessing, recalling
the five loaves at the feeding of the five thousand in the desert
(Matthew 14:15-21). The loaves are then taken into the altar, cut up into
smaller pieces, and sprinkled with the wine. After the Gospel at Orthros the
pieces of blessed bread are given to the faithful, who are anointed with the
blessed oil at the same time.

Artophorion — literally “bread-holder”; the Greek name for the tabernacle.

Asterisk — Two bar-strips of metal, crossed at the center, and bent at right
angles midway from the center to each end, so as to form a covering framework
set over the diskarion to prevent the veils from touching the Lamb and other
particles of bread. The Asterisk is set on the diskarion during the Proskomede
and remains in place until just before the Sanctus. The Asterisk is made to
match the chalice and diskarion, which are normally sold as a set.

Canon — The most complicated part of Orthros. Originally at this point of
Orthros it was customary to sing the nine Scriptural canticles or “odes,” with a
short refrain after each verse. After the seventh century, however, Byzantine
liturgical poets, such as Saint Andrew of Crete, Saint John of Damascus, and
others devised poetic verses about the feast or saint of the day, to be
intercalated between the Scriptural verses. Later the Scriptural texts fell out
of use, especially on Sundays and feasts.

Communion verse [Kinonikon] — A short Psalm verse, sung at the Divine Liturgy
directly after One is Holy... On Sundays, the Kinonikon is usually Praise the
Lord from the heavens; praise Him in the highest. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.

Diskarion — the plate or paten for the Eucharistic bread. The Byzantine
diskarion has a rim, which helps to keep the particles from falling off, and it
has a foot or stand which holds it two or three inches above the Holy Table.
Usually the diskarion and the Chalice are made as a set.

Doxology, Great — The ancient hymn, at the end of Orthros (after the Laudate
Psalms) which opens with words of the angels “Glory to God

101

Ordo Celebrationis

in the highest and on earth peace...” (Luke 2:14). The Great Doxology is sung on
great feasts, on Sundays, and on major saints days. On ordinary days, the Small
Doxology is read instead (the Small Doxology is longer than the Great Doxology).

Eiliton — a red square of silk, linen, or other material, in which the
antimension is kept folded upon the holy table. During the Divine Liturgy, the
Eiliton is unfolded and then the Antimension is unfolded, before the Great
Entrance, so that the Holy Gifts may rest upon the antimension.[325]

Ekphonesis — The concluding sentence or clause of a hieratic prayer. The priest
chants this concluding section aloud, even though he will usually have said the
rest of the prayer quietly, while the deacon is leading an ektene. An ekphonesis
invokes the Holy Trinity, and normally ends with the phrase ... unto ages of
ages or ... now and ever and forever.

Ektene — a set of petitions sung by the deacon; the faithful respond to each
petition with a short invocation, such as Lord, have mercy. Strictly, the Ektene
is the proper name for the petitions sung after the Gospel at the Divine
Liturgy; the response is a triple Lord, have mercy. See also Synapte and
Aitisis. However, the Slavs often use the term “ektene” for any of these,
indiscriminately.

Enarxis — the first public portion of the Divine Liturgy, consisting of the
Great Synapte, the three antiphons, and the hymn Only-Begotten Son; originally a
processional office. When the Divine Liturgy immediately follows Vespers, the
Enarxis is usually omitted.

Entrance — A procession in which the priest and deacon, preceded by one or more
processional candles, and perhaps the ripidia and processional cross, make their
way through the north door of the iconostasis into the center of the nave; after
pausing there they return to the Altar through the royal doors. There is an
Entrance at Great Vespers; for this Entrance the deacon carries the thurible (or
on infrequent occasions the Gospel Book). At the Divine Liturgy there are two
Entrances:

a) the Little Entrance; for this Entrance the deacon carries the Gospel Book.

102

Glossary

b) the Great Entrance; for this Entrance the deacon carries the diskarion and
the priest carries the chalice. This procession brings the Holy Gifts from the
Prothesis Table to the Holy Table.

Epigonation — a diamond-shaped vestment worn above the right knee by prelates
and distinguished priests. In certain Local Churches, the bishop awards the
Epigonation to those priests who are authorized to hear confessions.

Epiklesis — The section of the Anaphora during which the priest asks the Father
to send down the Holy Spirit upon the assembly, and upon the Holy Gifts to make
them the Body and Blood of Christ.

Epimanikia — ornamental cuffs, made of vestment brocade. The deacon ties the
Epimanikia with cords over the sleeves of the anterion and under the sleeves of
the sticharion, just above the wrist; the priest ties the Epimanikia with cords
over the sleeves of the sticharion and the anterion, just above the wrist.[326]
The Epimanikia of the deacon should match his sticharion and orarion; the
Epimanikia of the priest should match his phelonion.

Epitrachelion — the priest’s essential vestment: a long band of vestment
brocade, hanging about his neck, with both ends reaching down his front to his
shoes. Normally joined at the front in several places; the two ends are adorned
with two rows of fringe (three rows for a bishop’s epitrachelion. The
epitrachelion is usually ornamented with crosses. The brocade and ornamentation
should match the phelonion.

Evlogitaria — The troparia The Assembly of the Angels chanted on Sundays at
Orthros after (or in place of) the Polyeleos. There is another set of
Evlogitaria, with different verses, used at funerals and certain other services
for the dead.

Exaposteilarion — also called the Photagogicon, the “Hymn of Light.” The poetic
stanza immediately preceding the Psalms of Lauds[327] at Orthros.

Holy Table — the central table in the Altar, upon which the Eucharistic
Sacrifice is offered and consummated. Besides its own vestments (a special cord,
a white linen cloth, and a brocade cloth), the Holy Table has upon it:

103

Ordo Celebrationis

• the antimension (usually wrapped and folded within the eiliton, and unfolded
during the Divine Liturgy after the Gospel, then folded again after Holy
Communion),

• the sponge, kept in the antimension or eiliton,

• the Gospel Book, resting over the antimension.

• the hand cross

• the Spoon (for Holy Communion)

• usually the artophorion (the tabernacle)

• a purificator (for Holy Communion; usually red in color), and

• a Lance (for the convenience of the priest and deacon in dividing the Holy
Lamb at Communion-time).

Hymns of Ascent — eight sets of poetic verses (one for each of the eight tones)
sung at Orthros shortly before the Gospel, loosely related to the Psalms of
Ascent (Psalms 119 - 133). At festal Orthros the Hymns of Ascent of Tone Four
are always sung: From my youth many passions have warred against me.

Iconostasis — The screen of icons separating the Altar from the nave, pierced by
three doors. The central doorway, closed by double gates and a curtain, is
called the royal doors.

Introit — The Psalm verse chanted by the choir and/or the clergy at the Little
Entrance. This varies particularly on great feasts of Christ, when there is a
proper Third Antiphon. On these occasions, the deacon should chant the Introit.

Irmos[328] — a pattern-verse which regulates the meter and melody of the
troparia of each of the nine Odes of a Canon.

Kalymauchion — A stiff, round hat worn by monastics and clergy. The kalymauchion
is usually black (although Ukrainian and Russian protodeacons and archpriests
may wear purple kalymauchia). In some places those in major orders (deacons,
presbyters, and bishops) have a brim at the top of the kalymauchion. Monastics,
bishops, and those holding certain honorific distinctions of monastic origin,
wear a veil

104

Glossary

over the kalymauchion. Patriarchs and Metropolitans of the Slav Churches wear a
white veil; all others wear a black veil.

Katavasia — literally “descent”; a second Irmos sung at the end of one of the
Odes of a Canon, and usually having no connection with the meter or melody of
the Ode which precedes it. In monasteries the two monastic choirs “descend” from
their positions and meet together in the center of the nave to chant this
concluding Irmos.

Kathisma — literally “sitting;” the name for any of the twenty sections into
which the Psalms are divided. One may be seated during the reading of the
Psalter; hence the name.

Kolpak — A six-sided clergy hat popular among some clergy in Western Ukraine.
The origin of the kolpak is uncertain; some offer the opinion that it derives
from the ritual hat of Jewish cantors, while others think that it was designed
by the Turkish Sultan in imitation of an Ottoman coffee table. Father George
Fedoriv, The Ritus of Ukrainian Church, Opera Theologicæ Societatis Scientificæ
Ucrainorum, Roma-Toronto 1970, p. 142, maintains that the 1891 L’viv Synod
introduced the kolpak in order to differentiate the Greek-Catholic clergy from
the Eastern Orthodox clergy. Thus the Instruction for Applying the Liturgical
Prescriptions ...No. 21, p. 21, would appear to discourage the use of the
kolpak.

Lamb — the large, cube-shaped piece of bread, cut from the prosphora with the
lance, and set in the center of the diskarion.

Lauds — The section of Orthros which includes the Laudate Psalms
(148, 149, 150).

Lector — The reader, whose principal task at the Divine Liturgy is to proclaim
the Epistle lesson, with the Prokeimenon and Alleluia verses. The Lector should
properly be ordained to that rank by the Bishop (cf. Instruction for Applying
the Liturgical Prescriptions ...§§ 73-75, pp. 62-63). An ordained Lector should
always be vested in the sticharion when he is to read during the services. An
unordained (male) reader who is to proclaim the Epistle properly vests in the
sticharion. In most Local Churches of the Byzantine tradition, women may read
the Epistle, but they do not wear the sticharion.

105

Ordo Celebrationis

One is tonsured into the clerical state and ordained Lector, taper-bearer, and
chanter in the same service, which need not take place in connection with the
Divine Liturgy. An ordained Lector remains free to marry.

Litany — the solemn petitions during a special procession; attached to Vespers
on the eve of a great feast; attached to Compline on Christmas Eve, Theophany
Eve, and (in most years) the Vigil of the Annunciation.

Lord, I have cried ... — The opening words of Psalm 140, and applied as a
general title to the evening Psalms (140, 141, 129 and 116) sung each day at
Vespers.

Megalynarion

a) Slavs only — the short hymn, often beginning We Magnify You, sung to welcome
the Icon of the Feast, brought into the center of the nave just before the
Polyeleos;

b) all usages — the short refrain or refrains of the Ninth Ode of the Canon on a
great feast, often beginning Magnify, O my soul

Metany (or metania) — bow or prostration

Narthex — the western vestibule of the temple; some portions of certain services
are done in the narthex.

Orarion — deacon’s stole.

Parecclesia — side chapel (this word is very seldom used).

Phelonion — the priest’s outer vestment for the Divine Liturgy and the more
solemn moments of Vespers and Orthros. Originally cut in the shape of a circle,
the phelonion is now usually cut away in the front to allow the priest to move
his hands freely. The back of the phelonion should reach the heels. The
phelonion is made of vestment brocade; on the back, just below the level of the
shoulders, there should be a cross and much lower, about the level of the shins,
there is often a star. The traditional Slavonic phelonion has a high collar in
back of the head. The phelonion, the epitrachelion, the zone, the epimanikia and
the epigonation are made as a set;[329] often the aer and the smaller veils for
the

106

Glossary

chalice and diskarion are also made as a set to match the vestments. There is
also a Short Phelonion given to the reader at his ordination; in current usage
the reader never again wears the short phelonion, but after his ordination he
vests in the sticharion when reading or serving.

Polyeleos — Psalms 134 and 135 sung or chanted solemnly at Orthros on feast days
and often on Sundays; so called because they make mention of “mercy” (Greek:
poli [much] and eleos [mercy]) Among the Slavs, often only selected verses are
sung..

Polychronion — “for many years”; an acclamation sung at the end of the Divine
Liturgy (and of other solemn services).

Prokeimenon — sung verses from the Psalms or from a Scriptural canticle which
normally precede Scripture lessons. However there is no Scripture lesson after
the Prokeimenon of Vespers on most days.

Proskomede — preparation part of the Divine Liturgy, done by the priest and
deacon at the Prothesis Table, before the public part of the service.

Prosphora — loaf or loaves of Byzantine altar bread; this bread is always
leavened, and before baking should be stamped with a religious seal.

Prothesis — the side table within the Altar, where the bread and wine are
prepared for the Eucharist. The Prothesis table should be of the same height as
the Holy Table.

Rason — the wide-sleeved, ankle-length robe, usually black, worn by the clergy
of the Eastern Churches.

Ripidion (plural ripidia; they are usually in pairs) — liturgical fan, decorated
with images of the angels and affixed to a staff. The ripidia are often carried
in processions, at the Entrances of the Divine Liturgy, during the reading of
the Gospel, and at other solemn moments. Although ripidion is a Greek word, the
Greeks tend to call the ripidia the exapteryga.

Six Psalms — The Psalms read daily at the beginning of Orthros
(3, 37, 62, 87, 102, 142). During the Six Psalms, the priest quietly reads a
number of prayers.

107

Ordo Celebrationis

Skufia — A soft (folding) four-sided hat worn by the clergy; non-monastic
Russian and Ukrainian clergy of certain ranks sometimes wear a purple skufia.
Otherwise the skufia is always black.

Soleas — the raised platform before the iconostasis.

Sticharion — the first vestment, worn by all the clergy and servers, including
the lector or reader. The sticharion of the lector, subdeacon, and deacon is
often made of brocade; the sticharion of a presbyter or a bishop is made of
lighter material (since the phelonion or the saccos will go over it). Even
unordained acolytes and alter servers wear the sticharion. Presbyters and
bishops do not wear the sticharion for Vespers and Orthros. In origin the
sticharion is the white robe given to all the newly baptized.

Stichera — a verse of liturgical poetry. We chant stichera at Vespers during
“Lord I have cried,” at the Litany, and at the Aposticha; we chant stichera at
Orthros during the Laudate Psalms.

Stichologia — the recitation of a Kathisma of the Psalter.

Temple — The church edifice, in which the Divine Liturgy and other public
worship services are celebrated; cf. Instruction for Applying the Liturgical
Prescriptions ... No. 102, “The temple” (pp. 82-83). The Temple is divided into
several sections:

a) the Altar, where the Holy Table is located b) the nave, where the faithful
assemble c) the narthex, or vestibule, where certain prayers occur. d) the
exonarthex (not found in all churches), where there may be an atrium, a well for
the blessing of water, and so forth e) the bell tower.

Tetrapod — a small table from which certain blessings and some sacraments are
usually administered; located in the temple proper, just before the soleas. In
churches of the Ruthenian tradition, the tetrapod remains permanently in the
nave and usually holds an icon and a cross for veneration.

108
Glossary

Theotokos — “She Who Has Given Birth to God” — the dogmatic title of the Blessed
Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, defined by the Council of Ephesus and often
used in liturgical texts.

Tones — Liturgical music of the Byzantine Churches is based upon a system of
eight modes or tones, arranged in two groups of four: Tone One, Tone Two, Tone
Three, Tone Four, and Tone Five (or First Plagal), Tone Six (or Second Plagal),
Tone Seven (or Grave Tone) and Tone Eight.

This can become extremely complicated; within each “Tone” there is a large (and
variable) number of airs or melodies: for the Apolytikion, for the Kontakion,
for the Canon, for the Stichera, for the Prokeimena ... plus special airs for
particular pieces on specific occasions.

During most of the year, each Sunday and the week following each Sunday are said
to be in a particular Tone. This affects not only the music but also the texts,
found in a liturgical book (usually bound in two volumes) called the Paraklitiki
or the Great Octoëchos. At the time of writing there is no complete English
translation of the Great Octoëchos available.

The services of a specific feast day or saint’s day are not usually written in
one particular tone; at the top of each poetic text the tone number is
indicated, and one must know the melody in question by heart and be able to
apply it to the words. Sometimes the liturgical books “point” such texts for
chanting, but more often they do not. Thus chanters must prepare services with
great care.

To make matters still more confusing, the various Local Churches of the
Byzantine tradition retain the system of organization based on the eight tones,
but do not usually share the same actual melodies, so that “Tone 1” in a Greek
Church does not in the least resemble “Tone 1” in a Russian Church or “Tone 1”
in a Ruthenian or “Tone 1” in an Ukrainian Church, even though the texts being
sung are identical. Byzantine chant is apt to be metrical; Slavic chant usually
is not. As a result, the Slav chant systems lend themselves to adaptation to
English texts more easily than Byzantine chants do.

109

Ordo Celebrationis

Trisagion — hymn of the Thrice-Holy: “Holy God, Holy Mighty One, Holy Immortal
One, have mercy on us.” In Byzantine usage, this hymn is always Trinitarian. In
Roman usage and Oriental Orthodox usage, this hymn is frequently Christological.

Troparion — a generic name for a short verse of liturgical poetry, but also used
often to mean the Apolytikion or Dismissal Hymn, the “main” troparion of a day.

Typica — a brief Office seldom done in contemporary practice which seems to have
been used for the reception of Holy Communion. Also, Psalms 102 and 145, and the
Beatitudes when used in place of the three antiphons during the Enarxis of the
Divine Liturgy.

110

Appendix

I.

Circular of the Sacred Congregation for the Eastern Church to Ruthenian[330]
Ordinaries[331]

Prot. N°: 1219/28 Rome, September 10, 1941

Most Reverend Excellency:

I have the pleasure to send Your Excellency three copies of each of the first
liturgical books of the Byzantine Rite of the Ruthenian Recension in the Old
Slavonic language, revised and printed under the care of this Sacred
Congregation to carry out the decisions made by the Cardinals in the plenary
session held on 10 January 1938, and approved by the Holy Father, Pius XI in the
audience of 15 January 1938.

The first book (in small format) is an extract of the Liturgicon or Sluzhebnyk
(now at the press) and contains the Office of Vespers and Orthros for various
seasons of the year; the second book (large format) contains the Liturgy of
Saint John Chrysostom; the third book contains the same Liturgy, but in small
format.

As a result of discussions[332] among the Ruthenians concerning some changes of
a liturgical nature which were introduced in recent times into the text and
rubrics of the liturgical books, discussions which also concerned the four
points contemplated by the Synod of 1891, the Ruthenian Episcopate first
examined the liturgical problem at episcopal conferences held in 1927, 1929,
and 1932, and then decided to submit the entire question to the examination of
the Holy See, beseeching the Holy See to condescend to produce a Typical Edition
of all the liturgical books. For this reason, this Sacred Congregation in 1933
invited the Ruthenian Ordinaries to express their views on various questions,
and having received, with their reply, also the minutes of the sessions of the
Inter-eparchial Liturgical Commission of L’viv held in 1930-1935,[333] the
Congregation entrusted all the materials thus gathered to the exami-

111

Ordo Celebrationis

nation of Consultors particularly qualified in Canon Law, in Eastern Liturgy,
and in the Old Slavonic language.

The Cardinals, members of this Sacred Congregation,[334] in the above mentioned
plenary session of 10 January 1938, without taking specific decisions about the
merits of any particular disputed points, established certain general principles
to serve as a basis for the further work of revision and printing of the
Ruthenian liturgical books and entrusted this work to a special commission
chaired by the Cardinal Secretary of this Sacred Congregation.[335]

In the meantime, it was ordered that any controversy should be avoided,
authorizing, though, the temporary use of all the existing texts and forbidding
the publication of new editions without a special permission of the Sacred
Congregation.[336]

Your Excellency will certainly be pleased to know the results of the labors of
the Commission, which held sixty-one sessions just for the Liturgicon or
Sluzhebnyk alone, and is actively continuing the preparation of other books.

1. In the first place, the existence of a distinct Ruthenian Recension has been
established. This Recension is older than the recension commonly called the
vulgate,[337] because the Ruthenian books had not been corrected (as the vulgate
books were) on the basis of the Greek Editions printed at the beginning of the
seventeenth century. The Ruthenian Recension, then, inasmuch as it reflects
older texts, deserves to be preferred.

2. It has been established that from the middle of the seventeenth century
onward not only the texts but also, and especially, the rubrics were modified
and altered under the action of various influences without the participation of
the Holy See, with the exception of four points[338] treated at the Synod of
Zamost’.[339]

3. The more important alteration was that of the rubrics of the Eucharistic
Liturgy as these rubrics were first[340] codified in the Liturgicon which
Metropolitan Cyprian Zhokhovsky published at Vilnius in 1692; These alterations
were later much augmented in the “Rubrics for the Read Liturgy” inserted for the
first time into the Sluzhebnyk printed at Univ in 1733, reproduced later in the
successive editions of the

112

Appendix

eighteenth century. If these latter almost entirely disappeared in the Galician
editions on the nineteenth century, the former remain preserved up until the
present time for Solemn Liturgy. With this it was intended to imitate the
ceremonies of the Low Mass[341] of the Latin Rite.

Even though well accepted in the northern Eparchies of the ecclesiastical
province of Kyiv, these modifications did not penetrate so easily into the
Eparchies of L’viv and Peremyshl’ – the only ones that existed at that time in
Galicia – and even less in those situated south of the Carpathians.[342]

4. Considering, though, the private origin of these modifications from which the
Holy See was always aloof[343] – and considering the firm will of the Supreme
Pontiffs, more than once expressed, even in recent documents, to guard the
integrity of the Oriental Rites, it has been judged opportune to follow readings
of the older texts, taking care to adhere as much as possible to the (Greek)
text of Benedict XIV, especially for what pertains to the rubrics. Thus it has
been desired to remain faithful to the recommendation of that Pope, when, having
approved the Roman edition of the Greek Euchologion[344] in 1754, he recommended
it to all the Bishops of the Byzantine Rite in the Apostolic Constitution Ex quo
primum of March 1, 1756.[345]

5. The Typical Edition of the Ruthenian liturgical books now being published by
the Holy See follows the old tradition of distinct[346] volumes: 1) the Gospel
Book to be placed on the holy table; 2) the Liturgicon or Sluzhebnyk containing
the part of the priest and deacon; 3) the Epistle Book[347] with the antiphons,
troparia, and verses[348] regarding the Eucharistic Liturgy – destined for
choirs and lectors.

Considering the circumstances,[349] the publication comes in a smaller, more
manageable format, with extracted numbers or separable sections.[350] In the
future the Ruthenians may produce reprints with another system and a different
format may be followed. The important thing is that the text and the rubrics be
respected integrally. The same criterion holds also for the order of the
materials in the same book.[351]

6. At the present the large format Gospel is at the press. Since this book is
destined to remain on the Holy Table, it is called the Altar Gospel. As soon as
the printing of the Liturgicon or Sluzhebnyk is

113

Ordo Celebrationis

completed,[352] an abridged Gospel Book will be printed without delay (in view
of the urgent need for it).[353] This smaller Gospel Book will include all the
Gospels for Sundays and principal Feasts of the year, besides those common for
the days of the week and for various categories of Saints. An Epistle Book
abridged in the same way will also be printed, to suit the needs of priests who
must travel.[354]

After the printing of the large, complete Gospel Book it is hoped to be able to
print an Epistle Book in the same format.[355]

In view of all that we have explained, the Sacred Congregation considers it
necessary to indicate the following norms:

1. In territories[356] where the liturgical prescriptions promulgated by the
Synod of Zamost’ are in force, [these points are indicated in the present
edition by red parentheses ( )], the Bishop, Apostolic Exarch, or other prelate
having ordinary episcopal or quasi-episcopal jurisdiction, cannot modify the
existing practice without the intervention of the Holy See. If the Ordinary,
after carefully considering the circumstances of time and place, believes that a
derogation of the law would be opportune, he must request this derogation from
the Holy See.[357]

2. In places where the observance of the liturgical prescriptions of the Synod
of Zamost’ have been introduced in recent times by way of custom,[358] the
Sacred Congregation permits the Bishops and Ordinaries to dispense, prudently,
from the observance of these prescriptions of the Synod of Zamost’.

3. In those territories where the liturgical prescriptions decreed by the synods
of Zamost’ and L’viv[359] were not introduced, the Sacred Congregation desires
that they should not be introduced there.[360]

4. For the Clergy subject to the Latin Ordinaries, the dispensation has been
reserved to the Sacred Congregation which shall decide after having heard the
Local Ordinary.

114
Appendix

5. The Sacred Congregation permits those who have been ordained priests before
the date of the present letter[361] to continue to celebrate privately, if they
so desire, according to the previous usage.[362]

Nonetheless, in major and minor seminaries, in scholasticates and religious
novitiates, the celebration must be made from now on according to the new
Liturgicon or Sluzhebnyk and the new Ordo Celebrationis (in preparation),[363]
so as to educate young aspirants for the priesthood and for the religious life
in this practice.

I will be grateful if Your Excellency will acknowledge the receipt of this
letter. With sentiments of deep esteem, I am happy to remain Your Excellency’s

most devoted brother

Eugène Cardinal Tisserant, Secretary[364]

115

Ordo Celebrationis

II.

Translation of the Letter of Bishop Daniel Ivancho, to Eugène Cardinal
Tisserant, October 31, 1953[365]

His Eminence Eugène Cardinal Tisserant Secretary of the Sacred Congregation For
the Oriental Church Rome

Your Eminence:

Because of the conditions prevailing up to the present time in our Pittsburgh
Exarchate, it did not seem an opportune time, neither to my[366]
predecessor[367] nor to me, to introduce the Liturgical Rubrics as they are
found in the book: Ordo Celebrationis Vesperarum Matutini et Divinae Liturgiae
juxta recensionem Ruthenorum promulgated by the Sacred Congregation for the
Oriental Church, at Rome, in the year 1944.

Permit me, however, to express my highest gratitude to the Holy See for the care
and paternal solicitude with which the Holy See has kindly deigned to restore
purity and uniformity to our rite.

Experience teaches us more and more every day about the importance of our Rite.
Purity and uniformity of Rite are to be esteemed as the qualities by which our
Rite can truly become the Great Light which will admirably show our separated
brethren that the Catholic Church has no other desire than to preserve unity of
Faith for ever – One Fold and one Shepherd – together with the diversity of
Rites.

Therefore, since the conditions in our Exarchate have become favorable at the
present time, I have reached the decision to make every effort to bring into
practice the purity and uniformity of our Rite in conformity with the desire of
the Holy See.

However, there is a need to avoid confusion. Confusion might possibly arise from
our separated brethren, the so-called Independents,[368] who now strongly cling
to the existing rubrics which they tenaciously strive to preserve as a Rule of
Faith. Confusion might also

116

Appendix

arise among our own faithful; they are attached to particular customs and might
be very disturbed if unexpectedly something would be integrally changed in the
liturgical rubrics. So prudence dictates to me that certain particular customs
which are not in perfect conformity with the Roman Rubrics should be preserved
temporarily,[369] since these customs are immemorial.[370]

For this reason, I most humbly beseech the Holy See, that we here in the United
States of North America be benevolently permitted to retain the following
particular customs of the Carpatho[371] Ruthenians.

(The numbers here to which the particular customs to be retained are referred,
are taken from the Ordo Celebrationis, Rome 1944, pp. 49ff.)

N°. 100: The icons of the Iconostasis are not kissed.[372]

N°. 105: The amice is used.

N°. 116: The priest blesses with a sign of the Cross during the prayer of the
Proskomede.

N°. 117: The priest does not cense the Apsidal icon and the other icons in the
sanctuary – this censing is reserved only for the deacon.[373]

N°. 118: The Royal Doors remain open from the beginning until the end of the
Holy Liturgy.

N°. 119: In the Great Synapte, the petition for the Most Holy Father is taken
together with that for the Bishop.[374]

N°. 120: The priest recites the Glory ... Only-begotten Son ... and makes a
small inclination at “and became incarnate.”

N°. 121: The Little Entrance is made at the end of Glory ... Only-begotten Son
...; three bows do not precede the Entrance, but only one bow is made and the
third antiphon is recited

117

Ordo Celebrationis

privately only by the priest or by the server after the priest has privately
recited the second Small Synapte.[375]

N°. 123: The priest blesses the people at the end of the exclamation: For You
are holy ...

N°. 125: The priest does the censing during the reading of the Epistle.[376]

N°. 126: The exclamation Peace unto all is omitted before the reading of the
Gospel.

N°. 128: The priest turns towards the people and blesses with a sign of the
Cross at the exclamation That being ever protected by Your power...

N°. 129: Mention of the civil authority and army is not made in the exclamation
of the Great Entrance.[377]

N°. 130: After the Great Entrance, the cover is not removed from the chalice.

N°. 132: The priest, while reciting I believe ... makes a small bow at the words
and was incarnate.

N°. 133: The hands are elevated according to the Sluzhebnyk of 1905 (L’viv
edition). We decreed that the elevation of hands be omitted at the time of Holy
Communion, (as well as at the time of the Proskomede, and at the time of Glory
... Only-begotten Son ... and during the prayer before the Iconostasis, which
elevations, though not contained in the Sluzhebnyk of 1905, were, nevertheless,
performed by some of our priests).

N°. 137: According to custom the hands are washed before Communion.[378]

118

Appendix

N°. 137: The priest strikes his breast three times[379] instead of making three
bows while saying God, have mercy on me a sinner!

N°. 140: The prayer I believe and profess ... before Holy Communion is recited
as it is found in the Sluzhebnyk of 1905 (slightly longer than the same prayer
in the book Ordo Celebrationis, Rome, 1944). I wish to retain this prayer
temporarily at least for the people.

N°. 143: At the words: Be exalted above the heavens... the priest does not cense
the chalice ... this censing can be reserved for the deacon.[380]

N°. 143: The ablutions are performed immediately, that is, during the hymn May
our lips be filled ...

N°. 145: The Dismissal, according to the immemorial custom of
Carpatho-Ruthenians, is made thus:

Wisdom! ... More honorable than the Cherubim... Glory to You, O Christ, our God
and our Hope ... May Christ our true God ... The blessing of the Lord ...

N°. 10: According to immemorial custom, the small bells are used.[381]

Given at Pittsburgh, PA 31 October 1953

Your Eminence’s most devoted and dedicated brother and servant in Christ,

/s/ Daniel Ivancho

Bishop Daniel Ivancho Exarch of the Carpatho-Ruthenians in the United States of
North America

119

Ordo Celebrationis

III.

Translation of the Response[382] from the Sacred Congregation for the Eastern
Church to Bishop Ivancho’s Request

Rome, 27 November 1953 Via della Conciliazione, 34

Prot. N°. 908/48

Most Reverend Excellency:

This Sacred Congregation has not failed to consider Your Excellency’s letter
dated 13 October 1953, concerning some liturgical usages existing in your
Exarchate.

After having thanked the Holy See for the solicitude with which the Holy See has
provided the edition of the Ruthenian liturgical books, reintegrating the
genuine Rite and securing uniformity of practice, Your Excellency set forth some
reasons which suggest the temporary[383] toleration of certain usages which
would not conform to the prescriptions of the Ordo Celebrationis.

Attentively considering these reasons, the Sacred Congregation has reached the
following decisions:

N°. 100: the kissing of the icons may be omitted.

N°. 105: the amice of the Latin form is excluded, though nothing prohibits one
to place a cloth[384] around the neck to avoid staining the sacred vestments.

N°. 116: the priest may bless the Oblation with a sign of the cross.

N°. 117: in the absence of a deacon the priest need not cense the apsidal icon
and the icons in the sanctuary.

120
Appendix

N°. 118: the [royal] doors of the iconostasis may remain open during the entire
time of the Liturgy.

N°. 119: the petition for the Pope may be conjoined with the petition for the
Hierarchy.[385]

N°. 120: the singing of Only-begotten Son ... is done by the choir[386] and the
priest does not bow at the mention of the Incarnation.

N°. 121: let the priest make three bows and observe the other rubrics for the
Little Entrance.

N°. 123: the priest does not bless the people.

N°. 125: the censing may be anticipated during the reading of the Epistle.

N°. 126: the Peace unto all! may be omitted.[387]

N°. 128: the blessing should not be given to the people.[388]

N°. 129: the mention of the civil authority may be omitted.

N°. 130: the Latin Pall is excluded.[389]

N°. 132: Let the inclination at the mention of the Incarnation be omitted.

N°. 133: the hands are not elevated.

N°. 137 A: the hands are not washed.

N°. 137 B: let the three small bows be made and do not strike the breast at the
words: O God, be merciful to me a sinner!

N°. 140: the desired prayer may be preserved.

121

Ordo Celebrationis

N°. 143 A: let the priest cense the chalice.

N°. 143 B: the ablution may be made during the singing of May our lips be filled
...[390]

N°. 145: the final blessing must be given before the Dismissal: the hymn to the
Mother of God may be postponed until after the Liturgy.[391]

N°. 10: the small bells are eliminated even from the Solemn Liturgy.

While I am sure that Your Excellency will take due measures that the reform be
introduced sensim sine sensu, accustoming the faithful little by little to the
small changes, furnishing them with due explanations, I hold that in the
seminary and in Religious houses of formation, the integral application of the
reform should be easy.

At this time I extend sentiments of my deep respect and I remain

Most devotedly in the service of Your Excellency,

/s/ Acacius Coussa[392]

Assessor G. Moioli, off.

122

Appendix

IV.

Promulgation Letter of Bishop Emil Mihalik

The Byzantine Catholic Diocese of Parma Chancery Office 1900 Carlton Road Parma,
Ohio 44134

April 8, 1970

To the clergy of the Eparchy of Parma:

By virtue of our episcopal powers and by means of this letter, we hereby
promulgate the Ordo Celebrationis Vesperarum, Matutini et Divinae Liturgiae
juxta recensionem Ruthenorum published by the Sacred Congregation for the
Oriental Church in Rome, 1944, bearing the imprimatur of His Eminence Eugene
Cardinal Tisserant, dated May 17, 1944, as the norm governing the public
celebration of the Divine Liturgies and Offices within our Eparchy of Parma.

The order for the celebration of the Divine Liturgy in our various parishes is
as follows:

1) The preparatory prayers of the priest need not be said publicly (in front of
the congregation).

2) The vesting and washing of hands is to take place in the sacristy using the
prayers and rubrics as published in the official text The Divine Liturgy of our
Father, St. John Chrysostom published by the Byzantine Seminary Press, 1965 with
the approval of the Inter-Eparchial Liturgical Commissions of Pittsburgh and
Passaic.

3) The Proskomedia is a part of the Divine Liturgy and is to be taken at the
Table of Preparation (žertvennik) in its entirety.

4) On all solemn occasions (Sundays and Holy Days) the incensations are to be
taken as prescribed in the official text.

5) The public portion of the Liturgy begins with the singing of Blessed is the
Kingdom... and the chanting aloud of the Litany of Peace in its entirety. The
prayer of the first antiphon is to be recited privately by the celebrant before
the vozhlas of this Litany.

123

Ordo Celebrationis

6) The name of the Metropolitan Archbishop and the name of the Bishop is to be
included in all places required in the Liturgical text.

7) It suffices to sing one verse and refrain of the First and Second Antiphons
immediately followed by the Glory be ... and the Hymn of the Incarnation.

8) The two small litanies following the first antiphon need not be taken nor
need the prayers of the second and third antiphons be taken. During the singing
of the Hymn of the Incarnation the priest makes three small bows and makes the
little entrance with the Gospel Book. The procession is made and the priest,
having recited the prayer of the entrance, standing at the ambon, blesses the
entrance, raises the Gospel Book and says aloud Wisdom, be attentive. (He does
not make a sign of the cross with the Gospel Book at this time.)

9) After the singing of Come, let us worship... the congregation immediately
sings the Troparion and Kontakion. In the meantime the priest recites privately
the Prayer of the Trisagion. The conclusion of this prayer, the doxology For You
are holy... is chanted aloud by the priest. (No blessing is given at this time.)

10) While the Trisagion is being sung by the congregation, it is also sung by
the priest who at the same time makes three bows before the Holy Altar. The
priest then proceeds to go to the throne behind the altar, the priest saying as
he goes: Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. Then he also blessed
the throne with the words: Blessed are you on the throne... It is to be noted
that the priest does not ascend the throne nor does he sit on it, but he sits on
a chair at the left side of the throne. The center chair or throne is always
reserved for the bishop.

11) When the Trisagion is ended, the priest says aloud Let us be attentive.
Peace be with all. Wisdom. Be attentive, while blessing the congregation. The
choir chants the Prokeimenon. The priest says Wisdom and the lector reads the
title of the Epistle. The priest says Let us be attentive and the lector chants
the Epistle for the Day. The Epistle is to be chanted aloud and the priest sits
during the Epistle. Following the Epistle the priest says simply, addressing the
lector: Peace be with you, and then intones in a loud voice: Wisdom. Be
attentive. Incensa-

124

Appendix

tion should take place after the Epistle has been completed. The congregation
sings the Alleluia during the incensation.

12) The priest, returning to the altar, silently recites the Prayer before the
Gospel. The priest stands before the holy altar, intones aloud Wisdom, let us
stand and listen to the Holy Gospel according to St. N. The congregation
responds Glory be to You, O Lord, glory be to You. The priest intones Let us be
attentive making the sign of the cross upon himself and then chants the Gospel.
When the chanting of the Gospel has been completed, the congregation chants
Glory be to You, O Lord, glory be to You. The priest closes the Gospel Book and
then kisses it and places it upright in the center of the altar before the
tabernacle or lays it on the right side of the altar.

13) The sermon is delivered at this point of the Liturgy.

14) The priest then begins the Petitions of Supplication Let us say...

15) After the third petition, the priest recites privately the prayer of
supplication: Accept, O Lord our God... and then completes the litany. Following
the doxology, the congregation immediately begins to chant the Cherubic Hymn.
The Litany for the Catechumens need not be taken, but the celebrant immediately
recites both of the Prayers of the Faithful and begins the prayer: No one who is
bound by carnal desires... with his hands elevated on high. (No blessing is
given at this time.)

16) After the prayer has been completed, the priest makes the incensation and
returns to the holy altar. With his hands elevated, he silently recites the
Cherubic Hymn three times. Following each recitation he makes a small bow. He
kisses the holy altar and the hand cross and proceeds directly to the Table of
Preparation reciting silently God be merciful to me a sinner. He bows three
times and then places the aer on his left hand saying: Lift up your hands to the
holy things, and bless the Lord. The priest then takes the holy diskos, covered
with the small veil, into his left hand. and the chalice, covered with a small
veil, into his right hand and proceeds through the deacon’s door exclaiming: May
the Lord God remember... turning to the people at the words: and all you
Christians of the true faith. Entering the sanctuary

125

Ordo Celebrationis

through the royal doors, the priest then places the holy chalice upon the altar,
and places the diskos at the left of the chalice. He removes all covers from the
diskos and chalice and places them to the side. Taking the aer, he incenses it
and covers the holy gifts with it saying: The noble Joseph... He now incenses
the gifts saying: Deal favorably, O Lord... The Offertory Litany need not be
taken. (Let us complete our prayer to the Lord... etc.) However, the offertory
prayer must be said by the priest. It is recited silently together with the
doxology Through the mercies of your only-begotten Son... The priest then turns
to the people and says aloud: Peace be with all, blessing the people. The
congregation responds And with your spirit.

17) The priest, facing the altar chants: Let us love one another... While the
congregation sings the response The Father and the Son... the priest bows three
times saying silently three times I will love you, O Lord,... He kisses the
covered gifts, first the diskos, then the chalice and the edge of the altar.

18) The priest exclaims aloud The doors, the doors...

19) The priest lifts the aer and holds it over the gifts reciting the Symbol of
Faith together with the congregation without making any bow at the words and was
incarnate, He kisses the aer and places it to the right side of the altar.

20) The priest intones aloud Let us stand aright... The congregation answers:
The offering of peace ...

21) The priest exclaims The grace of our Lord... and blesses the people. The
congregation responds: And with your spirit.

22) The priest turns to the altar, elevates his hands and exclaims: Let us lift
up our hearts. The congregation answers We have them lifted up ...

23) Crossing his hands upon his breast, the priest bows before the altar,
chanting: Let us give thanks to the Lord. The congregation responds: It is
proper and just... The priest silently says the prayer It is proper and just...
At the end of this prayer the priest removes the asterisk from the diskos, makes
the sign of the cross over the diskos saying: Singing, shouting... He then
kisses the asterisk and lays it aside.

126

Appendix

24) The congregation sings Holy, holy, holy... during which time the priest says
the prayer: With these blessed powers... The priest does not take the diskos
into his hands nor does he raise it during this prayer. He gives a single
blessing over the bread at the words and blessed. Then, with bowed head, and his
right hand extended toward the diskos, he says aloud: Take, eat... The
congregation responds Amen, and the priest makes a deep bow making the sign of
the cross upon himself. Then he says silently Likewise the chalice... giving a
single blessing. He does not touch or raise the chalice, but extending his right
hand towards the chalice, he says aloud, Drink of this... The congregation
responds Amen and the priest makes a deep bow making the sign of the cross upon
himself.

25) The priest says the prayer Remembering, therefore... and crossing his arms
with the diskos in his right hand and the chalice in his left, he elevates both
slightly and makes the sign of the cross with them horizontally,, exclaiming
aloud We offer to... The congregation responds We praise you... and the priest
makes a small bow.

26) The priest says the prayer: Moreover, we offer to you. Before the words: And
make this bread... he makes three small bows. The priest blesses the bread,
saying: And make this bread... He blesses the chalice, saying: And that which is
in this chalice... He blesses both together, saying: Changing them... The priest
says Amen three times after this blessing, and continues the anaphora.

27) Exclaiming aloud: Especially for our most holy... the priest incenses the
sacred gifts three times from the front of the altar only. He covers the
chalice. The choir responds: It is truly proper... or the proper Irmos if it is
a feast.

28) The priest continues the anaphora silently and exclaims aloud: Among the
first... The people respond: And remember all your people.

29) The priest continues the anaphora silently and concludes aloud: And grant
that we with one voice... The congregation answers Amen.

127

Ordo Celebrationis

30) The priest turns toward the people and does not step aside from the center
of the altar, and blesses the people aloud: And may the mercies...

31) The Litany before the Our Father need not be taken, but the prayer: In You,
O gracious Master... must be recited by the priest. He concludes the prayer
aloud: And grant, O Lord, that we...

32) This is followed immediately by the Lord’s Prayer during which the priest
elevates his hands on high. At the conclusion, he exclaims: For Thine is the
Kingdom... The congregation responds: Amen. The priest turns to the people and
from the center of the altar, blesses the people: Peace be with all. The
congregation responds: And with your spirit. Turning to the altar he says aloud,
Bow your heads to the Lord. The people respond. To You, O Lord.

33) The priest says silently: We give you thanks, O King... and concludes the
prayer in a loud voice saying Through the grace and mercy... The priest does not
wash his hands at this point. The congregation responds: Amen.

34) The priest recites silently the prayer: Look down, O Lord Jesus Christ... At
the conclusion of this prayer he makes three small bows saying: O God, be
merciful... He does not strike his breast.

35) The priest uncovers the chalice, takes the sacred bread in his hands and
exclaims in a loud voice: Let us be attentive. Raising the bread slightly, he
exclaims: Holy things to the holy. The congregation responds One is holy... and
then sings the Communion Hymn.

36) The priest breaks the bread into four parts saying: Broken and
distributed...

37) The priest takes the upper part of the bread, makes a sign of the cross with
it over the chalice saying: The fullness of the Holy Spirit, and drops it into
the chalice. Having made a small bow, the priest takes a particle of the holy
bread in the fingers of his right hand and says: The precious and most holy
Body... Bowing his head, he recites the Communion Prayer and at its conclusion
consumes the Sacred Body. The priest takes the chalice in his right hand, the
lention which he holds under his chin in his left and partakes of the Sacred
Blood,

128

Appendix

saying: I, a servant of God... He wipes his lips and the edge of the chalice
with the lention saying: Behold, this has touched my lips... The priest does not
bow before taking the chalice in his hands, nor does he kiss it after receiving
the precious Blood. He does not make the sign of the cross with the chalice
before partaking from it, nor does he lift it on high.

38) While facing the altar, the priest says out loud: Approach with fear of
God... and the congregation responds Blessed is He... and the priest in a loud
voice begins the prayer: O Lord, I believe... No Sign of the Cross is made
before or after the prayer and there is no striking of the breast at Remember me
O Lord... nor at O God be merciful... Immediately following the prayer, the
priest proceeds to distribute Holy Communion to the faithful reciting, of
course, the prayer for each communicant: The servant of God...

39) After communion, the priest, standing before the Royal Doors, raising the
chalice, and blesses them while chanting the words: Save your people, O God...
and the priest returns to the Holy Altar while the congregation sings: We have
seen the true light... The words For many years O Master in the congregational
response are omitted. The priest then incenses the gifts three times saying: Be
exalted above the heavens... The priest takes the chalice in his right hand the
diskos with the covers on it in his left hand, makes a slight bow, turns towards
the congregation, and chants: Blessed is our God... The priest does not make the
sign of the Cross with the chalice neither over the iliton nor upon the people.
He proceeds to the table of preparation and places there the holy gifts. The
ablutions may be taken now or at the conclusion of the Divine Liturgy.

40) The congregation sings: May our lips be filled... The priest takes the
litany of thanksgiving silently together with its prayer. Then having folded the
iliton he makes a sign of the cross horizontally with the Gospel Book and places
it upon the iliton saying silently: For You are our sanctification... He
proceeds to the Royal Doors saying in a loud voice Let us go forth in peace. The
congregation responds: In the name of the Lord. The priest says aloud: Let us
pray to the Lord, the congregation: Lord, have mercy. The priest proceeds
through the Royal Doors and recites the Ambon Prayer standing on the Ambon: O

129

Ordo Celebrationis

Lord, blessing those who bless you... The Congregation responds: Amen, Blessed
be the name of the Lord... The priest silently recites the prayer: You O Christ
our God... At the conclusion of this prayer, he turns toward the people and
blesses them saying: The blessing of the Lord... The people respond: Amen. The
priest turns toward the altar and exclaims: Glory be to You..., the people
respond: Glory be to the Father... The priest once again turns to the people and
exclaims: Christ, our true God... blessing himself at the conclusion of this
prayer. The congregation responds: Amen.

This order for the celebration of the Divine Liturgy is herewith promulgated on
the 8th day of April, 1970 at Parma, Ohio in the first year of our episcopate
under the protocol number G. 79/70H. It is to be put into effect at all
Liturgies celebrated in the Eparchy of Parma beginning on Pentecost Sunday,
May 17, 1970, and is to continue until revoked.

/s/ Most Rev. Emil J. Mihalik, D. D.

Eparch of Parma

130

Notes

Notes to Chapter I

[1] The Prothesis Table should be the same height as the Holy Table.

[2] The Ordo does not mention the other traditional form of Byzantine
tabernacle, the hanging Dove. Such a tabernacle may be seen in the historic
Greek-Catholic Church of Saint Athanasius, Rome and in the chapel of SS Cyril
and Methodius Byzantine Catholic Seminary, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

[3] Candelabra to either side of the artophorion or cross are common in Greece;
among the Slavs one usually finds the seven-branched candelabrum directly behind
the Holy Table.

[4] The Greeks do not commonly object to setting the service-book on the Holy
Table. The Slavs, however, are most scrupulous in this matter, and permit only
the Gospel Book on the Holy Table, setting an analogion for the service books to
the left of the celebrant. When a bishop celebrates solemnly, the Slavs provide
an acolyte to hold the Archieraticon for the bishop to read.

[5] A parecclesia is a side-chapel open to the nave of the main church and used
for a second celebration of the Divine Liturgy. Normally such paracclesiae are
only found in very large, urban churches and even then they are comparatively
rare (there are good ones in Transfiguration Church, L’viv).

[6] The Statutes of the Archeparchy of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 1959, p. 121,
Canon 433, provide that:

“An altar cannot be considered fit for the celebration of the Divine Liturgy
before an iconostas has been erected. Because of the custom of concelebration,
it will rarely be advisable to have more than one altar in any church or
oratory. If, however, in any edifice of larger dimensions more than one altar is
erected for the celebration of the Divine Liturgy, each altar must have its own
iconostas.”

131

Ordo Celebrationis

And the Instruction for Applying the Liturgical Prescriptions... No. 104, p. 84,
states that:

“The sanctuary is separated from the nave by a veil, gate, or iconostasis,
because it is the most sacred place: it contains the altar on which the Divine
Liturgy is celebrated and the Oblation is offered.”

[7] The Christian East takes this principle very seriously; even outside of
service-time the clergy and servers are responsible for the good order of the
Altar.

[8] This lamentable turn of phrase has often been criticized. Of course laymen
and laywomen “partake in the divine worship”! But they do not do so within the
Altar.

[9] A curious abuse, which this paragraph prohibits, could be found in the
Hapsburg dominions: noble and quasi-noble families were seated inside the Altar
during the Divine Liturgy; this was considered to be an honor.

[10] The intent of this paragraph is to stop the use of the Roman paten, which
only holds one host (other hosts to be consecrated at the Roman Mass were
normally held in a ciborium) and has neither base nor rim. Without a rim, the
particles of leavened bread set on the diskarion during the Prothesis are likely
to fall, and without a stem-base it is difficult to carry the diskarion,
especially during the Great Entrance. Byzantine chalice sets are readily
available from supply houses which cater to the Eastern Churches.

[11] The bishop, presbyter or deacon of the Byzantine tradition holds the chains
of the thurible by the right hand (only) when censing. The Ordo does not mention
it, but in many places it is common to have small bells on the chains of the
thurible.

[12] The intent of this clause is to stop the use of the amice and the humeral
veil.

[13] The “little bells” thus excluded are the so-called Sanctus bells used in
the Roman rite.

132

Notes

[14] That is, if one is a deacon, presbyter, or bishop. Others do not kiss or
touch the Holy Table.

[15] This replaces the Trisagion during the Divine Liturgy on the Feast of the
Exaltation of the Holy Cross (14 September) and the Sunday of the Adoration of
the Cross (the Third Sunday of Great Lent). It is also sung at certain times
apart from the Divine Liturgy.

[16] This refers to the “call to worship” at Vespers and other Hours, not to the
Divine Liturgy.

[17] The reading of the assigned sections of the Psalter during Vespers and
Orthros.

[18] There are local variations on this point; usually when one receives an
individual blessing from a bishop or presbyter, the priest who blesses makes the
sign of the Cross, and the one who is blessed kisses the priest’s hand.

[19] For example, one comes before the royal doors to read the Epistle.

[20] Under no circumstances whatsoever does anyone who has not been ordained to
the diaconate pass between the Holy Table and the royal doors. Even deacons and
priests do not pass between the Holy Table and the royal doors except at those
moments when the liturgy requires them to do so. Otherwise, one walks around the
back of the Holy Table.

[21] The Slavs use ektene as a generic term. Liturgical scholars employ the
Greek distinctions among the Great Synapte, the Small Synapte, the Ektene, and
the Aitisis. When these specific elements occur, we shall give the appropriate
term.

[22] In practice, the deacon normally asks the priest’s blessing in the usual
way when he leaves the Altar for an ektene. When he returns, the deacon bows to
the high place and then bows to the celebrant.

[23] Customarily the clergy make a prostration immediately after the Epiklesis.
Earlier in the twentieth century this prostration was forbidden among
Greek-Catholics, and that prohibition is probably the intent of this paragraph.
Since Vatican II, one observes that this prostration

133

Ordo Celebrationis

is in regular use in churches in Rome under the direct jurisdiction of the
Oriental Congregation, so presumably there is no longer any objection. On
week-days, though not on Sunday nor during Paschaltide, many clergy also make a
prostration when they first enter the Altar, and just before Holy Communion.

[24] The Ruthenian Recension Liturgicon does not prescribe any raising of the
hands at this prayer; such a raising of the hands is a very recent custom in
certain regions only.

[25] The Ruthenian Recension Liturgicon does not prescribe any raising of the
hands at the Cherubic Hymn, but the custom is universal that the priest and
deacon should raise their hands while they quietly recite the Cherubic Hymn
three times before the Great Entrance. The priest raises both hands and the
deacon raises his right hand during the first part of the Cherubic Hymn; they
both bow during the second part.

[26] This raising of the hands is also not mentioned in the Liturgicon, but the
practice is universal.

[27] The Liturgicon does not mention any raising of the hands during the Lord’s
Prayer, but the practice is ancient and nearly universal. Among the Russians,
one may observe a peculiar variation: the priest raises his hands for the
incipit And grant O Lord that we may with confidence ... but then lowers his
hands and bows his head during the Lord’s Prayer itself. Perhaps this custom has
arisen because of the singing of lengthy musical settings of the Lord’s Prayer.

[28] In many places it is considered irreverent to rest one’s hands upon the
Holy Table.

[29] The Statutes of the Archeparchy of Philadelphia, 1959, p. 121, Canon 435,
provide that: “The ancient liturgical custom of hanging a veil behind the Royal
Doors shall be reintroduced.” One can find a few temples in the Metropolitanates
of Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and Winnipeg, which do, in fact, have the veil
hanging behind the royal doors. One can also find some temples which used to
have such a veil; although the veil itself has been removed some physical
evidence (such as a curtain rod or curtain fittings) of the veil’s original
presence remains.

134

Notes

[30] The royal doors are shut when the priest has completed the solemn
incensation. Since at an All-Night Vigil [which in current usage takes about two
hours] Psalm 103 is normally sung in an abbreviated form, the royal doors are
often open until the very end of the Psalm.

[31] There is no Entrance during Orthros, except on Holy Saturday!

[32] That is, at the Divine Liturgy. Even at the Hierarchal Divine Liturgy there
is a custom in many places to close the royal doors during the Communion of the
clergy.

[33] If the people never see this done, they cannot become accustomed to it! The
Statutes of the Archeparchy of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 1959, p. 121,
Canon 434, provide that: “The opening and the closing of the doors of the
iconostas shall be regulated by the ancient traditions of our own rite. All
innovations contrary to the aforesaid shall be prudently removed.” Appendix IX,
section I (General Rules) of the Statutes of the Archeparchy of Philadelphia,
pp. 215-216, give the details of the order of the opening and the closing of the
royal doors and the veil during the Divine Liturgy.

[34] When the server or deacon presents the thurible to the priest, he kisses
the priest’s hand. The server who gives the thurible to the deacon does not kiss
the deacon’s hand.

[35] The person or persons who are thus censed acknowledge this by bowing in
response.

[36] In this translation, we shall use the term rason for that purpose.

[37] By way of exception, among the Slavs it is common for bishops to bless
senior acolytes to vest as subdeacons for hierarchal divine services. Among the
Greeks, all acolytes vest as subdeacons.

[38] The principal exception is the Institution Narrative, which the clergy of
this tradition normally recite together at a concelebration.

135

Ordo Celebrationis

Notes to Chapter II

[39] The Instruction for Applying the Liturgical Prescriptions... No. 98,
pp. 79-80, strongly insists on the importance of the public and solemn
celebration of these services, stating that

“where such practice of celebrating the Divine Praises with the people has
diminished, if not completely disappeared, the ancient tradition should be
restored without delay, so as not to deprive the faithful of a privileged source
of prayer, nourished by treasures of authentic doctrine ... a superficial
observance is not sufficient; those responsible must do their best for the
faithful to understand the meaning and value of this prayer, love it, take part
and find spiritual nourishment in it.”

[40] If the deacon is wearing his rason, as he normally would be, he removes it
before vesting in the sticharion.

[41] Good usage would have the deacon also vest in the epimanikia.

[42] The Ruthenian Liturgicon gives eight Prayers of Light; most usages of the
Byzantine tradition only give seven.

[43] The Liturgicon specifies that the priest reads these prayers “with
uncovered head”; thus he does not wear any head-gear (kalymauchion, klobuk,
skufia) while offering these prayers.

[44] The assigned section of the Psalter, normally read at Vespers. On Saturday
evenings and before many feasts, the Ruthenians (like other Slavs) chant a few
verses of the first Kathisma, instead of reading the whole.

[45] Normally the deacon censes all round the interior of the Temple before
returning to the Altar.

[46] This rubric refers to the ancient, very ample phelonion, which can be
abbreviated in front with buttons for certain moments, so that the priest’s
hands will not be inconvenienced, and then allowed to hang freely at other
moments.

136

Notes

[47] This entrance prayer (which is found in old sources) is now peculiar to the
Ruthenian usage. Other service-books prescribe the prayer In the evening, in the
morning, and at noon-day ...

[48] When either of these vigils occurs on a Saturday or a Sunday, Vespers is
served separately, after the Divine Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom. Should the
vigil occur on Monday through Friday, Vespers immediately precedes the Divine
Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great, replacing the Enarxis.

[49] In practice this is unusual; if the deacon is to carry the Gospel Book he
does not also carry the thurible.

[50] If a hierarch is serving Solemn Vespers with full pontifical ceremonial,
the deacon carries the Gospel Book. The Gospel Book is also carried whenever
there is to be a Gospel lesson at Vespers, such as on Good Friday and on Pascha,
and on those occasions when Vespers directly precedes the Divine Liturgy of
Saint Basil the Great or the Divine Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom.

[51] The compilers of the Ordo Celebrationis seem to have disliked the practice
of the deacon or priest making the sign of the Cross with the Gospel Book at the
Entrance of the Divine Liturgy or Vespers. Nevertheless, the custom is nearly
universal.

[52] In practice the deacon often censes only the Holy Table; in many places
this second incensation is omitted entirely.

[53] Standing at the High Place, although the Ordo indicates that he goes there
after this blessing.

[54] Normally the people respond and to your spirit!

[55] Usually the deacon announces the Prokeimenon and its verses, although this
is not strictly required.

[56] Whether there are lessons or not, the royal doors are closed directly after
the Prokeimenon.

[57] Usually such lessons are three in number.

[58] Or after the Prokeimenon, if no lessons are prescribed.

137

Ordo Celebrationis

[59] In some places it is customary for the clergy and servers to sing this
prayer in the altar

[60] Within the altar the priest may put off the phelonion.

[61] A lector may read the Trisagion prayers, but in the Ruthenian usage it is
normal for the assembly to chant these prayers together.

[62] If he has removed the phelonion, the priest puts it on again during the
Trisagion prayers if he intends to open the royal doors.

[63] In most usages one chants Master bless only in the actual presence of a
hierarch, or perhaps in a cathedral. However, both the Ordo Celebrationis and
the service-books to which the Ordo corresponds prescribe this regularly at
Vespers. Liturgicon, Rome 1942, p. 51; Horologion (recensio rutena), Rome 1950,
p. 294.

[64] Before unvesting, the deacon customarily asks a blessing from the priest.

[65] It is very rare for both deacons to cense simultaneously as prescribed; in
practice one deacon does the complete incensation.

[66] They normally also cense round about the interior of the Temple.

[67] In practice only one thurible is used, carried by the senior deacon.
However, if the senior deacon is to carry the Gospel Book, the second deacon
carries the thurible.

[68] In practice the second deacon stands to the right of the first deacon. If
the first deacon is carrying the Gospel Book, the second deacon, who has the
thurible, censes the Gospel Book continuously.

[69] In practice this second great incensation is often omitted.

[70] As noted above, the people normally respond and to your spirit.

[71] When the Prokeimenon is finished, the royal doors are shut.

[72] Or after the Prokeimenon, if there are no readings assigned.

[73] That is, the senior deacon stands at the priest’s right, and the junior
deacon stands at the priest’s left.

138

Notes

[74] Before the Prayer of the Entrance.

[75] During the Entrance.

[76] If there is an acolyte, the acolyte takes the thurible from the priest.

[77] When there is no deacon, it is still more unlikely that the priest will
repeat the great incensation.

[78] In practice the priest kisses the Holy Table and goes at once to the High
Place.

[79] In practice he remains at the High Place until he must close the royal
doors after the Prokeimenon. If there will be lessons read, he returns at once
to the High Place, and sits on the bench during the readings.

[80] Normally the people respond and to your spirit.

[81] For these short ekphoneses, the priest rises; he is seated during the
actual readings.

[82] When there is no deacon, some priests prefer to say the ektene at the Holy
Table, and then, putting off the phelonion, the aitisis before the closed royal
doors.

[83] While so standing, the presbyters face one another.

[84] At such a concelebration, it is not unusual for all the presbyters to chant
O Joyful Light.

[85] In practice they kiss the Holy Table and go at once to the High Place.

Notes to Chapter III

[86] In normal parish use, the “All-Night” Vigil lasts about two hours; in
monasteries it can last three or four hours, or even longer. The service is
usually a combination of Vespers, Orthros, and First Hour. On the Vigil of
Christmas, the Vigil of Theophany, and sometimes the Vigil of the Annunciation,
the All-Night Vigil consists of Grand Com-

139

Ordo Celebrationis

pline, Orthros, and First Hour. In Greece the All-Night Vigil includes the
Divine Liturgy, and actually lasts all night.

[87] When there is All-Night Vigil, the deacon must also wear the epimanikia.

[88] In practice this first incensation and the beginning of the Vigil are done
as follows:

The deacon opens the royal doors and takes his large candle in his right hand;
saying nothing he leads the priest around the four sides of the Holy Table,
facing the priest across the Holy Table as the priest censes. He leads the
priest to cense the High Place, and the icons within the Altar.

The deacon then goes out through the royal doors, faces the people, and
announces loudly Command! He turns and faces the East; the deacon, the chanters,
or the choir may then sing Bless, O Lord! Standing at the Holy Table the priest
makes the sign of the Cross with the thurible and simultaneously exclaims Glory
to the holy and life giving Trinity, One in Essence and undivided, always, now
and ever, and unto ages of ages. The choir: Amen. The clergy, with the servers
in the altar, then sing Come let us worship (three times). When they have done
so, the choir sings Bless the Lord, O my soul ... (usually in an abbreviated
version). During the singing, the deacon leads the priest to cense the icons on
the iconostasis, the choirs, the people, and the whole Temple interior round
about. When the censing is complete, the priest and deacon return to the altar
through the royal doors, which are then closed, and the priest puts off the
phelonion.

This order leaves no time for the priest to read the Prayers of Light during the
Psalm; he may either read them before the service begins, or during the service
at a later time. In theory, when there is an All-Night Vigil there has already
been Little Vespers, during which the priest would already have completed the
Prayers of Light.

[89] No such custom prevails anywhere, nor does the Liturgicon mention such a
possibility. This paragraph should be ignored.

140

Notes

[90] As mentioned above, the customary practice at a Vigil does not allow
sufficient time for the Prayers of Light.

[91] The Liturgicon does not mention the opening of the royal doors, nor is it
strictly correct to do so. If the royal doors are not opened, the priest does
not vest in the phelonion. Unfortunately, the custom of vesting in the phelonion
and opening the royal doors for this procession is widespread.

[92] On great feast days, and particularly on the patronal feast, the procession
for the Litany may go outside and around the temple, pausing at the four sides
for the petitions of the Litany.

[93] The present Ruthenian books only give three petitions (one of which is for
the Pope and normally combined with the petition for the hierarchy). Other
editions all give more petitions for the Litany; reducing the Litany to two
petitions is not satisfactory. In some places, it is customary for the deacon to
cense continually during the petitions.

[94] Singing the Aposticha, followed by Saint Simeon’s Prayer and the Trisagion
sequence. If the priest is not already vested in the phelonion, he returns to
the altar, vests in the phelonion, and goes out through the royal doors to the
tetrapod.

[95] The festal Troparion - see the Glossary

[96] The reference is to a monastic superior, or to a bishop present but not
serving.

[97] In practice they both enter through the royal doors. The deacon, an
acolyte, or if need be the priest himself carries the tray with the loaves,
wheat, wine, and oil into the altar.

[98] The royal doors are already open.

[99] The priest remains inside the altar during the first three psalms, and
reads the prayers before the Holy Table; he goes out during the small doxology
and stands before the royal doors to read the rest of the prayers.

[100] There is no such custom; the priest invariably does this incensation
himself.

141

Ordo Celebrationis

[101] For the Litany Procession, it is appropriate that both deacons carry
thuribles.

[102] On greater solemnities, especially the patronal feast, the faithful may
carry icons in the procession for the Litany.

[103] In practice the petition for the Pope is combined with the petition for
the rest of the hierarchy.

[104] In practice the censing is less elaborate. The priest may cense, preceded
by the deacons with candles; one deacon may cense, or both deacons may cense,
but together, not facing each other.

[105] Some priests prefer to say the Aitisis before the royal doors.

[106] The priest may dispense with the hand cross, but should take the thurible
and cense the icons.

[107] Unless the royal doors are opened, the priests do not wear the phelonion
for the Litany Procession.

[108] This is a lapsus calami. Presbyters never sit in the apsidal chair; the
presbyters are seated on the presbyteral benches.

Notes to Chapter IV

[109] This preliminary sequence of psalms and prayers for the King is called the
“Royal Office”, and is a spiritual recompense for the King or Emperor who
founded a given monastery. In modern practice, it is very seldom done.

[110] From the sequence of paragraphs, it appears that § 75 was intended to be
the direction for how to proceed if Orthros follows Vespers as part of a Vigil;
cf. § 60.

[111] If there is Polyeleos, the priest vests in phelonion and the royal doors
are opened; the priest censes the entire temple, preceded by the deacon carrying
a candle. If there is no Polyeleos, this incensation takes place during the
troparia The Assembly of the Angels, for which, again, the priest is in
phelonion and the royal doors are open. They remain open until the Gospel Book
is brought back into the altar.

142

Notes

[112] On any feast day involving We magnify You ... the Polyeleos is invariably
sung. The rubrics on such a feast for the enthronement of the icon and the
incensation are complicated and subject to local variations.

[113] Usually the deacon announces the actual text and verse of the Prokeimenon.
On feast days, the Orthros Prokeimenon is always in Tone 4.

[114] This appears to be a belated reference to the incensation at the Polyeleos
and/or The Assembly of the Angels.

[115] On Sundays both the Greeks and the Slavs read the Orthros Gospel at the
Holy Table. On feast days the Gospel is normally read in the center of the nave,
facing the East.

[116] The priest does not return to the altar; he stays in the nave by the
Gospel Book and the festal icon to bless the faithful who approach him
individually. If there was the blessing of the loaves at the Litany, the priest
anoints the faithful with the blessed oil, as prescribed in § 80.

[117] Having beheld the Resurrection ... is better chanted in Tone 6.

[118] So long as the priest remains in the nave to bless the faithful, the royal
doors remain open. When all have come for the blessing, the priest takes the
Gospel back into the altar through the royal doors, sets the Gospel Book on the
Holy Table, and then closes the royal doors.

[119] The hand-cross is superfluous; the faithful may kiss the priest’s hand if
they wish.

[120] A fine brush is normally used for this purpose.

[121] The deacon usually begins this censing during the Eighth Ode, timing
himself so that he arrives at the icon of the Theotokos to chant The Theotokos
and Mother of Light ...

[122] Thus the modern Greek usage. In Slav practice, he has normally done this
already.

143

Ordo Celebrationis

[123] If the priest has already returned to the altar, closed the royal doors,
and put off the phelonion, he may properly say the small synaptes standing in
front of the royal doors.

[124] The clergy do not return to the altar until the beginning of the Canon.
They are the first to venerate the Gospel Book and/or the festal icon; after
they have done so, they go to the altar and put off the phelonion.

[125] In some places, especially if a hierarch is serving, all the presbyters
vest in phelonion for the Great Doxology.

Notes to Chapter V

[126] “The preparation of the bread for the Eucharist is an integral part of the
celebration and cannot be omitted without truly serious reason. Therefore ...
when prosphora is lacking, normal fermented bread is to be used in the
exceptional cases mentioned.” Instruction for Applying the Liturgical
Prescriptions ... No. 68, p. 58. Cf. also Joseph Cardinal Slipyj, “On the Holy
Bread for the Celebration of the Divine Liturgy” [in Ukrainian], De Synodis
archipiscopalibus episcopatus catholici ucrainorum earumque fundamento iuridico
expositiones, Editiones “Literæ-Nuntiæ Archiepiscopi Maioris” No. 1, Castello
Gandulphi 1970, pp. 30-31.

[127] With regard to the reduction of the Eucharistic fast in the Latin Church
which began in the reign of Pope Pius XII (cf. Motu Proprio of 19 March 1957),
the Instruction for Applying the Liturgical Prescriptions ... No. 62, pp. 53-54,
notes that many Eastern Catholic Churches have followed the Latin example, while
the Orthodox have maintained the original customs, if perhaps less strictly. “An
eventual restoration, at least partial, of the ancient norms for [the
Eucharistic] fast in the Eastern Catholic Churches is considered opportune,
taking into account the meaning of both the traditional practice, which does not
always exactly coincide with the Latin sensibility, and of the need to
correspond with the different conditions in the world today.”

[128] Customarily the deacon kisses the priest’s hand, and the large cross on
the diaconal sticharion. Subdeacons and acolytes also

144

Notes

bring their vestments to the priest for a blessing, and customarily kiss the
priest’s hand and the large cross on the sticharion.

[129] The Liturgicon makes no mention of an eiliton on the Prothesis.

[130] The zone - a broad belt, made of the same brocade as the phelonion - is
worn over the epitrachelion.

[131] The reference to the seal reinforces the need to use at least one entire
loaf of prosphora for each celebration of the Divine Liturgy, since the seal is
stamped only once into each loaf. In the Statutes of the Archeparchy of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 1959, p. 83, Canon 276, Metropolitan Constantine
(Bohachevsky) provides that “In accordance with the re-established liturgical
customs of our rite, priests are to use at least one loaf of Eucharistic bread
for each Divine Liturgy.”

[132] The auctores probati agree that it is better to use red wine for the
celebration of the Eucharist. In countries where wine for the Eucharist is
produced under ecclesiastical supervision, this wine is to be preferred to other
wines commercially available.

[133] The Liturgicon simply directs the deacon to pour “wine together with a
little water” into the chalice.

[134] This is a relatively large triangular particle.

[135] Stamford translation; Pittsburgh-Passaic gives The mighty leaders of
heavenly hosts.

[136] Each of these nine particles is triangular!

[137] Stamford translation; Pittsburgh-Passaic gives Our holy fathers.

[138] Stamford translation; Pittsburgh-Passaic gives inspired.

[139] Stamford translation; Pittsburgh-Passaic gives The holy and charitable
wonder-workers.

[140] The asterisk is open when it is in use!

[141] In other words, the priest does not make the sign of the Cross over the
Holy Gifts during the prayer.

145

Ordo Celebrationis

[142] This is the Small Synapte.

[143] This is a confusing rubric, because in any usage of the Byzantine Liturgy
that most clergy are likely to encounter, the chanters do not come to Glory to
the Father ... before the Little Entrance. The reference is to changeable
troparia intercalated into the Beatitudes. These troparia are found in the
service books, but only a very few monasteries still chant them. When they are
omitted, there is no Glory ... now and ever... to the Beatitudes. When the
ferial or festal Third Antiphon is sung, the Glory ... now and ever... come
after the Little Entrance, during the troparia, in such a way that no one
realizes the connection with the Third Antiphon.

In practice, one begins the Little Entrance at Blessed are those who hunger and
thirst ... if the Beatitudes are sung, or at the beginning of the third
antiphon, if the ferial antiphon is sung. If a festal third antiphon is sung, as
occurs on great feasts of the Savior, one must calculate with some care when to
begin the Little Entrance.

[144] This rubric presumes that the priest is wearing a traditional phelonion
which is very full in the front and has buttons so that it can be shortened for
convenience. Such phelonia are sometimes still found among the Greeks, but are
very rare among the Slavs.

[145] Stamford and Basilian translations; Pittsburgh-Passaic gives Master, bless
this occasion.

[146] Stamford translation; Pittsburgh-Passaic gives And forever. Basilian
translation gives And ever.

[147] In some places, the people respond and to your spirit.

[148] Usually; on feasts of the Theotokos, however, the Prokeimenon is from the
Magnificat.

[149] This refers to male lectors only; if a woman reads the lesson, she does
not wear the sticharion.

[150] In some places one finds an odd abuse: the priest gives this blessing in a
whisper. The blessing is intended for the reader, who is standing some distance
away from the priest and should be enabled to hear it!

146

Notes

[151] The Ordo Celebrationis does not permit the abuse of censing during the
Epistle, when clergy and faithful should all be listening to the reading. The
censing and the Alleluia are both done, simultaneously, to welcome the Gospel.

[152] The sermon is usually preached at this point, and the holy doors are not
closed until after the sermon.

[153] At this point, the Liturgicon provides an ektene for the dead.

[154] The meaning of this rubric is disputed; many priests keep the antimension
wrapped in the eiliton and open both. In that event, one kisses the edge of the
antimension after it is opened.

[155] As noted above, the raising of the hands for this prayer is not mentioned
in the Liturgicon. Neither is it a Ruthenian practice of any antiquity; it first
appears in the 1905 L’viv Liturgicon.

[156] For this quiet recitation of the Cherubic Hymn, normally the priest
elevates both his hands, but the deacon only raises his right hand, holding the
orarion.

[157] This custom is universal.

[158] To do this successfully, in such a way that the aer will not fall from the
deacon’s shoulder during the Great Entrance, the priest must tuck a corner of
the aer well under the deacon’s sticharion.

[159] To facilitate this, the deacon does well to genuflect momentarily,
especially if he is taller than the priest. During the Great Entrance, the
deacon must hold the diskarion well over his own eye level, so that he is able
to see in front of himself.

[160] Stamford and Basilian translations: Pittsburgh-Passaic gives all you
Christians of the true faith. The Latin text reads Omnium vestrum orthodoxorum
christianorum.

[161] Ibid.

[162] That is, to the priest’s own left.

[163] That is, he holds the veil in the smoke from the thurible. Many priests
actually wrap the aer around the thurible for a moment.

147

Ordo Celebrationis

[164] The veil across the holy doors is also closed; cf. § 19 g above.

[165] This entire “Orate, Fratres” dialogue is done quietly between the priest
and deacon, while the choir or chanters conclude the Cherubic Hymn.

[166] In other words, the priest twice kisses the aer: once over the diskarion
and once over the chalice. He then kisses the antimension or the eiliton, as the
case may be.

[167] As the deacon says this, a server opens the veil of the royal doors.

[168] For this purpose the priest folds the aer and sets it on the Holy Table
with the cross uppermost..

[169] Stamford and Basilian translations; Pittsburgh-Passaic gives offering.

[170] Regardless of actual need, this custom is virtually universal, and is
prescribed in the Liturgicon.

[171] The Liturgicon does not mention this raising of the hands, but the
practice is universal.

[172] With the increasing use of vernacular languages for the Divine Liturgy, in
many places it has become customary, in keeping with ancient usage, to read the
Anaphora aloud.

[173] Customarily the deacon folds the asterisk and sets it on top of the folded
aer.

[174] The unusually negative wording of this rubric indicates the intent to
suppress a usage. Certain latinized Ruthenian books had introduced a custom of
blessing oneself with the folded asterisk, in imitation of the Latin practice of
blessing oneself with the empty paten.

[175] The Liturgicon does not include the conditional clause “if there is need,”
but simply directs the deacon to fan the Holy Gifts with ripidion or veil.

[176] In many places, all in the Altar now offer a full prostration.

148

Notes

[177] The Liturgicon does not mention this covering of the chalice; in practice
it is only done if it seems necessary.

[178] The anthem to the Theotokos sung during the Anaphora is variable. On great
feast days of the Savior and great feast days of the Theotokos, one chants the
Irmos of the Ninth Ode of the Orthros Canon (the text is normally found in the
Menaion, the Triodion, or the Pentecostarion, but service-books which provide
the changeable parts of the Divine Liturgy will give the text of the Irmos of
the Ninth Ode for those days when it is needed at the Divine Liturgy). At the
Divine Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great one chants All Creation rejoices in you,
O Full of Grace!

[179] The deacon makes this commemoration of the dead inaudibly.

[180] This diaconal commemoration of the living is also mentioned in the
Liturgicon, but no text is given. It was originally done aloud; the formula for
it can be found in certain other editions of the Liturgicon.

[181] This is the translation currently in use in the Pittsburgh Metropolia.
Stamford gives and for all (men) and all (women), Pittsburgh-Passaic gives Also
all men and all women; Basilian gives and remember all men and all women. The
problem with the translation of this phrase is that English does not have
variant gender forms of the pronoun “all.”

[182] This negative rubric corrects a previous practice.

[183] Pittsburgh-Passaic translation. Stamford gives And make us worthy, O
Master; Basilian gives Make us worthy, O Master

[184] This negative rubric corrects a previous practice.

[185] In practice, the deacon commonly does this during the Lord’s Prayer.

[186] This uncovering of the chalice is not mentioned in the Liturgicon. The
rubrics of the Liturgicon presume that after the end of the Creed the chalice
remains uncovered.

149

Ordo Celebrationis

[187] “Edge” here is not strictly accurate; note the graphic illustration. The
four Particles of the Holy Lamb are set towards the upper, lower, left and right
edge of the diskarion, away from the center.

[188] The Liturgicon provides less detailed rubrics for the Fraction, but the
result is the same, as illustrated in the graphic in the Liturgicon, which we
have reproduced here as well.

[189] For this purpose the priest normally uses the sponge which is kept in the
antimension.

[190] Where the ceremony of the Zeon has gone out of use, it is to be restored.
Instruction for Applying the Liturgical Prescriptions..., No. 57, pp. 67-68.

[191] The hot water may be held ready in a thermos flask, or prepared by a small
kettle or water-heater, and should be nearly boiling. It is presented in a
special vessel for that purpose. Clergy who bless the infusion of hot water
usually also like to use hot water for the purification of the Chalice after the
Dismissal.

[192] The Liturgicon does not mention the practice of the deacon washing the
palm of his right hand.

[193] Stamford directs the deacon to say Pardon me, O reverend Father.

[194] This lention or purificator is normally made of red cloth.

[195] The Liturgicon prescribes that “If there are any who wish to partake of
the Holy Mysteries, the priest breaks the two Particles, NI and KA, into smaller
Portions and the deacon (with the sponge) puts these and the other Particles
together with the consecrated Lamb into the holy chalice.” The Ordo
Celebrationis does not mention this rubric.

[196] The Instruction for Applying the Liturgical Prescriptions... No.60, p. 52,
directs that Holy Communion is normally given to the faithful only during the
Divine Liturgy, except in the case of Communion for the sick who cannot attend
the Divine Liturgy, and Communion for those who attend the Divine Liturgy of
Presanctified Gifts. The Instruction for Applying the Liturgical Prescriptions
... No. 61, pp. 52-53, stresses that the priest must give the faithful Holy
Communion

150

Notes

from the Holy Mysteries consecrated during the same celebration of the Divine
Liturgy, except in cases of absolute necessity. It is thus not permitted, for
example, to retain the Chalice with the Holy Mysteries from the celebration at
the Divine Liturgy at an early hour and administer Holy Communion to the
faithful from such a Chalice during another celebration of the Divine Liturgy at
a later hour in the same Temple.

[197] Usually the people, especially those who are to receive Holy Communion,
recite this prayer together with the priest.

[198] The Liturgicon prescribes that “those who wish to receive approach. After
the Prayer O Lord, I believe and profess they come one after the other, and they
bow reverently and with fear, with hands folded upon the breast, and each
receives the divine Mysteries.”

[199] The Instruction for Applying the Liturgical Prescriptions... No. 51,
p. 45, mandates the restoration of Holy Communion for baptized, chrismated
infants and young children, stating that:

“the administration of the Divine Eucharist to infant neophytes is not limited
to only the moment of the celebration of Initiation. Eucharist is the Bread of
life, and infants need to be nourished constantly, from then on, to grow
spiritually.”

Normally a parent or god-parent carries or accompanies the infant or small child
who is to receive Holy Communion, and tells the priest the child’s name.
The 1941 Roman edition of the Church-Slavonic recensio vulgata Liturgicon,
pp. 155-156, gives the following direction for the Holy Communion of infants:

“With the Spoon, the priest takes as small an amount as possible of the Holy
Blood from the chalice and communicates the infant, saying: The infant [name]
partakes of the precious and holy Blood of our Lord and God and Savior Jesus
Christ unto life everlasting.

From pastoral experience, one finds that an infant or small child who is
regularly brought to Holy Communion very soon becomes accustomed to receiving
the Eucharist and readily accepts the administration of the Sacrament.

151

Ordo Celebrationis

[200] The Liturgicon does not mention this holding of the diskarion during the
communion of the faithful.

[201] For the sake of caution, many priests prefer not to leave the spoon in the
chalice.

[202] Both the Ordo Celebrationis and the Liturgicon to which it corresponds
stress that the priest gives this blessing with the chalice. That is also the
contemporary Greek practice. Most other Slavonic Churches retain the older
tradition of giving this blessing with the right hand.

[203] This clause “aut alio modo iuxta regionis morem Communionem recipiunt”
could justify almost any particular practice in use anywhere for the
distribution of Holy Communion to the faithful during the Divine Liturgy.
However, the standing posture, with the faithful approaching in single file, was
and is the authentic universal custom among Christians of the Byzantine
tradition; for many years this was also the custom in the Western Church.

[204] After placing the sacred vessels on the Prothesis table, the priest takes
the thurible from the acolyte and censes the sacred vessels three times. He then
returns the thurible to the acolyte, and goes back to his place at the Holy
Table.

[205] Basilian translation; the Pittsburgh-Passaic translation puts this
admonition later in the petition.

[206] During this synapte, according to the Liturgicon, the priest folds the
eiliton (and the antimension, if the antimension has been unfolded upon the
eiliton).

[207] This means that the priest should go beyond the soleas. The prayer is
addressed to the Father, not to Christ, so there is no reason to turn towards
the icon of Christ on the iconostasis.

[208] Unfortunately the custom of chanting Psalm 33 is practiced very rarely.

[209] The Liturgicon prescribes that the priest should actually say this prayer
standing directly at the Prothesis table. In practice, priests stand at the Holy
Table for this prayer.

152

Notes

[210] In practice the deacon enters the altar through the south door and
receives a blessing from the priest as the priest concludes the prayer You, O
Christ our God. Only then does the deacon consume the Holy Gifts.

[211] Most editions of the Liturgicon prescribe that the antidoron should be
distributed to the faithful at this point, but in practice this is invariably
done after the Dismissal.

[212] Usually the priest himself decides whether or not to intone the
polychronia. It would be unusual not to have the polychronia on a great feast
day. The diocesan bishop may direct the clergy to have the polychronia for this
or that special occasion. There is also a less solemn version of the
polychronia, which the chanters may sing without any intonation from the clergy.
If no polychronia is sung, the chanters or the faithful will often sing
something appropriate.

[213] As noted above, it is customary to distribute the antidoron now, instead
of before the blessing and dismissal. There are local variations in this
practice; in some places the priest actually gives the blessed bread into the
hands of the faithful. In other places the priest holds a hand cross for the
faithful to kiss; in that case the faithful themselves then take the blessed
bread from the tray. On great feast days, churches of the Ruthenian tradition
usually have a festal anointing during the distribution of the antidoron (for
this anointing the priest uses the oil which has been blessed at the Litany of
Vespers the night before).

[214] And certain other prayers found in the Liturgicon. In some churches a
reader recites the prayers after Holy Communion aloud for all who care to remain
and listen.

[215] One hopes that this startling rubric is now a dead letter! Even the Roman
Liturgy no longer permits the abuse of presbyters vesting and functioning as
deacons. The practice of Presbyters functioning as deacons during divine
services is to be eliminated. Instruction for Applying the Liturgical
Prescriptions ..., No. 75, P. 63.

[216] No specific criteria are indicated to determine when this degree of
solemnity is appropriate. The Liturgicon seldom alludes to

153

Ordo Celebrationis

the possibility of more than one deacon. Occasionally, one may find even three
or more deacons serving at the same Divine Liturgy.

[217] Customarily the second deacon remains in the Altar during the Great
Synapte; during the first antiphon he receives a blessing from the priest and
goes to the soleas, where he will sing the two small synaptes. In that event,
the first deacon returns to the Altar as the second deacon is going out.

[218] This wording assumes that the second deacon has been waiting within the
Altar during the Great Synapte.

[219] In practice it is often the second deacon who does both small synaptes
during the Enarxis.

[220] If there are two deacons, it is even more important to allow enough time
for the Entrance. If the actual third antiphon is sung, the Entrance should
start immediately. If the Beatitudes are sung, the Entrance should begun no
later than the chanting of “Blessed are those who hunger and thirst”.

[221] Holding the Gospel in his left hand, resting the Book against his left
shoulder.

[222] This peculiar arrangement of the deacons is not customary. Normally the
second deacon, carrying the thurible, stands to the right of the first deacon
and censes towards the Gospel Book.

[223] The people may respond and to your spirit.

[224] Again, this is not customary; normally only one deacon is on the soleas
for the ektene or synapte.

[225] If only one deacon is on the soleas, the other deacon who chants part of
the dismissal of the catechumens does so within the Altar, looking out through
the royal doors.

[226] Usually each deacon raises only his right hand.

[227] Stamford and Basilian translations: Pittsburgh-Passaic gives all you
Christians of the true faith. The Latin text reads Omnium vestrum orthodoxorum
christianorum.

154

Notes

[228] Here also, normally one deacon only goes to the soleas for the aitisis.

[229] If there are one or more deacons in the Altar, they all go to the soleas
for the kiss of peace. The Liturgicon says: each deacon kisses his orarion where
the image of the Cross is, and the deacons kiss each other on the shoulders,
greeting each other with the same words as the priests.

[230] Customarily, only the deacon who is to sing the aitisis leaves the Altar.

[231] This is normally done during the Lord’s Prayer.

[232] The people may respond and to your spirit.

[233] Many priests prefer to have an acolyte hold the thurible at this moment.

[234] For the sake of caution, it is preferable not to place the spoon in the
chalice.

[235] For the sake of caution, it is preferable not to leave the spoon in the
chalice.

[236] After placing the sacred vessels on the Prothesis table, the priest takes
the thurible from the acolyte and censes the Holy Gifts three times. He then
returns the thurible to the acolyte, and goes back to his place at the Holy
Table.

[237] This concept, which is completely foreign to the ethos of the Byzantine
liturgical tradition, was borrowed from the West. It became fairly widespread
for several reasons: the multiplication of Masses, especially in certain
paramonastic communities, the neglect of concelebration, and the wish of priests
to celebrate the Eucharist on a daily basis when chanters were often
unavailable. The Liturgicon makes no provision for such a form of service.

[238] “Private liturgy” is an oxymoron!

[239] This prescription seems intended to prevent the abuse of the priest and
the acolyte whispering the Divine Liturgy to each other.

155

Ordo Celebrationis

[240] “The Eastern Catholic Churches are to jealously maintain and practice as
much as possible the use of incense in the celebrations, even daily, because it
belongs in a special way to their own traditions. Every custom to the contrary
is to be modified.” Instruction for Applying the Liturgical Prescriptions ...
No. 101, p. 82.

[241] Despite this clear prohibition, which has been reiterated, these abuses
are still widespread.

[242] In many places pious lay people will come forward spontaneously to support
the Gospel Book; they consider this to be a special blessing.

[243] As Father Korolevsky noted elsewhere, some priests had been reciting the
Leonine Prayers after Low Mass.

[244] The Instruction for Applying the Liturgical Prescriptions... No. 57,
pp. 50-51, states that:

“Care should be taken that the concelebrants are not of such quantity as to have
to overflow into the nave where the faithful are, and thus [be] outside the
Sanctuary itself, or to occupy the space of the Sanctuary in such a way that
impedes the dignified celebration of the rite. Of course, concelebration is
nevertheless preferable to the so-called individual celebrations without the
people. Individual, independent celebrations of the eucharist on multiple altars
in the same place at the same time are categorically prohibited.”

[245] This occurs quite often on festive occasions, when priests who have
already liturgized for their own parishes arrive when they can and join in the
solemn celebration.

[246] In practice, it is usually more convenient for the main celebrant alone to
raise his hands.

[247] This is indeed preferable. But it is also permissible for the
concelebrants to offer these prayers separately, especially if one must come
earlier for the Proskomede, and others arrive a few moments later.

[248] This does not forbid the other concelebrants to kiss the icons if they so
wish, and that has become the present custom.

156

Notes

[249] For the convenience of presbyters and deacons, the Holy See has published
the Church-Slavonic Liturgicon in a smaller format.

[250] It is undesirable for concelebrants to stand directly to the East of the
Holy Table, so as to gaze across the Holy Table to the West and thus face the
main celebrant.

[251] The presbyters may extract commemorative particles and place them on the
diskarion until the Great Entrance. For this purpose, it is usual to have two
prosphora and the lance on the Prothesis table.

[252] This is usually not convenient.

[253] This is done on each occasion that the deacon censes the Holy Table.

[254] To avoid undue repetition of the same phrase it is better to arrange that
each concelebrant makes a different, distinct commemoration. If there are many
concelebrants, it is not necessary for each one to offer a commemoration aloud.

[255] The practice described is still in use. But one also finds another custom:
the presbyters clasp right hands, kiss each other three time, and then each
kisses the back of the other’s right hand.

[256] If the number of concelebrants is not too large, all of them may assist in
holding the aer. If, however, there are too many, the others simply stand and
join in the Symbol of Faith.

[257] That is, with his right hand extended, palm upwards.

[258] This practice is not universal.

[259] That is, with his hand.

[260] This washing of the fingers is not mentioned in the Liturgicon, nor is it
customary in practice.

[261] This procedure is still to be found, but a variant is also customary: the
principal celebrant withdraws slightly from the Holy Table and the presbyters
approach in order of their dignity and seniority of ordination; each one takes a
Particle of the Holy Lamb, places the Particle in the palm of his right hand,
covers the Particle with his left hand, and resumes his place. Last of all, the
principal celebrant does

157

Ordo Celebrationis

the same, and all then recite the Prayer I believe, O Lord ... At the conclusion
of the prayer, all the presbyters together consume the Particles of the Holy
Lamb which each holds in his hand. [Often the presbyters will wish to absterge
the palms of their hands with the sponge over the diskarion.] The principal
celebrant then communicates himself from the Holy Chalice, and communicates the
deacon from the Holy Lamb while the other presbyters are communicating
themselves from the Holy Chalice. When the last presbyter has communicated
himself from the Holy Chalice, one of the presbyters communicates the deacon
with the Precious Blood.

[262] In contemporary practice the main celebrant almost invariably invites the
youngest concelebrant to offer the Prayer behind the Ambo.

[263] Again, this clause is intended to correct an abuse. Incredible as it may
seem, one can actually observe presbyters who apparently find it too difficult
to carry the Gospel Book and the Holy Gifts out the North Door and into the
Altar through the royal doors.

Notes to Chapter VI

[264] Literally the Quadragesima, the “forty days.” Byzantine rubrics often use
this expression to denote Great Lent.

[265] Such “another day” could be the Feast of the Annunciation.

[266] The Latin original reads “the Office of the Presanctified Gifts,” probably
to stress the point that as there is no Eucharistic Prayer and the Holy Gifts
are given from a previous Divine Liturgy, there is no Sacrifice. Nevertheless,
this service is universally called “the Divine Liturgy of the Presanctified
Gifts.” The Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches uses the term Liturgia
Præsanctificatorum, canon 715, § 2.

[267] It is customary to intinct the Holy Lamb with the Precious Blood. For this
purpose, one holds the Holy Lamb directly over the Chalice and, taking the
Communion Spoon, one takes a few drops of the Precious Blood and traces the Sign
of the Cross over the Holy Lamb where the Lamb was cut with the Lance during the
Proskomede.

158

Notes

[268] In parishes the Little Hours are often omitted.

[269] Parma: Reverend Father, give the blessing.

[270] That is to say, he chants or intones as usual.

[271] Following the Greek, the Latin here calls this the “proemiac” Psalm.

[272] The priest reads these prayers quietly, while the chanter or chanters
continue the Psalm.

[273] The Liturgicon prescribes that the priest recites these prayers “with
uncovered head” (Rome, 1941, p. 6). Thus if the priest is wearing a
kalymauchion, skufia, kolpak, or klobuk, he must remove his head-gear for these
prayers.

[274] Although most Byzantine service-books only give seven Prayers of Light,
the Ruthenian usage has eight.

[275] Customarily the priest waits at the royal doors for the deacon, so that he
may bless the deacon before returning to the Holy Table.

[276] In some places the priest reads the first Prayer of Light during the Great
Synapte.

[277] During the fifth week of Great Lent this varies.

[278] Having set aside the Gospel Book, the priest unfolds the eiliton (and the
antimension, if the antimension is kept within the eiliton).

[279] Or directly on the antimension ...

[280] If the priest prudently foresees that the Lamb will not suffice. This can
occur frequently in parishes where the faithful are accustomed to receive Holy
Communion often and come to the Liturgy of Presanctified Gifts in good numbers;
it is more difficult to break the Presanctified Lamb into smaller Particles for
the Communion of the faithful.

[281] The deacon or acolyte holds the thurible so that the priest may hold first
the asterisk and then the small veil in the rising smoke.

159

Ordo Celebrationis

[282] In many places it is customary for the priest to circle the Holy Table
three times for this incensation.

[283] The Liturgicon prescribes a full prostration; cf. Rome, 1941, p 17; Parma,
p. 10.

[284] The Liturgicon makes no mention of an eiliton on the Prothesis table. Such
a use would imitate the Latin use of a corporal.

[285] Customarily a full prostration. It is customary in many places to leave a
candle burning before the Prothesis, as a sign of special reverence for the
Presanctified Lamb.

[286] Folds the eiliton and antimension, and then ...

[287] In present-day usage, it is unusual to reserve the Holy Gifts on the
Prothesis table. However, this was unquestionably the custom at one time. Those
clergy who prefer this usage may purchase a small artophorion made by
ecclesiastical supply houses in Greece specifically for the reservation of the
Holy Gifts needed for the Liturgy of the Presanctified.

[288] The priest does not actually take the thurible into his hand; he blesses
the thurible, which the deacon or acolyte holds for him, and then censes the
asterisk and veils by holding them in the smoke.

[289] Provided the kathisma is read in full, this arrangement is quite
opportune. Abbreviating the kathisma can compel the priest to an unseemly haste
which is altogether inappropriate in preparing the Presanctified Lamb. The best
usage is for the congregation to chant the Psalms to a simple tone.

[290] That is, censing (once or three times) around the Holy Table.

[291] The Liturgicon does not mention such an exigency, but it can occur often
in pastoral practice. Note that the Ordo prescribes that the Holy Gifts to be
used for Communion shall be set on the diskarion at the same time as the
Presanctified Lamb, not simply removed from the tabernacle immediately before
the Communion of the faithful.

[292] Which are on the Prothesis table.

160

Notes

[293] Normally a Gospel occurs at the Liturgy of the Presanctified on the feast
of the Forty Martyrs of Sebastia, the Feast of the Finding of the Head of Saint
John the Baptist, and the first three days of Holy Week.

[294] The people may respond and to your spirit.

[295] During Holy Week the first reading is from Exodus.

[296] The Liturgicon does not mention these three metanies before the second
reading.

[297] During Holy Week, the second reading is from Job.

[298] The Liturgicon prescribes Wisdom, but not let us be attentive.

[299] The order of censing and kneeling during Let my prayer ... is
controversial, and varies in practice.

[300] There is a recent but widespread custom to accompany these three
prostrations with the Prayer of Saint Ephrem the Syrian. Most editions of the
service-book do not mention this practice.

[301] The Archieraticon, Rome 1973, p. 201, prescribes the unfolding of the
Antimension at this point. Cf. also ibid. p. 221.

[302] This special synapte and prayer are for those catechumens who are to be
baptized on Holy Saturday.

[303] Customarily the deacon only raises his right hand.

[304] The Liturgicon does not mention this raising of the hands, but the custom
is universal.

[305] A diskarion without a stem base is not suitable for the Byzantine Liturgy!

[306] During the Great Entrance at the Liturgy of Presanctified Gifts, the
chanters pause and the faithful prostrate, or at least kneel with bowed heads;
the procession is made in absolute silence. As the priest enters the royal doors
he may say in a moderate voice Let us draw near, so as to signal the chanters to
resume the singing.

161

Ordo Celebrationis

[307] Here also one may find a very recent but wide-spread custom of reciting
the Prayer of Saint Ephrem. One also finds that in some places only one
prostration is made at this point.

[308] In a peculiar usage, in many places the curtain of the royal doors is
closed half-way at this point, and closed the rest of the way after the bowing
of the heads.

[309] If the curtain was only closed half-way, it is now closed the rest of the
way.

[310] In other words, if there is a sponge normally kept (as there should be) in
the antimension or eiliton.

[311] The Liturgicon and the Ordo do not mention it, but it is customary to
drink from the chalice, without saying anything. This is a matter of practical
reverence; the Lamb is usually dry and taking some of the wine from the chalice
enables the priest to rinse his mouth.

[312] With the sponge.

[313] Infants and very small children, who are to be communicated with the
Precious Blood, do not usually receive Holy Communion at the Liturgy of
Presanctified Gifts.

[314] The Ruthenian Liturgicon mentions only the Body of the Lord. Those clergy
who customarily intinct the Lamb with the Precious Blood usually also allude to
the Precious Blood when they communicate the faithful.

[315] Notice that the priest does not bless with the words O Lord, save Your
people; these words are not said at all, nor is there any chant to replace We
have seen the true light. While the Ruthenian tradition is almost unique in
contemporary practice in not having these elements at the Presanctified Liturgy,
the Ruthenian tradition on this point is faithful to the older usage.

[316] Many priests mention Saint Gregory Dialogos, Pope of Rome. The Old Kievan
usage was to mention either Saint Basil the Great or Saint John Chrysostom,
depending on which Liturgy had been celebrated when the Presanctified Lamb was
consecrated. Metropolitan

162

Notes

Peter Mohyla, Leiturgiarion, Kiev 1639, Eastern Christian Publications –
Stauropegion reprint 1996, pp. 696-697.

[317] The Liturgicon (Rome 1941, pp. 60-68) prescribes and supplies the usual
prayers after Holy Communion.

[318] The people may respond and to your spirit.

[319] With the prescribed Alleluia verses by the Lector.

[320] That is, from the Wednesday which follows the Third Sunday of Lent, the
Adoration of the Holy Cross.

[321] Customarily only the first deacon goes; the second deacon remains with the
priest at the Holy Table.

[322] No one who has not been ordained to the Sacred Diaconate may pass between
the Holy Table and the royal doors. On this occasion, the server must leave the
Altar through the north door, face the east while the priest censes the Holy
Table, and then enter the Altar through the south door so as to face the priest
across the Holy Table.

[323] Depending on the number of acolytes, one should carry the thurible and the
others, in pairs, should carry candles and perhaps the ripidia.

[324] Translators’ note: it was necessary to paraphrase this sentence!

Notes to the Glossary

[325] In some churches of the Ruthenian tradition the antimension is kept under
the cloths which cover the holy table, and the eiliton alone is unfolded during
the Divine Liturgy. In that case, the sponge is kept in the eiliton.

[326] Deacons should be reminded, if necessary, to wear the epimanikia; this is
their distinctive vestment. And those who make liturgical vestments should be
reminded that the epimanikia are to be made in such a way that the priest or
deacon who wears them ties them with cords each time he puts them on.
Pseudo-epimanikia made with elastic bands lack both symbolism and utility.

163

Ordo Celebrationis

[327] Psalms 148, 149, and 150, invariably chanted at the end of Orthros.

[328] One also finds the etymologically correct spelling heirmos.

[329] And should be tailored to fit the priest who is to wear them.

Notes to the Appendix

[330] The term “Ruthenian” is not used in this letter in an ethnic sense. It
would be difficult to arrive at a scientific definition of the use of that term
in this context, although in a practical way one can certainly determine whom
the Congregation had in mind.

[331] This letter was sent to the Metropolitan of Kiev-Halych and his suffragans
(the Bishop of Peremyshl’ and the Bishop of Stanyslaviv), to the Bishop of
Mukachevo-Užhorod and the Bishop of Prešov, to the Bishop of Križevci, to the
Bishop of Hajdúdorog, and to the Apostolic Exarchs in Philadelphia, Pittsburgh,
and Winnipeg. It was also communicated to the Major Superior of the Basilians.
The letter was published (in Italian) in Orientalia Christiana Periodica VIII
(Roma 1942), pp. 136-139.

[332] A controversy had been raging about these matters for decades. Cf. Cyril
Korolevsky, “Liturgical Reform” in Metropolitan Andrew (1865-1944), English
translation by Serge Keleher, Stauropegion, L’viv, 1993, pp. 407-436; Victor J.
Pospishil, “Sheptyts’kyi and Liturgical Reform” in Morality and Reality, the
Life and Times of Andrei Sheptytsky, Paul Robert Magocsi, Editor, Canadian
Institute of Ukrainian Studies, University of Alberta, Edmonton 1989,
pp. 201-225.

[333] Neither the episcopal conferences nor the Inter-Eparchial Commission were
able to reach agreement. This deadlock caused the hierarchy to ask the Holy See
to resolve the matter.

[334] At the time in question, only Cardinals could be full members of the
Oriental Congregation (at present all the Eastern Catholic Patriarchs, whether
they are Cardinals or not, are ex officio members of the Congregation). Since
most of the Cardinals are also Archbishops of

164

Notes

dioceses outside of Rome, a plenary meeting of the Congregation is an unusual
event, and decisions taken at a plenary are considered to have special
importance. This particular plenary had been carefully prepared over a period of
years.

[335] This was Cardinal Tisserant himself; the editing of Eastern Catholic
liturgical books was among his greatest achievements. In this endeavor he
enjoyed the enthusiastic help and support of Father Cyril Korolevsky.

[336] Despite this provision, the Basilian Press in Canada produced an
offset-reprint of the 1905 L’viv Liturgicon. Their justification was the acute
need for service-books, and the practical difficulty of communicating with the
Holy See during World War II.

[337] The “vulgate” recension is the term the Congregation used to designate the
Niconian usages which appear in Russian Orthodox liturgical books published
since the reforms of Patriarch Nicon of Moscow. The Oriental Congregation also
published a series of Church-Slavonic liturgical books following this “vulgate”
recension; this series is distinct from the “Ruthenian” Recension books. It is
easy to distinguish the two groups of books: the “vulgate” service-books
published by the Congregation give the page numbers exclusively in
Church-Slavonic, while the “Ruthenian” versions of the same books give the
page-numbers both in Church-Slavonic and in Arabic.

[338] The Synod of Zamost’ forbade the use of the sponge, forbade the infusion
of hot water (Zeon) into the Chalice before Holy Communion, required the
interpolation of the Filioque into the Nicene Creed, and required the
commemoration of the Pope.

[339] Zamost’ is a small town presently located in Eastern Poland, east of
Lublin and south of Kholm. In 1720 the Greek-Catholic hierarchy of the
Kiev-Halych Metropolia held a Synod in Zamost’, which adopted a number of
“latinizing” measures.

[340] By comparison to the detailed and careful rubrics of the editions of the
Liturgicon prepared by Metropolitan Peter Mohyla earlier in the seventeenth
century, Metropolitan Cyprian Zhokhovsky’s lamentable edition of 1692 has very
scanty rubrics.

165

Ordo Celebrationis

[341] This refers to the form which is now usually called the “Tridentine” Low
Mass.

[342] The Eparchy of Mukachevo-Užhorod was not represented at the Synod of
Zamost’.

[343] This assertion is disputable; Pius IX’s Brief Omnem Sollicitudinem (13
May 1874) certainly gave the impression of ratifying, even requiring, all the
hybridisms. In the present letter, Tisserant is adopting Korolevsky’s
interpretation of that document: Korolevsky, op. cit., pp. 416-420.

[344] There is a divergence in terminology between Greek and Church-Slavonic;
the Greek Euchologion corresponds roughly to the Church-Slavonic Liturgicon.

[345] In the final years of the eighteenth century and the early years of the
nineteenth century Metropolitan Heraclius (Lisowsky) attempted a liturgical
restoration on the basis of the work of Benedict XIV.

[346] Cyprian Zhokhovsky’s 1692 edition was actually a “Missal,” modeled on the
Missale Romanum; it contained in one volume all the texts for the Divine
Liturgy, thus enabling the priest at the altar to read the entire “Mass” and
eliminating the role of the deacon, reader, and chanter.

[347] Literally titled the Apostle; the “Epistle” of the Byzantine Liturgy is
sometimes taken, not from one of the actual Epistles, but from the Acts of the
Apostles.

[348] That is, the Prokeimena, the Alleluia verses, and the Kinonika.

[349] Tisserant is probably referring to “the circumstances” of the war; one is
impressed that the Congregation was able to print these books at the time. The
printing of the Liturgicon in the small (duodecimo) format facilitated the
restoration of the service of the deacon and the practice of concelebration.

166

Notes

[350] Over the years, clergy and students often found it convenient to purchase
the Liturgicon in unbound sheets and have different sections bound to suit
themselves.

[351] This sentence implies that there is to be no further attempt to produce a
“Ruthenian Missal.”

[352] The full Liturgicon appeared in 1942.

[353] The large and the small editions of the Gospel Book each appeared in 1943.

[354] The Cardinal is here prudently referring to the difficult conditions of
World War II, when many priests had to travel and not a few were exiled.

[355] All these books were eventually printed, and are still available.

[356] At the time of writing of this letter, the liturgical prescriptions of the
Synod of Zamost’ were in legal force in the Archeparchy of L’viv, the Eparchy of
Peremyshl’, and the Eparchy of Stanyslaviv, but not in monastic houses of the
Studite Rule; these latter were exempt from the liturgical prescriptions of the
Synod of Zamost’.

[357] In view of practical developments, and of the prescriptions of the Vatican
II decree Orientalium Ecclesiarum, the liturgical prescriptions of the Synod of
Zamost’ no longer have binding force in any specific territory, although they
may still be found by way of custom here and there. To take one example, many
priests and hierarchs in Western Ukraine perform the infusion of hot water into
the Chalice before Holy Communion as a matter of course.

[358] In varying degrees, these places include the Eparchies of
Mukachevo-Užhorod, Prešov, and Hajdúdorog, the Apostolic Exarchates of
Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and Winnipeg, and other localities in the diaspora
(which at the time would have been under the jurisdiction of the local Latin
hierarch).

[359] The Synod of L’viv of 1891 involved only the Archeparchy of L’viv, the
Eparchy of Peremyshl’, and the Eparchy of Stanyslaviv. Moreover, the liturgical
prescriptions which had been intended for

167

Ordo Celebrationis

discussion at that assembly were never voted on, never received approval, and
thus have never acquired the force of law.

[360] This paragraph was intended to include parishes and communities which were
reconciled to the Greek-Catholic Church after a notable time under Eastern
Orthodox administration; in such parishes the Zamost’ usages were not to be
revived. Bishop Nicholas (Charnetsky), Apostolic Exarch of Volyn’, Podlassia,
and Polessia adhered to this policy with careful accuracy.

[361] By 1996, 55 years after the date of this letter, relatively few priests
ordained before 1941 would still be alive, and still fewer would be serving
Divine Liturgy in public on a regular basis.

[362] Metropolitan Constantine (Bohachevsky) noted this permission, but made it
clear that he did not want his clergy to make use of it! Statutes of the
Archeparchy of Philadelphia, 1959, p. 83, Canon 275.

[363] The Ordo Celebrationis was published in 1944.

[364] From the creation of the Oriental Congregation until the Curial reforms of
Pope Paul VI after Vatican II, the Pope himself was the nominal Prefect of the
Oriental Congregation, and the Cardinal in charge was called the “Secretary.”

[365] This letter appeared in the mimeographed English translation of the Ordo
Celebrationis which Bishop Daniel Ivancho authorized on 22 February 1954.
However, when Bishop Nicholas Elko assumed the administration of the Pittsburgh
Exarchate, he called back all the copies of that translation and removed the
pages containing this correspondence. So far as we are aware, this letter has
not been published elsewhere.

[366] Throughout this letter, Bishop Daniel Ivancho referred to himself in the
plural. For the sake of clarity, we have used the singular forms in this present
translation.

[367] Bishop Basil Takach, who was Apostolic Exarch of Pittsburgh at the time of
the promulgation of the Ordo Celebrationis and the liturgical books.

168

Notes

[368] This is a pejorative reference to the American Carpatho-Russian Orthodox
diocese, composed almost entirely of clergy and faithful who withdrew from the
Pittsburgh Exarchate during the nineteen-thirties because of the imposition of
involuntary celibacy as a requirement for ordination to the priesthood. At the
time Bishop Daniel Ivancho was writing, it is true that the Carpatho-Russian
Orthodox were continuing to conduct liturgical services according to the
practices that they had known in the Greek-Catholic Church in the
nineteen-thirties.

[369] In using the qualifying word “temporarily,” Bishop Daniel implies that
these specific practices should be retained for a transitional period, during
which time the faithful should have a gradual, pastoral preparation for the
complete use of the Ordo Celebrationis.

[370] Most of these practices were not “immemorial” in the canonical sense.

[371] This term is inexact; most of the faithful of the Pittsburgh Exarchate
were “Ruthenians” from the southern slopes of the Carpathian Mountains, from
Transcarpathia and the Prešov region of Eastern Slovakia. “Ruthenians” from the
northern slopes of the Carpathian Mountains are equally “Carpathian”, and to
this day often refer to their lands as “Pre-Carpathia.” However, in the United
States such expressions as “Carpatho-Russian” have become accepted.

[372] One finds it difficult to believe that any Greek-Catholic lay person would
have been shocked or disturbed by the sight of the priest kissing an icon.

[373] It is also difficult to believe that anyone would have been surprised had
the priest censed the icons in the altar.

[374] At the time when Bishop Daniel was writing, the Pittsburgh Exarchate was
not attached to a Metropolitanate; the clergy commemorated only the Pope and the
Bishop.

[375] So far as we are aware, this practice did not appear in any official
liturgical book of the period, but was nearly universal in the Pittsburgh
Exarchate.

169

Ordo Celebrationis

[376] This abuse is widespread throughout the Byzantine world. It is deplorable,
nonetheless, because it distracts everyone from the Epistle. It also leads to
the omission of the Alleluia verses.

[377] This point seems strange, and we are at a loss to explain it.

[378] This particular practice had the priest leave the center of the Holy Table
(usually a rectangular, baroque High Altar) and move to his right, where the
acolyte, holding a cruet of water, a small basin, and a hand towel, would wash
the priest’s fingers. While washing his fingers and drying them with the towel,
the priest was simultaneously intoning the exclamation: Through the grace and
mercies and man-befriending love ...

[379] An obvious imitation of the triple striking of the breast during the
Confiteor which was recited at the Tridentine Mass before Holy Communion (but is
no longer used in that place since the publication of the 1962 edition of the
Missale Romanum).

[380] This appears to be immobilism; the incensation could not have distressed
anyone.

[381] In requesting a temporary tolerance on this point, Bishop Daniel was not
unwise; it proved difficult in practice to eliminate the use of the Sanctus
bells. Over the years, however, this has been accomplished successfully in most
places.

[382] This document also was included in the mimeographed English translation of
the Ordo Celebrationis published by authority of Bishop Daniel Ivancho, and was
also excised when Bishop Nicholas Elko recalled the books.

[383] The permissions to be given in this letter were not intended to be a
permanent derogation from the prescriptions of the Ordo Celebrationis.

[384] That is to say, such a cloth may be used for the practical reason
mentioned, but may not in any way be treated as a vestment.

[385] This has also been done in the Church-Slavonic Arkhierticon published by
the Holy See for the “Ruthenian Recension,” and in

170

Notes

the Ukrainian service-books published by Patriarch Joseph Cardinal Slipyj.

[386] With this provision the Holy See refuses to permit the practice of “double
recitation.” By that abuse, the priest more-or-less simultaneously recited, in a
whisper, everything that the deacon, lector, chanters and/or congregation were
saying or singing aloud.

[387] On this point, Bishop Daniel Ivancho was right. The Peace unto all before
the Gospel is a relatively recent addition to the textus receptus of the Divine
Liturgy, and on the principles which the Congregation claimed to have applied in
producing the new “Ruthenian Recension” service-books, it should not have been
inserted.

[388] With Bishop Daniel Ivancho’s sudden departure from office, the Ordo
Celebrationis did not come into practical effect in the Pittsburgh Exarchate,
and the priests continued to give this particular blessing. However, in
virtually every parish it became customary for the congregation to begin singing
the Cherubic Hymn immediately after the Ektene following the Gospel; the priest
would quietly recite the synaptes for the catechumens and the faithful while the
Cherubic Hymn was already being sung. The bizarre result was that for no
apparent reason, during the Cherubic Hymn, the priest would suddenly face the
congregation, move his lips inaudibly, and bestow a blessing!

[389] The small veils for the Chalice and Diskarion are properly made with
“flaps” on all four sides, so as to cover the Asterisk over the Diskarion, and
the actual cup of the Chalice. The Latin Pall is simply a stiff square of
vestment-brocade (often stiffened with cardboard, or nowadays with plastic).

[390] We are surprised that the Congregation permitted this practice; it is a
blatant imitation of the Tridentine Mass.

[391] Judging by this response, there must have been some confusion or
misunderstanding of Bishop Daniel Ivancho’s request.

[392] A canonist, Archimandrite Acacius Coussa was later consecrated Bishop by
Pope John XXIII and became Cardinal-Secretary of the Oriental Congregation.

171

Ordo Celebrationis

172

