Typikon Footnotes:
¹ Title of the original text: "Typikon of the Ruthenian Catholic Church." "Ruthenian" is the ancient name for Ukrainians.
^[2] Excerpt from Appendix XXXI.
^[3] Let it be known that the Synod presents the rubric of only this, the 1st, part. The rubrics of the other four parts are given according to the Slavonic and Greek service books, and also according to the customs of our churches.
^[4] Corrected by me (Ivan Dutka), since in the translation this service was omitted.
^[5] The Rubric of the Liturgy is not given, for it is given in detail in the newly published Service Books.
^[6] The Greek Euchologia and Slavonic Menaia (December 25 at the Vigil with Great Compline) prescribe also the phelonion; the rubric of our Service Books and the Moscow Typikons prescribe only the epitrachelion. Also, the Greek Typikon mentions the phelonion for the first time at the Entrance, prescribing: Και ειςελΰοντες (priest and deacon) αλασσουσιν την ιερατικην στολην εν τω διακονικό. (Καιφ. β) /And, having entered, they dress in the sacred robes (Chapter 2)/.
^[7] Likewise in the order of the Divine Service published by Bp. Tsikhanovsky for the use of the clergy of his Kholm Eparchy, this exclamation is prescribed for one of the deacons; in the Greek Euchologion — to the Reader τω Αναγνώστη or Ευταξιω /the Master of Ceremonies/; in the Greek Typikon — to the serving cleric who lights the candles Κανδηλαπτη (Sacristæ).
^[8] The Greek Typikon prescribes this to the priest, and this is evident, for according to its rubric, from the beginning it is not the deacon who serves, but the priest himself.
^[9] The Greek Typikon orders the deacon to mention the service from the litany “In peace let us pray to the Lord,” however, the Greek Euchologia do not forbid him to serve from the beginning: Ει μη φορεση ο διάκονος εις την αρχήν του Εσπερινού, ενδύεται ψαλλομενου του γ αντίφωνου του ψαλτηρίου, ει εστίν Στιχολογια; ει δε μη, του Προοιμιακου ψαλλομενου /If the deacon has not vested from the beginning of Vespers, let him vest during the singing of the prefatory psalm/. Our Service Books prescribe for the deacon to begin serving already from the beginning of Vespers, but prescribe the censing to the priest himself; the Synod approves the current custom for two deacons to cense. Regarding what some say, that it is not proper for two deacons to serve at the Divine Services, but only one, because the rubrics mention only one, the Synod does not accept this, and rightly so. And since there is nothing against our rite when several priests serve concelebrating, even though the rubrics mention only one priest, so nothing prevents the service of several deacons.
^[10] The Greek Typikon prescribes for the priest, before “Glory to the Holy,” to make the sign of the cross with the censer before the Holy Table three times, and the Euchologion — to sing “Glory to the Holy” while censing the Holy Table.
^[11] In the Greek Ευχολογ. /Euchologion/, in the order of Vespers, it is presented: Και φησιν (ο διάκονος): Ευλογησον Δέσποτα το ΰυμιαμα. Και ο Ιερεύς ευλογεί αυτό λέγων: Ευλογητος ο θεός ημών, πάντοτε /And (the deacon) exclaims: “Bless, Master, the censer.” And the priest blesses, saying: “Blessed is our God, always”/ and at subsequent censings, the prayer “Incense we offer to Thee” is not mentioned, but only at the beginning. Therefore, it is proper to adhere to this rule at the Liturgy as well, using this prayer only once, at the beginning.
^[12] The Greek Ευχολογιον /Euchologion/ prescribes to cense only the Holy Table.
^[13] In some parishes, they still bend their knees and heads to the ground, as presented in the Greek Typikon, in which: Και ημών κλιναντων, και επί γης κεκυφωτων, (Καιφ. β) /And while we have bowed and bent down to the ground (Chapter 2)/.
^[14] Since no Typikon (the Synod testifies) prescribes censing in the temple here, it would be better if the deacons cense from the place of the Litiya when they arrive there. And since this is better, we have placed such a rubric in the text, and we have completely rejected the worse existing local custom of censing the Holy Table and the local icons as at “Lord, I have cried,” although the Synod mentions it too. However, if there are icons in the narthex, it is proper to cense them first, for the ancient Typikons prescribe so.
^[15] To exclaim at this place “Bless, Master” is prescribed for the deacon also by the Greek Διακονικον /Diakonikon/. The same is prescribed also by the Menaion at Great Compline of the Nativity of Christ and Theophany.
^[16] The Greek Ευχολογ. /Euchologion/. Likewise the Pochaiv Triodion at Matins of Pascha Sunday.
^[17] Some of us consider that here it is not proper to say “Lord, bless,” but only “Bless,” because here a blessing is not asked from the Lord, but from the priest. But this we do not know for certain, for in other Typikons, namely in the Moscow Typikons and Horologia in the order of Vespers, and in the Greek Horologia at Daily Midnight Office, the words “Lord” are absent; however, in our Horologia (at the end of Matins) and in the Church Eye, and in the Greek Euchologia in the order of Vespers this word is given. Here are the words of the Roman Euchologion: “Ο ιερεύς ησυχως: Δόξα σοι ο θεός, η ελπις ημών, δόξα σοι; και λεγουσιν οι Αδελφοί: Δόξα, και νυν, Κύριε ευλογησον /The priest quietly: ‘Glory to Thee, O God, our hope, glory to Thee.’ And the brethren say: ‘Glory, Both now,’ ‘Lord, bless’/.” Therefore, both the former and the latter are good, for it is possible to ask the Lord God for a blessing at the conclusion of the Divine Service, just as is asked at Vespers with Vigil, at the beginning of which the deacon, or the priest himself, exclaims: Κύριε ευλογησον /“Lord, bless”/.
^[18] (similar to Daily).
^[19] All this the Greek Horologion also presents. The Peremyshl Prayer Book incorrectly does not present them; incorrectly also our Horologia begin them from the Trisagion, not prescribing “Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee” and “O Heavenly King.”
^[20] However, it is better presented in the Greek Horologia — only one troparion, that is of the current Saint, or the four aforementioned: “O God of our Fathers” with the three others, without distinction of day. In the Greek Menaia the Saint does not always have a troparion and, when he does not have one, then the general troparia are taken — “O God of our Fathers”; when he has one, then to the Saint. With us, because the current Saint in the Menaion always has a troparion, then, if it were taken always, the troparia “O God of our Fathers” would be superfluous; so that they not be superfluous, they are taken daily, and to the Saints — only to the Polyeleos ones. The troparion of the day and of the Temple is given only in the Slavonic Typikons.
^[21] After “Blessed is our God” there will be also “Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee,” “O Heavenly King,” Trisagion etc. up to “Come, let us worship,” as the Menaion of December 25 presents.
^[22] To the aforementioned cases which the Greek and Slavonic Typikons present, the Moscow Octoechos of 1782 adds also other Feasts of the Lord and of the Theotokos, presenting at the Midnight Office on the feast day itself, on the first day of Afterfeast, the troparion and kontakion of the feast; however, we do not have this new Typikon.
^[23] The Six Psalms are divided into two parts [by] “Glory, Both now,” “Alleluia” (3), “Glory to Thee, O God” (3), “Lord, have mercy” (3), “Glory, Both now”; and then the typikons prescribe for the priest to recite with uncovered head the Morning Prayers before the Holy Doors; however, because now the Six Psalms are recited without interruption, the priest begins to recite the prayers already at the beginning of the Six Psalms. Therefore also the censing, which was prescribed in previous typikons at the first three psalms, does not exist with us, and has not for a long time, for it is no longer mentioned in the Pochaiv Service Book.
^[24] E.g., St. John the Theologian, if it falls on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers.
^[3] E.g., Menaion September 9 or 11.
^[25] E.g., on Sunday after Nativity.
^[26] E.g., Menaion December 29.
^[27] In the Greek Euchologion only one exclamation Οτι ευλογητοα /“For blessed is”/ is given, the same one both on Sunday and on Feasts; the Greeks do not have “Magnifications” here, for they are an invention of the Slavs.
^[28] When the first antiphon of Tone 4 must be sung, it is not proper to add to it the third troparion of the second antiphon, as some do, but it is sufficient to sing only the first antiphon with the refrain Glory, Both now before its third troparion.
^[29] So it is presented in the Latin compilation approved in Rome. However, the Ruthenian text prescribes for the priest to hold in his hand the cross intended for kissing; if someone wants to do so, then let someone else hold the vessel with oil.
^[30] E.g., Μηναιον /Menaion/ 11, 15, 16, 17, 18 September.
^[31] Because regarding the troparia of the canon the text of the Synod is somewhat unclear, therefore, adhering on the whole to the essence, we have presented it here in a simplified manner.
^[32] At Great Matins.
^[33] Pochaiv Octoechos, Tone 4, Wednesday.
^[34] Likewise in the Church Eye, in the 2nd chapter: “But we recite its irmos, which the priest begins in a loud voice in the sanctuary; here they have the custom that the priest, instead of the irmos, exclaims: ‘The Theotokos in songs let us magnify’.” The Typikon of the Greek Euchologia on Feasts prescribes for the deacon to sing the beginning of the irmos: Ψάλλει ο διάκονος μεγαλοφωνως: “Την θεοτοκον και μητέρα του φωτός εν υμνοις μεγαλυνωμεν”, και στιχολογειται η Τιμιότερα; ει δε μη, ψάλλει την αρχήν του ειρμού της Ι5. της εορτής /The deacon sings very loudly: “The Theotokos and Mother of the Light let us magnify in songs,” and “More honorable” is recited (read, or sung); if not, then he sings the beginning of the irmos of the 9th ode of the Feast/. In the Order of Matins.
^[35] E.g. January 11 and 17.
^[36] E.g. December 6 and January 25 and 30.
^[37] Sometimes also according to the Greeks. February 7 and 8.
^[38] The Greek Irmologion also presents: Ει μεν ουκ εστί Κυριακή, μετά τον Ειρμον το Αξιον εστίν; ει δε Κυριακή, μετά την Καταβασιαν συνακτη, το Αγιος Κύριος ο θεός ημών /If it is not Sunday, after the Irmos — “It is truly meet”; but if it is Sunday, after the Katavasia the small litany, “Holy is the Lord our God”/. Ed. Propag. 1876.
Regarding the troparion “Holy is the Lord our God,” neither the ancient Greek Typikons nor the Euchologia prescribe to take it three times, nor do they adduce its verses. However, the Slavonic rubrics and the new Constantinopolitan Typikon prescribe to take it three times; regarding the verses — they do not agree. Our Service Book and the new Constantinopolitan Typikon present only one verse; ours: “Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at His footstool, for He is holy” (5th verse of the 98th psalm, from the last verse of which this troparion is taken). Constantinopolitan: Υψουτε Κυριον τον θεον ημών /Exalt ye the Lord our God/. The Church Eye and following it the Moscow Typikons present two verses, namely: 1. “For holy is the Lord our God”; 2. “Over all people is our God.” In our opinion, if the troparion must be taken three times, then one verse is not sufficient; therefore it is possible to divide the verse “Exalt ye” into two parts, of which the second would begin from: “And worship at His footstool” etc.
^[39] In the Greek Horologia the given addition refers only to the first verse.
^[40] For the Pochaiv Service Book of 1744 also presents censing here only “if it is Sunday or a Feast.”
^[41] Let it be known that besides the Great Forty Days there exist two other periods in which the rubric of the Menaion on September 21 prescribes also a 3rd Sessional Hymn with a Small Litany and a Kathisma before it. The first period lasts from the Leavetaking of the Feast of the Holy Cross, which falls on September 21, to the Forefeast of the Nativity of Christ, which falls on December 20 exclusively. The second lasts from the Leavetaking of the Feast of Theophany to Cheese-fare Sunday exclusively, that is in these two periods, in which at Sunday Matins the Polyeleos is given. However, in the content of our Psalter three Sessional Hymns and three Kathismata are given only in the Great Forty Days, so we use them.
^[42] That is, the troparion of the Saint is taken, and then — Glory, Both now: troparion of the Feast; if two Saints, then troparion of the first Saint, Glory: of the second, Both now: of the Feast.
^[43] Sometimes inclusive, as October 23 and July 25; sometimes exclusively, that is beginning from the Praises (Pochaiv Trephologion November 12 and December 4, Greek Menaion September 23). In the first case the Katavasia will be the current one after every ode, in the second — the irmos of the last canon after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th.
________________________________________
[44] In the general church rubric, not a single instance is encountered of a Saint with an All-Night Vigil falling in an Afterfeast on a Sunday, except in the midst of the feasts of Pentecost; but because the feasts of Pentecost have separate rubrics, when some Saint with an All-Night Vigil falls in the midst of Pentecost, then the rubric for him must be taken from the third part of this Typikon. However, in time, this case may happen even outside the feasts of Pentecost and a need for a separate rubric will arise; therefore, for the sake of this, we add these two cases to the instances of feasts: that is, a Saint with an All-Night Vigil on a Sunday and on weekdays, and their rubric may serve also in the case of a Patronal Saint.
[45] According to the ancient rubric, a saint "on 4" could be of two types: that is, either with a troparion or without a troparion; and when the saint has no troparion, then at Matins, instead of "God is the Lord," "Alleluia" was sung and the divine service had a separate rubric. But in our current Horologia, troparia are given for every day of the month, and therefore at Matins we always sing "God is the Lord," and we limit the "Alleluia" service to Great Lent, as do the Greeks.
Footnotes
[46] Pochaiv Octoechos 1800, tone 1, fol. 2; and Greek, and Venetian; Moscow typikons, Tserkovne Oko in chapter 2 and following.
[47] Pochaiv Octoechos at the end, fol. 7, on the verso.
[48] Mark, chapter 80 in the Greek Typikon, in Tserkovne Oko Mark, chapter 2, Tserkovne Oko, chapter 2 and Moscow Typikon, chapter 5.
[49] Μαρκ. Καιφ, οη /Mark, chapter 78/; Tserkovne Oko, chapter 2; Moscow Typikon, chapter 5.
[50] Peremyshl Typikon, page 8. — The Moscow Typikon does not prescribe taking the troparion of the second saint, “for, — it states, — at Vespers 4 troparia are not refused”, chapter 52, fol. 385 on the verso. However, that same Typikon, as also the Menaion, for the feast of St. John the Theologian on May 8, when it falls on a Sunday of the Holy Fathers, prescribes taking 4 troparia at “God is the Lord”, so we do not know why it would not be possible to take 4 at Vespers as well.
[51] Lviv Synod; Tserkovne Oko also mentions the saint, but the Stratyn Service Book of Balaban mentions only the saint with a Doxology.
[52] Horologions and Greek Octoechoi do not give a Canon to the Theotokos at Compline; however, the Greek Typikon states, saying: Παρελαβομεν δε και κατ εκαστην εν τοις Αποδειπνοις ψαλλειν Κανόνας Παρακλητικούς της Υπεραγιας Θεοτόκου. (Καιφ. ι) /And we have received [the tradition] to sing daily at Compline the Paraklesis Canons of the Most Holy Theotokos (chapter 10)/. These canons are not found in ordinary Greek Octoechoi, only at the end in them are given two theotokia canons.
[53] Our Horologions in the order of Small Compline and Pochaiv Octoechos in Tone 1; Moscow Octoechos gives a Kontakion (in Tone 5, at Compline). Greek Horologions give only the troparion of the saint, whose day it is, or (it must be understood, if the saint has no troparion) troparia: “(Thy Church, O Lord), throughout all the world”, Glory: “With the saints give rest”, Both now: “Through the intercessions of all the saints”, which are found also in our Horologions for use on weekdays.
[54] Our Horologions at the end of Matins; Horologions of others do not have “Glory to Thee, O Christ God”, but “Glory, Both now”, “Lord, have mercy” (3), “Bless”.
[55] Moscow Typikon in chapter 52 and Peremyshl, page 80.
[56] These Sessional Hymns, whether there be one or two (in different editions), end with their own theotokion. And when there is one, then “Glory, Both now” is sung to its theotokion together; when two, then to the second is sung “Glory”, and to the theotokion — “Both now”, as is given in the Lviv editions of 1765 and 1897 and in the Greek-Venetian of 1885; but according to general editions, to the second is sung one of the two Sunday verses, given with the two Praises stichera, that is after the 1st Kathisma — “Arise”, after the 2nd — “I will praise”, and to the theotokion — “Glory, Both now” together, as is given in the Pochaiv Octoechos of 1880, Moscow 1782 and Greek Typikon Καιφ. β /chapter 2/.
[57] In our Irmologions, three more small troparia are added to the Polyeleos, that is, one — Trinitarian with the refrain “Glory”, the second — Theotokion with the refrain “Both now”, and after “Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia”, “Glory to Thee, O God” thrice — yet another theotokion. But because this addition does not exist in Greek rubrics, nor in Slavonic ones, nor in the Typikon of the Lviv Synod, but is generally used among us, we also present it.
[58] Tserkovne Oko in chapter Mark 5.
[59] Moscow Typikon in chapter 5, page 7, and Peremyshl, page 78.
[60] Pochaiv Octoechos at the end, fol. 7 on the verso.
[61] Peremyshl Typikon, page 81. — Usually typikons give for the 6th Ode only one Kontakion-Ikos of the first service, other services, if they have any of this (for in the Menaion they never have an Ikos, nor ever a Kontakion), are transferred to the 3rd Ode before the Sessional Hymn; e.g. May 8, when it falls on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers, September 20, November 23, December 4. If there be several Sessional Hymns, then “Glory” is sung to the last one, and “Both now” to its theotokion (Menaion, December 4; Lviv Synod, in the Order of Great Matins).
[62] Moscow Typikon in chapter 5. Pochaiv Octoechos does not give the Cross-Resurrection canon, but gives: “Sunday on 4, of the Theotokos on 2, and to the saint on 6” (at the end). However, of the Theotokos must be on 4, as in the case of a Polyeleos saint on 6, when the Cross-Resurrection canon is also not taken.
[63] Moscow Typikon, chapter 5 and Μαρκ. Καιφ. 90 /Mark, chapter 90/.
[64] Lviv Synod, in the Order of the Hours.
[65] Peremyshl Typikon, page 81. — According to the ancient typikon there was to be a Sunday troparion at all hours, also “Glory” at the 1st and 6th — Goes also to the first saint, at the 3rd and 9th — to the second; Kontakia — alternating: at the 1st and 6th — to the first, at the 3rd and 9th — to the second saint (compare John the Theologian on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers). When the Kontakion is only for one saint, then it alone is taken at all [hours]; and when for neither, nor for the feast, then the Hypakoe of the tone is taken; for general Greek editions do not have Sunday Kontakia. Regarding the Hypakoe, you have the rubric in Greek Horologions at the 1st Hour, it and at the other hours must be observed.


[66] Lviv Synod in heading 5. According to the Typikon given at the end of our Apostles, and in our previous ones, as also in some Greek service books in Goar, the daily antiphons "It is good" are given, also on Sundays, with the refrain only Sunday on the 3rd antiphon, as the Italo-Greeks also observe. General Greek service books give the Typika on Sunday, and Octoechoi also on weekdays; for in them are given daily stichera on the "Beatitudes", by which is understood the presence of the Typika. With such a difference of typikons let everyone preserve the custom of his Church, and among us the Typikon is — of the Synod. In vain during the Synod some tried, saying, that to take daily antiphons, instead of the Typika, does not correspond to our rite; for daily antiphons are given not only by the aforementioned service books and apostles, but also by Greek Readers [Anagnostiki] and the Moscow Typikon in chapter 25, and St. Sophronius himself, Patriarch of Jerusalem, in the 7th century, in the explanation of the Divine Liturgy (Spicileg. Rom. tom. 4, nn. 12, 13, 14. Propag. 1840) — mentions nothing about the Typika, but only about the antiphons "It is good". About the Typika we assume that they were left for the case when there is no Liturgy. For in the beginning numerous in monasticism were of the laity, who could not serve the Holy Liturgy; and therefore, instead of the Liturgy, they had to use the Order of Typika; therefore also the Synod limits them to days in which there is no Liturgy, so that in this way the memory of them was preserved only in monasteries. It is equally good to use antiphons, as also the Typika, when it is taken fully; but when from every psalm only one verse is taken and without stichera on the "Beatitudes", as they practice, then it is better to use antiphons. Finally, the full Typika is quite long and in present times was shortened. 
[67] Our Service Book on Sundays from the second to the ninth after the Descent of the Holy Spirit.
[68] Moscow Typikon in chapter 3 and Peremyshl, page 79.
[69] Troparia and other changeable parts of the Liturgy, according to the previous typikon, were not to be taken only of the Sunday, but also of the saint, if he has anything. (e.g. Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξη. and on verso. /Mark, chapters 68 and 79/; as also our Menaion September 7, if it falls on a Sunday). In previous typikons the saint sometimes did not have a troparion, and sometimes also a Kontakion; sometimes he had either only a troparion, or only a Kontakion, sometimes also a Prokeimenon-Alleluia and Apostle and Gospel, and Communion Hymn. However, because later among us troparia and Kontakia were added to all saints, that in the sequence of the Menology, services to a saint without Polyeleos at the Liturgy are not taken; the Greeks, in the case of a saint who has an Apostle-Gospel on a Sunday began taking the Apostle only to the saint, and the Gospel — only of the Sunday. New Constantinopolitan Typikon, 1851, e.g. September 3.

Footnotes
[70] Search according to the content given at the beginning of the Psalter. The Psalter is divided into three parts, of which the first covers all weeks from the Sunday of Thomas the Apostle to Great Lent, the second — Great Lent, the third — Passion Week. In Bright Week the Psalter is not read.
[71] Since the Octoechos gives 6 stichera, and the Typikon does not determine which 3 of the 6 to take, we leave this to the judgment of the reader. However, to say how it is better, let us first recall that the daily service of the Octoechos is double, that is: on Monday — Penitential and to the Bodiless [Powers], on Tuesday — Penitential and to the Forerunner, on Wednesday and Friday — to the Cross and the Theotokos, on Thursday — to the Apostles and Nicholas, on Saturday — to all Saints and the Departed. Thus, in order not to discard either of the two services of the weekday, the Greek Octoechos (Παρακλητική /Parakletike/), printed in the "Propaganda" in 1738, gives from the three stichera of the first service only the two first stichera, and from the three stichera of the second service — only one, the first. Among us, so that the printed stichera given in the Octoechos do not remain in vain, it would be possible to sing alternating all three stichera of the first service and all three stichera of the second service, that is, one year, odd — three of the first service, and the second year, even — three of the second service, or, even better — one year two first stichera of the first service and one sticheron, the first, of the second service, and the second year — one sticheron, the third, of the first service and two last of the second service. The Greek Typikon takes nothing from the Octoechos, but only three stichera from the Menaion on 6, repeating each (Καιφ. ε /chapter 5/). The Moscow Typikon takes three first stichera of the Theotokos from the Octoechos, which do not exist in our editions, but we find them in the Greek-Venetian edition; the Moscow Octoechos of 1782 has the same stichera as ours.
[72] In the Greek Menaion after the Doxastikon to the saint his Theotokion is also added. If there is no Doxastikon, then only certain most general Theotokia of the Octoechos are indicated by initial words; it is implied that they are known, although the number of Octoechos editions makes their search inconvenient. We cite here some: 1. Θεοτόκε, συ ει ο άμπελος “O Theotokos, thou art the vine” (Venetian Octoechos, Tone 6, on the Aposticha); θεον σαρκοΰεντα εκ σου “God incarnate from thee” (Tone 6, on Saturday, Praises, Moscow edition); Δέσποινα προσδεξαι “O Sovereign Lady, receive” (Tone 8, on Saturday at Matins; Την πασαν ελπίδα “All my hope” (Tone 2, on Thursday, on the Aposticha of Matins). Sometimes the Theotokion is not indicated even by initial words, but is only named generally: θεοτοκιον ομοιον /Theotokion similar/, or only: θεοτοκιον /Theotokion/ (Menaion September 3, August 2); in this case one must select a Theotokion from the Octoechos. Four aforementioned Theotokia are given also on “Lord, I have cried”, and on the Aposticha (Menaion November 1 and 3, December 5, July 1). In the last edition of the Venetian Menaion Theotokia are given almost always fully. But among us, at the end of every volume of the Menaion are given all Theotokia that are taken on “Lord, I have cried” and on the Aposticha, and not only for every tone, but also for every day of the week, in order not to repeat the same Theotokia many times. In the Pochaiv Anthologion Theotokia are given only according to the tone, and not also according to the day; and in general services sometimes only the first words are cited, and they themselves are not given.
[73] Moscow Typikon, chapter 52, and Peremyshl, page 114.
[74] Greek Horologions give only the troparion to the saint, if there be one, if — not, then the four aforementioned troparia.
[75] Μαρκ. Καιφ. οε /Mark, chapter 75/.
[76] Moscow Typikon, chapter 52, and Peremyshl, page 115.
[77] When two kathismata should be read, and when three, we noted in the note to the Order of Daily Matins on page 41. Regarding small litanies which are read between kathismata and sessional hymns, the Lviv Synod, our Horologions and our Service Books (at the end) give them also at Small Matins, and they are used also by the Greek-Melkites (according to the testimony of their patriarch bl. m. Clement Bahous). Conversely, in the Russian Typikon, approved by their Governing Synod (Moscow edition of 1859), in the Order of Daily Matins it is written that the priest refuses them only at the Vigil and when the memory of saints having a Polyeleos and Doxology is celebrated; similarly also in the new Wallachian-Bucharest Typikon, in which in the Order of Daily Matins is given: “We take sessional hymns from the Octoechos without litanies” (untranslatable); and adds: “In monasteries, usually, between kathismata litanies are taken only on Sunday and when more special saints occur”. From the Greek Typikon no conclusion can be made, for in it small litanies are not mentioned neither at Small Matins, nor at Great, nor before the Canon, nor after the Canon. It is assumed in the Typikon that this is known to everyone. From the rubrics of the Greek Triodion, given at Matins on Meatfare Saturday, one can conclude that these litanies should be refused also at Small Matins. For it gives: η συνηιϊης στιχολογια. Εν δε ταις συναπταις πασαις της στιχολογιας και του Κανόνος, μνημονεύονται πάντες οι προαπελΰοντες Πατέρες και αδελφοί ημων /Ordinary Stichology. In all small litanies of the Stichology and of the Canon, all our fathers and brethren who have passed away before us are commemorated/. Let everyone observe the rubric and custom of his Church. Finally, in our opinion, later typikons reject litanies here only for the sake of greater shortening of the divine service; if the single difference between Small and Great Matins were the rejection or use of litanies, then this difference should have been indicated in some place of ancient liturgical books; however, this is not encountered. What the exclamation of the third litany should be is not indicated in any of the church books. Therefore we are forced to borrow it from Great Matins. At Great Matins in Slavonic books two exclamations are given which are used at the third litany, that is one — for Sunday “For blessed is” and the second — for Polyeleos feasts “For holy art Thou”. For the sake of distinguishing the Sunday day from the ordinary day, at Small Matins it is appropriate to use the second “For holy art Thou”, although it would not be bad to use also the first “For blessed is” (Οτι ευλογητοα), for in Greek books we find only this one exclamation, without distinction of day. Regarding Sessional Hymns, they are taken two or three after each stichology, depending on the edition, except the Theotokion. In Lviv editions of the Octoechos and in the Greek-Venetian one, only to the Theotokion is sung “Glory, Both now”. In the Pochaiv and Moscow ones a separate refrain is also given to every second, or even to the third sessional hymn. This refrain, corresponding to the content of the sessional hymn: on Monday and Tuesday — Penitential “O Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger”; on Wednesday and Friday — of the Cross, and on Thursday — of the Apostles; to the third sessional hymn, that is the Martyron — also the Martyron refrain: “Wondrous is God in His saints”.
[78] After the mentioned odes the Canon of the Saint of the Menaion gives his Irmos.
[79] Pochaiv Octoechos, at the end.
[80] Pochaiv Octoechos, at the end, fol. 7, on the verso.
[81] See the Menaion of the Greek-Venetian edition, when two saints; e.g. September 2.
[82] E.g. Menaion September 4. More often in the Menaion, when two saints occur, only one, the first, has a Kontakion and Ikos. Thus September 2 and 3. In the Anthologion every general service has a Kontakion and Ikos.
[83] Octoechoi Pochaiv and Moscow, at the end.
[84] E.g. Menaion October 24.
[85] Octoechoi Pochaiv and Moscow, at the end.
[86] Pochaiv Anthologion, November 12, December 4. So also the Greek Menaion, September 23: Μη ύαυμαζης περί της μεγάλης Δοξολογίας: εξεστι γαρ, ως ο το Τυπικον συγγραψαμενος λέγει, και της Οκτωηχου ψαλλομενης, και ως εν ετερω Τυπικω είδαμε ν, του Τω Κυριω ασωμεν λεγομένου, ποιησαι την μεγαλην Δοξολογιαν. Ει δ ουν βουλει, είπε και Αποστιχον της Οκτωηχου /Do not wonder about the Great Doxology; for it is permitted, as he who wrote the Typikon says, even when the Octoechos is sung, and as we saw in another Typikon, of that called Let us sing to the Lord, to perform the Great Doxology. And if you wish, say also the Aposticha of the Octoechos/.
[87] Lviv Synod in the Order of the Hours: according to the previous typikon troparion and Kontakion — only to the saint at all hours (Moscow Octoechos, fol. 358). If the saint did not have a troparion or Kontakion, then the troparia given in the Horologion in the Order of the Hours (which today we limit to Great Lent) were taken, as follows from Greek Horologions.
[88] Peremyshl Typikon, page 116. According to the previous typikon at all hours — troparion of the first saint, Glory: of the second; Kontakia — alternating, that is: at the 1st and 6th — to the first, at the 3rd and 9th — to the second saint. (Moscow Typikon, chapter 58).
[89] Our Service Book on Monday of the second week after the Descent of the Holy Spirit; so also Menaion September 26, in which it is said: “and troparia and Kontakia of temples of saints are not taken”.
[90] Peremyshl Typikon 1852 edition, page 110.
[91] The Greek Typikon gives the whole service only to the saint, and Apostle and Gospel — first of the day, and then of the saint; Προκειμενον του κατά την ημεραν Αγιου, Αλληλούια του Αγιου, Ευαγγελιον της ημέρας και του Αγιου. (Καιφ. σ) /Prokeimenon of the saint of the day, Alleluia of the saint, Gospel of the day and of the saint (chapter 6)/. So also in chapter 99, Mark. Although this rubric is given only in the Saturday service, however, it must be understood that also on other days of the week it should be so. Slavonic typikons prescribe the whole service to the day and to the saint, if he has one, and troparia — also to the temple, if it is of the Lord or of the Theotokos. The Moscow Typikon also prescribes to the temple, if the temple is of a saint (although this does not agree with the rubric of that same Typikon, given on September 26 and January 30); this same Typikon ends the Kontakia with the Kontakion for the Dead “With the saints give rest” with the refrain “Glory” and the Kontakion of the temple, if it is of the Lord or of the Theotokos, if — not, then with the usual “Protection” (“O Undisputed Intercessor”) with the refrain “Both now” (chapter 52). This custom we find also among Greek-Italians and Greek-Melkites, but it does not exist among Constantinopolitan Greeks and Athonites, with the exception of some. But, since according to the rubric of the Greek Typikon, two Apostles and two Gospels were to be taken, and according to the Slavonic rubric, also the whole service of the day and of the saint, if he has one, and, since many saints (over one hundred eighty) have an Apostle and Gospel, as follows from the content of the Apostle-Gospel, therefore, in order to shorten the duration of the divine service, followers of the Greek Rite began already many years ago to reject certain rubrics; therefore also our Ruthenians take at the Liturgy only the service of the day, and reject the saint without Polyeleos; some — conversely: take only the service to the saint, and reject the service of the day, as evidenced by the Pochaiv Service Book of 1765, which gives the Apostle and Gospel only on Sundays, and on weekdays — only in Bright Week and in the week after the Descent of the Holy Spirit, similarly as Latin Missals, which give the Apostle and Gospel of the day only in these two mentioned weeks, for Great Lent and for certain other days. This custom we find also among Greek-Italians, observed also by some of those who are called Orthodox, whom the Moscow Typikon accuses, saying: “The Ecumenical Church does not take neither on the Beatitudes, nor at Liturgies the Apostle and Gospel to the saint on every day, only the sequential, that is the pillar throughout the whole year, in sequence, as also of selected saints who have an Apostle and Gospel. And if the Apostle and Gospel of the saint is read every day, then this is from one’s own ignorance, and not according to the church typikon” (chapter 58, at the end). Exactly so also in the manuscript of the three-hundred-year-old Gospel that is among us. However, this rubric of the Ecumenical Church is not observed by the Constantinopolitan Hierarch, called Ecumenical, nor by the Churches subject to him, who (according to the testimony of hierarch Benjamin Νεαπολεος /of Neapolis/, who lived in Constantinople and on Mount Athos, who in our times accepted church union) have the custom, also in monasteries, to take the Apostle and Gospel only of the day, if the saint does not have one, if he has, then only to the saint, and in another they adhere to the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, printed in the patriarchal typography in 1851, marked with the patriarchal seal and confirmed by signatures of all patriarchs and hierarchs subject to them. In this Typikon there, where the rubric gives two Apostles and Gospels, one Apostle-Gospel is given, that is the Apostle — of the first service, and the Gospel — of the second service. Thus e.g. October 26, November 21, when they fall on a Sunday and on John the Theologian May 8, when it falls on Ascension.
[92] Title 12, chapter 1, § 1, part 3.
[93] The most important readings, without doubt, — are the Sunday and Saturday ones, since in the most ancient Gospels readings are given only for these two days of the week, so in the Ostroh one and in two Vatican ones: one Greek of the 9th century and one Slavonic Glagolitic of the 11th century.
[94] E.g. September 7 on the Sunday before the Exaltation.
[95] E.g. November 20.
[96] E.g. Menaion September 13, October 26, November 1.
[97] Today’s Greeks, who adhere to the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, since they always take only one Apostle-Gospel, take everything else only one by one, that is: one Prokeimenon, one Alleluia and one Communion Hymn.
Footnotes
[98] So gives the Peremyshl Typikon and so we take. Russian typikons imitate the Greek Typikon on Saturday, which on Saturday and on other days of the week gives all 6 stichera only to the saint; however, it would be better, either to adhere to the Greek Typikon also on other days of the week, or to take three stichera of the Octoechos also on Saturday, as on other days of the week.
[99] On Saturday the tone is taken leave of, which began on the previous Sunday and, in view of this leavetaking, it ends with the great Theotokia, that is the Sunday ones: on “Lord, I have cried”, after the Troparion at Vespers and at “God is the Lord”.
[100] So the Moscow Octoechos, fol. 356 on the verso, and so we take. Of these three Martyria stichera, given on “Lord, I have cried”, according to the rubric of the Greek Typikon, the first is discarded: καταλιμπανοντες το πρώτον (Καιφ. σ) /discarding the first (chapter 6)/; however, in tones that have two Martyria on the Aposticha, the first and second are discarded from “Lord, I have cried”. Παρακλητική /Parakletike/ Greek-Venetian, instead of two usual refrains, gives two Martyria refrains: “Wondrous is God” and “To the saints that are in the earth”.
[101] The Moscow Typikon in chapter 12 and the Moscow Octoechos 1782, at the end of Tone 8, give a Theotokion not in the tone of the saint, but of the current tone. However, this does not agree with Mark (his chapters are located in the Greek Typikon), who says: Τη Παρασκευή εσπέρας και τω Σαββατω εις το θεός Κύριος λεγομεν μετά του Τροπαρίου του Αγιου Δόξα και νυν θεοτοκιον το α εις τον αυτόν ηχον του Τροπαρίου του Αγιου. Το του Ηχου δε πρώτον θεοτοκιον λεγομεν μετά του πρώτου Καθίσματος του ψαλτηρίου, και τα μαρτυρικά εις το Δόξα και νυν, ει ουκ ετυχεν ο ήχος του Τροπαρίου του Αγιου και της Οκτωηχου ο αυτός. Ει γαρ ούτως έχει, λεγομεν το α θεοτοκιον της Οκτωηχου εις το θεός Κύριος, εις δε τα Καθίσματα του ψαλτηρίου Δόξα και νυν θεοτοκιον της ημέρας. Ωσαύτως γίνεται και εν τη κυριακη εις το θεός Κύριος, και εις τα Καθίσματα. (Καιφ. πδ) /On Friday at Vespers and on Saturday at “God is the Lord” we take with the troparion of the saint Glory, Both now: Theotokion, which is of the same tone as the troparion of the saint. The first Theotokion of the tone we take with the first kathisma of the Psalter, and the Martyria at “Glory, Both now”, if the tone of the troparion of the saint and of the Octoechos did not happen to be the same. For, if it is so, we take the first Theotokion of the Octoechos at “God is the Lord”, and at the kathismata of the Psalter Glory, Both now: Theotokion of the day. Likewise it happens also on Sunday at “God is the Lord” and at the Kathismata (chapter 84)/. Slavonic books of this typikon do not have it for Sunday, but only for Saturday.
[102] Commemoration of the day, that is of all saints, occurs after the calculation of the services of the whole week, as you will find at the end of Matins with the addition of Sts. Joachim and Anna.
[103] So give our Horologions; so also the Moscow Typikon and Moscow Octoechos; however they, like on other days of the week, take first the troparion of the temple, if it is of the Lord or of the Theotokos; of the temple of the saint they do not take, “for in the troparia of the day all saints are mentioned”. Moscow Typikon, fol. 356, on the verso, Greek Horologions take only the troparion to the saint, if there be; if — not, then the general troparia, as on other days of the week.
[104] Moscow Octoechos in the Saturday service, fol. 357, gives: “and not of the current tone, since the Sunday Theotokion is taken after the 1st sessional hymn, Both now”. Similarly also the Moscow Typikon in chapter 52, fol. 352; and Mark in chapter πδ /84/, as you have in the note 3 on page 65.
[105] Pochaiv Octoechos at the end of Tone 8 and Moscow at the end of Tone 5, page 72.
[106] It is called Martyria from the first troparion of every Ode, dedicated to the Martyrs; however, the whole canon is dedicated to all saints, for other troparia are dedicated to other ranks of saints.
[107] Slavonic typikons, in order not to discard the canon for the dead, transfer it to the Panikhida over the Kolyva, or to Compline (Pochaiv Octoechos at the end and Moscow Typikon, chapter 12). The Greek Typikon in chapter 6, instead of the Martyria canon, prescribes the canon for the dead; however, with such a decision the Martyria canon would never be taken: neither on these Saturdays, nor on Souls Saturdays, for even on these Saturdays that same Typikon does not prescribe the Martyria canon. Probably ordinary Octoechoi did not have it.
[108] Refrains to the troparia of the Octoechos canon usually are given in Tone 1, and sometimes also in Tone 8 of the Octoechos. According to the ancient typikon odes were taken, as in the Psalter and refrains from them.
[109] Pochaiv Octoechos at the end fol. 7, on the verso and 8; and Moscow, vol. 2, fol. 353, on the verso and 357; and Moscow Typikon in chapter 11. The Greek Typikon does not mention the canon of the temple of the Lord or of the Theotokos, but only of the temple of the saint, however, all the more it must be understood, if it is of the Lord or of the Theotokos; and, instead of the Martyria canon, it takes the canon for the dead (Κοαφ. σ) /chapter 6/.
[110] Pochaiv Octoechos at the end fol. 2 and Moscow, fol. 358.
[111] Pochaiv Octoechos, ibidem.
[112] Moscow Octoechos, fol. 358; otherwise in the Moscow Typikon, which prescribes to take the Theotokion of the current tone (chapter 52, fol. 355).
[113] According to the previous typikon at all hours — troparion and Kontakion only to the saint, if there be. If two saints occur, then at all hours there will be the troparion to the first saint, Glory: to the second. Kontakia — alternating: at the 1st and 6th — to the first, at the 3rd and 9th — to the second. (Moscow Octoechos at the end fol. 355, on the verso).
[114] The Moscow Typikon prescribes to take first the Apostle and Gospel to the saint, and then of the day, not as the Greek Typikon (Καιφ. σ) /chapter 6/, and not as Mark (chapter 99), who prescribe: Ευαγγελιον της ημέρας, και του Αγιου /Gospel of the day and of the saint/, and not as Tserkovne Oko, which says: “Prokeimenon, Apostle, Alleluia, Gospel and Communion Hymn to the saint of the day, which always precedes the sequential Apostle and Gospel, except for feasts of the Lord” (chapter 8; regarding the Saturday service).
[115] According to the previous typikon everything — only to the saint, if there be; Apostle and Gospel — first of the day, and then to the saint (Greek Typikon, here on page 61 in 4 Καιφαλ. σ. /chapter 6/). The whole service only of the day is taken only when the saint does not have a troparion so, as Mark says: εν αις ημεραις ου ψαλλεται θεός Κύριος (Καιφαλ. 99) /in those days, when “God is the Lord” is not sung (chapter 99)/.

Footnotes
[116] Μαρκ. Καιφ. ob /Mark, chapter 79/ and an ancient manuscript typikon, well and intelligently compiled, which we possess, prescribes: “When a saint occurs, whose memory we celebrate on 8 and who has a Polyeleos. If a saint occurs, whose memory we celebrate on 6 and who has a Polyeleos (chapter 35). Similarly also the ancient manuscript typikon of St. Onuphrius in Lviv.
[117] On 6 you have in the Pochaiv Anthologion May 10, in the Greek-Venetian Menaion January 11; in Tserkovne Oko and in the Manuscript of the Basilian Fathers May 21.
[118] Pochaiv Octoechos 1880, at the end fol. 7, on the verso; Moscow Typikon, chapter 4. Sometimes to a Polyeleos saint in the Menaion a Lytia is given without the blessing of loaves: “since, — gives the Pochaiv Service Book, — usually there is no blessing of loaves, although the Lytia is sung, but only at the Vigil”. (At the beginning of Matins); however, among us the Lytia is sung only at the Vigil.
[119] Lviv Synod. See e.g. and the Lenten Triodion, 2nd Sunday of Great Lent (Pochaiv 1784, fol. 91, on the verso). The previous typikon does not have this, since it gives a Vigil.
[120] Lviv Synod; Peremyshl Typikon, page 84.
[121] Lviv Synod and Moscow Typikon, chapter 4.
[122] Lviv Synod. So also the Moscow Typikon in chapter 4; only in it nothing is said about Megalynaria, for they — are a later invention of the Greek-Slavs; however, it gives Megalynaria in the case of a saint with Vigil, in chap. 2.
[123] Which is of the sequence of the Octoechos; for if also two Canons of the Theotokos, which are sung on Polyeleos saints, before their canon, are given in our Anthologions after the general services, equal in value with other Theotokion Octoechos canons, however, since the current Octoechos canon is already at hand, one does not need to look for another in another book.
[124] Mark, chapter 95, and Pochaiv Octoechos at the end fol. 7, on the verso.
[125] Mark, chapter 79; but the Pochaiv Octoechos gives the Sunday Canon on 4, of the Theotokos on 2 and of the saint on 6.
[126] Tserkovne Oko in chapter 2, also and the new Moscow Typikon in chapter 4 and our Peremyshl one give 4 canons: “Sunday with Irmos on 4, Cross-Resurrection on 2, of the Theotokos on 2 and to the saint on 6”. And the Moscow Typikon adds: “If two canons of the saint, then both canons on 8, and the Cross-Resurrection is discarded”. However, these typikons do not agree with the Greek Typikon, which says: Ιστεον ουν, ότι ει εορτάζεται ο Αγιος του Μηναίου, καταλιμπανεται ο Σταυροαναστασνμος Κανών της Οκτωηχου (Καιφ. β) /Therefore, one must know, that if the memory of a saint of the Menaion is celebrated, the Cross-Resurrection Canon of the Octoechos is discarded (chapter 2)/; they do not agree also with Mark, that in chapter 79, περί Αγιου έχοντος Πολυελεον /about a saint, who has a Polyeleos/ says about the canon: ο Αναστάσιμος εις δ Θεοτόκου εις δ και Αγιου εις σ ει δε εισι δυο Αγιοι, εις η /Sunday on 4, of the Theotokos on 4, to the saint on 6, and if two saints, then on 8/.
[127] Moscow Typikon, chapter 4, and Peremyshl, page 85. — Mark in chapters 78 and 79 prescribes after the 3rd Ode the Sessional Hymn of the saint, Glory, Both now: 1st Theotokion of the tone, that is Sunday, after the 6th — Kontakion of the saint. New Constantinopolitan Typikon after the 3rd Ode: Κοντακιον το αναστασιμον χύμα, είτα ψαλλεται το Κάθισμα του Αγιου, και το θεοτοκιον; μετά δε την εκτην ωδην Κοντακιον και Οίκος του εορταζομενου Αγιου /Kontakion of the resurrection spoken, then is sung the Kathisma of the saint, and the Theotokion; after the 6th Ode Kontakion and Ikos of the celebrated Saint/. Greek Typikon in chapter 2, after the 3rd Ode — Κάθισμα του Μηναίου /Kathisma of the Menaion/, after the 6th — Κοντακιον του Αγιου /Kontakion of the Saint/, after the 9th — Εξαποστιλαριον το αναστασιμον και του Αγιου ει εορτάζεται, και το θεοτοκιον /Exaposteilarion of the resurrection and of the Saint if he is celebrated, and the Theotokion/, but does not indicate, which Theotokion; however, Slavonic typikons rightly prescribe the Theotokion of the Sunday Exaposteilarion, for it corresponds to the Sunday Gospel.
[128] Moscow Typikon, chapter 3, and Peremyshl, page 85; Menaion, e.g. October 26; similarly also Constantinopolitan Typikon, e.g. December 5.
[129] Moscow Typikon, chapter 4; and Peremyshl at the 6th Hour prescribes the troparion and Kontakion of the temple, however, the Lviv Synod orders in this case to discard the temple (in the Order of Ordinary Hours).
Footnotes
[130] Menaion September 28, October 18, February 24, July 15; Moscow Typikon, chapter 15.
[131] Menaion October 9, November 14 and 16, January 27.
[132] So gives the Pochaiv Anthologion in every general service; for all Theotokia, cited there, are found on the Sunday Aposticha of the corresponding tone. Also the Moscow Typikon, chapter 15, prescribes to select Theotokia in the tone of the saint. In the Menaion the Theotokion will never be from the Sunday Aposticha, but is selected from another day of the week (January 27).
[133] Slavonic Menaion, e.g. October 18 and January 25, and new Constantinopolitan Typikon December 6 (for it does not prescribe a Vigil).
[134] Although in this case no typikon mentions this canon, however, it is used among us, and this is good. Although in this case the Octoechos is discarded, but, since the Theotokion canon does not have the character of the weekly service of the Octoechos, it can be used at the service of a Polyeleos saint, as also at Matins; for both canons, which precede the canon of the Polyeleos saint at his Matins, are taken from the Octoechos. This corresponds to the Typikon of February 24 on the Finding of the Honorable Head of the Forerunner, when it falls on Cheesefare Saturday.
[135] Lviv Synod in the Order of Small Compline. So also Slavonic Horologions; but Greek ones prescribe only the troparion of the saint.
[136] One canon you have in the Menaion on December 5. But usually there are two canons. Pochaiv Anthologion sometimes prescribes: Canon of the Theotokos on 4, sometimes with Irmos on 6; for when it says on 4, it is understood without the Irmos, which it prescribes twice (Typikon at the end of the Pochaiv Octoechos 1800 on page 8). Sometimes in the Menaion, instead of the aforementioned usual Theotokion canons, there will be a separate canon (December 6, January 30). In general services of the Anthologion only one canon to the saint is given.
[137] Pochaiv Octoechos at the end fol. 7, on the verso, and Moscow, fol. 357, on the verso.
Footnotes
[138] Moscow Typikon, chapter 3.
[139] Manuscript Typikon, chapter 31.
[140] For the Theotokion that is in the Menaion after the Doxastikon of the saint is not taken, nor in the tone of the Doxastikon.
[141] Manuscript Typikon and Moscow in the aforementioned chapters. Also and Mark: To αναστοσιμον στιχηρον του στίχου, και τα γ του Αγοιυ. (Καιφ. 78) /one Sunday sticheron and three of the Saint (chapter 78)/.
[142] Mentioned typikons only prescribe: Theotokion in the same tone; and since Sunday Theotokia of Small Vespers — are solemn, which are also called Δογματικον /Dogmatikon/, the Peremyshl Typikon selects them rightly.
[143] Moscow Typikon, chapter 3, and Manuscript, chapter 31; and Mark: Εις την Λιτην στιχηρον του Αγοιυ της Μονής, και του Αγιου στιχηρα; δόξα του Αγιου, και νυν θεοτοκιον του κατά αβ εις τον αυτόν ηχον (Καιφ. 78). At the Lytia — sticheron of the Saint of the Monastery, Glory: to the Saint, Both now: Theotokion alphabetically in the same tone (chapter 78). Stichera κατά αβ (αλφαβητον) alphabetically — these are stichera on the Aposticha of Great Vespers, for in the Greek text the initial letters of these stichera (except the first) are given alphabetically; and since in every tone of them — [there are] three, then with the 8th tone all 24 letters of the Greek alphabet end: 3 x 8 = 24. With this our Menaion, or Anthologion, e.g. October 26, agrees.
[144] Manuscript Typikon, chapter 31, and Mark Καιφ. 78 /chapter 78/.
[145] Μαρκ. Καιφ. 78 /Mark, chapter 78/. Manuscript Typikon, chapter 31, and Moscow, chapter 3.
[146] Aforementioned typikons.
[147] So usually our typikons and Russian: Moscow Typikon, chapter 3 and Menaion, e.g. October 26; but Manuscript Typikon and Mark in the aforementioned places give “The Blameless” and Hypakoe of the tone, and also Polyeleos and Sessional Hymns to the saint, Both now: first Theotokion of that same tone, according to Mark, or Theotokion in the same tone, according to the Manuscript Typikon. New Constantinopolitan Typikon does not give “The Blameless”, but only Polyeleos and only the last Sessional Hymn of the saint with its Theotokion, “The Angelic Host” and Hypakoe (e.g. December 6).
[148] Mark and our Manuscript Typikon prescribe canons on 16, that is Mark: Sunday on 6, of the Theotokos on 2 and to the saint on 8; Manuscript: Sunday on 4, of the Theotokos on 4 and to the saint on 8.
[149] Here everything is so, as with a Polyeleos saint on Sunday, where we gave the sources too.
Footnotes
[150] On the Aposticha January 25, June 24.
[151] There is no need to select a Theotokion on the Aposticha of Small Vespers of the Sunday service, as the Peremyshl Typikon prescribes, for in no case is a Theotokion on the Aposticha or on “Lord, I have cried” of Small Vespers selected from the Sunday service, but only from the daily service.
[152] Μαρκ. Καιφαλ. πη /Mark, chapter 88/. Manuscript Typikon, chapter 37.
[153] E.g. December 5 and January 25.
[154] E.g. September 26, October 26, December 5.
[155] Pochaiv Menaion June 24 and 29; and Moscow Typikon adds to this and August 29 (chapter 7).
[156] Chapter 7, at the end.
[157] Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξ•β /Mark, chapter 69/; Menaion November 20.
[158] Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξε /Mark, chapter 65/; Manuscript Typikon, chapter 22; Menaion September 9 in the Afterfeast, which falls under a common rule with the Forefeast.
[159] Menaion September 9, that is in the Afterfeast.
[160] According to the ancient typikon, on Sunday, in view of the All-Night Vigil, everything was taken on Small Vespers only of the Sunday, as usual. But on Great Vespers at the Lytia: one sticheron of the temple, and also stichera of the Forefeast from the Aposticha of Matins. At the Blessing of Loaves: Troparion “O Virgin Theotokos” twice and of the Forefeast once (Menaion September 7), and Mark: “O Virgin Theotokos” thrice without the Afterfeast (Καιφ. ξε /chapter 65/).
[161] Peremyshl Typikon prescribes Hypakoe, also Glory, Both now: of the feast. The Greek Typikon does not give anything, for the All-Night Vigil is implied, which excludes Compline. But because in Greek Horologions at the Hours the Kontakion of the feast excludes the Hypakoe, similarly as chapter 77 of Mark, then one can also here at Compline take one Kontakion of the Forefeast without Hypakoe. Similarly and at the Leavetaking of the feast the Kontakion of the feast excludes the Hypakoe (Menaion January 14).
[162] Menaion November 21; Moscow Typikon November 21 and Mark in chapter 8 prescribes so and this can be extracted from the Typikon of September 7 and August 5, when saints of these days fall in the Afterfeast on a Sunday; for they have a canon only on 4, although they are on 6, as is seen from the marks, given in the Menology at their headings.
[163] 3 E.g. September 7. According to the Greek Typikon of Mark: Από γ ωδής Κοντακιον του Αγιου, ει έχει, η το Κάθισμα του Αγιου, δόξα του Αγιου, και νυν το της Εορτής. Αφ. έκτης Κοντακιον της Εορτής. (Καιφ. ξε) /From the 3rd Ode Kontakion of the Saint, if he has, or the Kathisma of the Saint, Glory to the Saint, Both now of the Feast. After the 6th Kontakion of the Feast (chapter 65)/. In chapter 8 of Mark of Tserkovne Oko: after the 3rd — also Ikos to the saint, after the 6th — also Ikos of the feast.
[164] Μαρκ. Καιφαλ. ξε /Mark, chapter 65/ and in Tserkovne Oko, chapter 8, fol. 20: and sometimes of the Octoechos — 5 and of the feast — 3 (September 7).
[165] E.g. September 7; so also Mark: however, since according to the Greek Typikon there are no Sunday Kontakia, then at all hours only the Kontakion of the Forefeast is taken (Καιφ. οζ/chapter 77).
[166] According to the Greek Typikon, since there is no Sunday Kontakion, there will be Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the Forefeast. If also the saint has something, then is taken also to him what he has (Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξε /Mark, chapter 65/).
Footnotes
[167] Menaion January 3, 4, 5; if sometimes there will be also stichera of the Forefeast, then there will be: of the Forefeast — 3 and to the first saint — 3, and to the second saint are taken on the Aposticha, with two of his refrains, as on November 2. And then stichera of the Forefeast on the Aposticha will not be, except “Glory, Both now”; or the Praises are taken, and after the Small Doxology — the Aposticha, in its own place, as on February 1, when it falls on Meatfare Saturday and is transferred to the previous Friday.
[168] E.g. Menaion September 15 and August 9 (according to the most ancient typikons, which prescribe to celebrate the memory of the Holy Apostles on 6, without Polyeleos) and November 20, which has the sign of a saint on 6; also the Typikon, given for Thomas Sunday for the whole Pentecost.
[169] Although the service of the day, that is of the Octoechos, fully is not taken, but, instead of it, the service of the feast, however, still something from the daily is taken, namely liturgical Prokeimena, which on the Forefeast will be of the day, and in the Afterfeast — of the feast.
[170] Slavonic Menaion, e.g. November 20 and December 20.
[171] Μαρκ. Καιφ. οε /Mark, chapter 75/, having given this typikon for the Afterfeast, adds: Ωσαύτως γίνεται και εις τα Προεορτια /Likewise it happens also in the Forefeast/. Pochaiv Anthologion November 20. In the most ancient Menaia two saints in the Forefeast never have two separate troparia.
[172] Menaion, e.g. September 7; and Μάρκο Καιφ. ξσ /Mark, chapter 66/.
[173] Greek Menaion, e.g. September 7, December 21, August 13.
[174] Menaion August 7. In the Menaion sometimes the saint does not have an Ikos, then to the 3rd Ode is transferred only the Kontakion, sometimes does not have neither Ikos, nor Kontakion, and in this case nothing is transferred (Greek Menaion December 20, 21, 24. Sometimes does not have an Exaposteilarion).
[175] Menaion November 20, Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξσ /Mark, chapter 66/.
[176] Greek Menaion November 20.
[177] If there be in the Menaion; in the Anthologion always there will be in general services, But Mark gives such a Typikon: Εάν τυχωσι τα Προεορτια και Μεϋεορτα, και δυο Αγιοι έχοντες Κοντακιά δυο, λέγεται το πρώτον από γ ωδής, και το έτερον αφ έκτης, το δε Προεοπτιον, η της Εορτής, καταλιμπανεται. (Καιφ. ξη) /If the Forefeast and Afterfeast occur, and two Saints having two Kontakia: the first is said after the 3rd Ode, and the second after the 6th, and the Forefeast or the Feast is discarded (chapter 68)/.
[178] September 7 and August 5 we find the Forefeast on 8 and to the saint on 4, although he has the sign on 6. However, Mark prescribes to the saint on 6. (Καιφ. ξσ) /chapter 66/.
[179] According to the previous typikon at all hours: troparion of the Forefeast, also Glory: to the saint, and Kontakion — only of the Forefeast (Tserkovne Oko, Mark, chapters 128 and 129, and this “if some saint has a Doxology”); similarly and the Manuscript Typikon in chapter 27. In the case of two saints we do not find a typikon, but it is easy to understand, that at the 1st and 6th Hour at Glory belongs to take the troparion of the first saint, and at the 3rd and 9th — of the second; and the Kontakion at all — only of the Forefeast.
[180] According to the previous typikon: troparion of the Forefeast and to the saint, if he has, Glory: Kontakion to the saint, if he has, Both now: Kontakion of the Forefeast; everything else — only to the saint, and Apostle-Gospel also of the day, in the first place. Also to the second saint is taken, if he has something. Before the troparia of the saint Slavonic typikons prescribe to the temple of the saint (Pochaiv Triodion, fol. 11, on the verso.).
[181] So Tserkovne Oko and generally Slavonic typikons.
[182] Athenian editions add to the entrance [verse] of the feast the usual “Save us, O Son of God” with the refrain of the feast.
[183] 2 Ancient Greek Typikon of the Monastery of St. Nicholas των Κασουλων /of Casole/ (Ed. Note: a place in Puglia, southern Italy, where the Monastery of St. Nicholas was located) in the village of Otranto (Bibliotheca Barberina) prescribes “As many as have been baptized into Christ” also on the Transfiguration. And the Greek Typikon of Grottaferrata, that is of the monastery of the reverend father Nilus, near Rome, gives “As many as have been baptized into Christ” not only on the very day of the feast or in Bright Week, but also on all days of the Afterfeast until the Leavetaking of the feast; similarly also the new Constantinopolitan Typikon; however, the Greek Typikon, called of St. Sabbas, and following it also Slavonic typikons do not agree with that, for on Thomas Sunday and on Monday after the Descent of the Holy Spirit they explicitly prescribe the Trisagion. Does not agree also the Typikon, called of St. Nicholas.
Footnotes
[184] So unanimously all Slavonic typikons.
[185] Peremyshl Typikon; for the sticheron of Great Vespers is taken at Great Vespers.
[186] So all Menaia and Slavonic Anthologions, Moscow Typikon, Manuscript Typikon, chapter 17 and Greek Constantinopolitan Typikon; also Tserkovne Oko in chapter 12; however, allows to take on Glory the sticheron of the feast, and on Both now — 1st Theotokion of the current tone (Dogmatikon).
[187] So general typikons and ours, and Russian. And Tserkovne Oko, chapter 12, and the Manuscript Typikon prescribe first the Kathisma “The Blameless” with “The Angelic Host” and Hypakoe, and also Polyeleos and all Sessional Hymns of the feast once. So also Mark in the case of a saint with Vigil on a Sunday (Κοαφ. οη) /chapter 78/.
[188] Tserkovne Oko, and with it also the Manuscript Typikon, on the Entrance into the Temple of the Most Holy Theotokos prescribe the Sunday Gospel, and not of the feast, but why — we do not know. General, ours and Russian, typikons and the new Greek Constantinopolitan Typikon (page 14) Και εις την Εισοδον /and on the Entrance into the Temple of the Most Holy Theotokos/ prescribe the Gospel of the feast.
[189] Tserkovne Oko, chapter 12; Manuscript Typikon, chapter 17, and Menaion. When two feasts, Meeting and Annunciation, fall on a Sunday of Great Lent, they have a canon only on 6.
[190] Formerly, when also at this Matins Odes were taken (Μαρκ. Καιφ. ογ /Mark, chapter 73/ and chapter 140 of Tserkovne Oko) it was not possible to take refrains of the feast, but only refrains of the Ode; however, now we take Odes only in Great Lent, with the canon of the feast would be taken, as more appropriate, refrains of the feast.
[191] According to the Greek Typikon, the Kontakion at all hours — only of the feast.
[192] Although general typikons, Greek and Slavonic, do not have this, however, the Lviv Anthologion of 1643 (August 15) has it. Some take this refrain also on the antiphons, but it is not necessary to create new typikons.
[193] General Slavonic typikons give the Irmos only on Annunciation and on the Dormition of the Most Holy Theotokos; but our Service Books and the new Greek Constantinopolitan Typikon — on all feasts of the Theotokos and of the Lord, until the Leavetaking.
Footnotes
[194] By our custom.
[195] Menaion, e.g. September 15.
[196] Mark in the Greek Typikon does not prescribe a Prokeimenon, nor Alleluia, nor Communion Hymn of the feast (Κοαφ. ξα and ο /chapters 61 and 70/). When someone reads in the weeks the Apostle and Gospel only to the saint, or only for a certain intention, does not need to take it also to the feast, but only then, when he reads the Apostle-Gospel of the day.
[197] About the commemoration of the feast at the Dismissal in the Afterfeast we find nothing in Greek typikons. From the Typikon of Slavonic Triodia and of the Moscow Typikon one could conclude that the commemoration of the feast should be taken only on the very solemn day of the feast and on its Leavetaking. For it prescribes to take the Paschal Dismissal throughout the whole Bright Week, every day of which has the form of the divine service of the very day of the Resurrection, and afterwards prescribes to take it at the Liturgy of the Leavetaking of the Resurrection. However, today we observe the general custom to make the festal commemoration also on other days of the Afterfeast, which has also the rubric of the Service Book, printed in Stratyn under the Lviv Bishop Gedeon Balaban in 1604, 11 years before the Tserkovne Oko, which gives the following: “Know, that festal dismissals are taken from the day of the feast until the Leavetaking of the feast of every day” (page 517). Similarly one could take in Theotokion Afterfeasts, but the words “today” and “solemnly” must be discarded. However, in Afterfeasts of the Lord it is better not to take the commemoration of the feast on Sunday, for it does not combine well with the Sunday commemoration, which must occupy the first place. It would be, e.g. on the Afterfeast of the Nativity of Christ: “Who rose from the dead and who was born in a cavern in Bethlehem of Judea and let himself be laid in a manger for our salvation, Christ, our true God”. And on weekdays, except Sunday, the commemoration of the feast can be taken without doubt, for then the service of the feast replaces the service of the Octoechos and therefore, instead of the commemoration of the service of the day, that is of the Octoechos, it is good to take the commemoration of the service of the feast. Some on Sunday discard the Sunday commemoration and take only of the feast, but they act contrary to our Service Books, which on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers, in the middle of the feast of the Ascension before Pentecost, give the Sunday commemoration.
[198] Μαρκ. Κοαφ. ξε /Mark, chapter 65/.
[199] E.g. our Menaia September 8; Moscow Typikon September 8 and November 21; and Mark, because in the general Greek Typikon there is no Sunday Kontakion, prescribes at all [Hours] only the Kontakion of the feast.
[200] However, we think, that when the Sunday service coincides with the service of the Afterfeast, the Sunday one must prevail.
[201] According to the most general and most ancient typikons in the Afterfeast and on the Leavetaking the Trisagion should be taken, and not “As many as have been baptized into Christ” or “Before Thy Cross”, for they are taken on the very day of the feast, with the exception of “As many as have been baptized into Christ”, which is taken not only on the very day of the Resurrection, but also throughout the whole Bright Week, since throughout the whole Bright Week the divine service takes place as on the very day of the Resurrection. On other days, until the Leavetaking of the Resurrection, the Trisagion is taken. So have the general Greek and Slavonic typikons and the most ancient Typikon of the Monastery of St. Nicholas of Casole in the district of Otranto, kept in the Barberini library in Rome, written six hundred or seven hundred years ago. In it on fol. 121 and 124 is given the Typikon, which I gave. With this general and ancient typikon one Greek Typikon does not agree, written by the Reverend Father Bartholomew, a companion of the Reverend Father Nilus and co-founder of the Monastery of Grottaferrata near Rome, kept in that same monastery, which prescribes “As many as have been baptized into Christ” until the Leavetaking of the feast. E.g. December 26 gives: Και αντί του Τρισάγιου Οσοι εις Χριστον. Τούτο γαρ λεγομεν έως ου αποδιδοται η εορτή /And instead of the Trisagion As many as have been baptized into Christ. For this we say until the feast is taken leave of/. Does not agree also the new Constantinopolitan Typikon 1851, marked with the seal of the patriarch. See, e.g. on Monday of the Holy Spirit there, where Greek and Slavonic Triodia have the Trisagion, this Typikon has “As many as have been baptized into Christ”. Regarding Troparia, Mark thus: Sunday, Glory: Troparion to the saint, if he has, Both now: Kontakion of the feast (Καιφ. ξε)/chapter 65/.
[202] Moscow Typikon and Menaion November 21, September 8 and 15 and February 2. (Moscow Typikon, fol. 176, on the verso) and Mark Καιφ. ξε /chapter 65/ prescribe, according to the ancient typikon, also of the day, and to the saint, if he has; if — not, then only of the day, and to the saint — nothing. Mark, chapter 8, in Tserkovne Oko: if — not, then sequential and of the Theotokos.
Footnotes
[203] E.g. September 15 and 16 in the Menaion.
[204] This is the Typikon of the Pochaiv Octoechos (1800) and Moscow 1782, at the end, according to the prescription about the Temple of the Resurrection of Christ: “If the Forefeast or Afterfeast of feasts of the Lord or of the Theotokos joins in Saturday and on other days of the week, except Sunday, also on the Deposition of Her Robe in Blachernae and on the Deposition of the Honorable Belt the Octoechos is not taken, except the Dogmatikon on “Lord, I have cried” on Friday evening”. Does not agree with this typikon the Typikon of our and Moscow Menaion and of Tserkovne Oko, given on the Afterfeast of the Meeting in Cheesefare Saturday, where will be given not the 1st Theotokion of the tone, but the Sticheron of the feast.
[205] E.g. September 15; in Tserkovne Oko September 16 and in the Greek Menaion: Exaposteilarion to the saint once.
[206] Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξσ /Mark, chapter 66/ and Menaion September 15.
[207] Menaion September 16; Greek Menaion November 24.
[208] According to the previous typikon at all hours: troparion of the feast and Glory: to the saint, if he has; and Kontakion — only of the feast (Tserkovne Oko in chapters 128 and 129 of Mark). In the case of two saints after the troparion of the feast is taken on Glory alternating troparion to the first and second saint, and Kontakion — only of the feast.
[209] Some take daily antiphons “It is good”; others — Typika; according to the previous typikon — are taken also to the saint, if he has something.
[210] Slavonic Menaion September 8 and Mark in Tserkovne Oko, chap. 9.
[211] According to the previous typikon, when there was an All-Night Vigil, on the Lytia — stichera of the feast from the Vespers Aposticha of that day (Pochaiv Menaion September 8); and according to the Moscow Typikon — also stichera to the saint and his “Glory”; however, it orders to take the Glory Sticheron later, on the Aposticha.
[212] Pochaiv Menaion, e.g. January 7.
[213] E.g. April 23 and May 8.
[214] Menaion November 21; Mark, chapter 77.
[215] The Typikon of the Slavonic Menaion November 21, and chapter οσ /76/ of Mark of the Greek Typikon and 8 of Tserkovne Oko prescribes at all hours only the Kontakion of the feast.
[216] Slavonic Menaion November 21, Μαρκ. Καιφ. ξε /Mark, chapter 65/, in Tserkovne Oko, chapter 8.
[217] Examples of this case you have in the Menaion January 11, April 23 and 25, May 9 and 21.
[218] January 11 only 6, all — to the saint.
[219] So also on the Synaxis of the Forerunner on January 7.
[220] Our and the Greek-Venetian Menaion.
[221] Menaion April 25 and 30; May 9, 21 and 25. Sometimes we encounter the canon of the feast on 8 and of the saint on 6, as in the Greek Menaion and in the Moscow Typikon January 11. However, we think, if a Polyeleos saint is celebrated on 8, as it usually happens today, then there will be a canon to the saint on 8; and if he is celebrated only on 6, then there will be only on 6. Examples of a Polyeleos saint on 8 and on 6 we gave here on page 70.
[222] E.g. January 11, May 9 and 25.
[223] April 25, May 21.
[224] April 23, January 11.
[225] E.g. April 23 and the Typikon of the Menaion, that on the Sunday before the Resurrection; Moscow Typikon, fol. 362, on the verso.
[226] Typikon of the Menaion September 15 does not give at the end even a troparion to the saint; however, the Typikon of the Theologian on the Sunday of the Myrrh-bearing Women does not refuse him.
[227] According to the Typikon of George and the Theologian on the Sunday of the Myrrh-bearing Women.
[228] Menaion September 12; December 31, January 13.
[229] Menaion September 21.
[230] Slavonic Menaion December 31: and troparion on the Leavetaking of the Resurrection and Descent. It would be possible to add also the commemoration of the feast, if the feast is of the Theotokos, but to pronounce, that the Dormition (Nativity, Entrance into the Temple) of the feast we take leave of.
[231] Menaion January 14; and Moscow Typikon January 14.
[232] Chapter 63 of Mark in the Greek Typikon prescribes after the 3rd — Sessional Hymn, after the 6th — Kontakion-Ikos of the feast.
[233] Not taking one of those that are before “Glory”.
[234] According to the general Greek Typikon and Mark, chapter 63, at all hours — only Kontakion of the feast.
[235] According to the Greek Typikon: Glory, Both now: Kontakion of the feast.
[236] E.g. Menaion August 13.
[237] Menaion on the Leavetaking of the Nativity, Entrance and Dormition of the Most Holy Theotokos.
[238] Menaion, e.g. September 21, August 13 and 23.
[239] Menaion December 30 and January 14; and Tserkovne Oko in chapter 118 of Mark.
[240] Here on page 106 in 3.
[241] Thus is called the first day of the year, from the Latin indicere — to proclaim, for on this day tributes were announced throughout the entire Roman state. Nilles, Calend. 1 Sept.
[242] Synaxis (Συναξις), that is, a gathering of people for the solemn veneration of the miracle-working icon of the Most Holy Theotokos, which iconoclasts threw into the Gazoura or Zagoura lake at the Monastery of Miasena, not far from the city of Melitene in Armenia, during an attack; they found it undamaged after a long time (Synaxarion of the Greek Menaion on this day and Nilles 1 September).
[243] The Greek-Venetian Menaion has the entire Matins – Great.
[244] Pochaiv Menaion and Moscow Typikon.
[245] Thus the Pochaiv Menaion and Moscow Typikon; but our liturgikons end the kontakia with the troparion of the Synaxis.
[246] Thus the Pochaiv Menaion and Moscow Typikon, but Chapter 1 of Mark, which is in the Oko Tserkovne, in accordance with the general Greek typikon, Which does not have Sunday kontakia, gives only the Kontakion of the Indiction and the Saint alternating, that is on the 1st and 6th — Indiction, on the 3rd and 9th — to the Saint.
[247] According to the rule of the Menaion (8 September, at the end) the entire service to the Saint is also taken; however, with us, for a Saint without Polyeleos it is usually not taken; just as the sequential Apostle-Gospel; for if one is already taken, there is no need to take [another], except in cathedral churches, at sung Liturgies.
[248] Rule of the Menaion 8 September.
[249] Menaion 13 September.
[250] Menaion 7 September. According to the ancient rule — also the entire service to the Saint.
[251] Oko Tserkovne and Menaion 8 September.
[252] Menaion 15 September.
[253] Menaion 12 September.
[254] This renovation, in Greek Εγκαίνια /renovation/, in Latin Dedicatio, or Dedication of the temple of the Resurrection of Christ, built in Jerusalem on Golgotha under Emperor Constantine in the year 335.
[255] The Oko Tserkovne and our handwritten typikon do not give this first kontakion of the Renovation. But the Greek-Venetian Menaion gives it after the 6th ode; also we do not find the kontakion of the Cross, nor the kontakion of Cornelius in any edition, but only in our horologion and the Greek one of the Propaganda, and of the cross also in the Oko Tserkovne; the well-written typikon of the XVII century of the Lviv University library (1. N. 4), our handwritten typikon and the Greek-Venetian Menaion do not give either a troparion or a kontakion to the saint.
[256] The Oko Tserkovne (in the menologion, fol. 268), and after it the Moscow Typikon (fol. 54, on the reverse) give at the hours only the Troparion of the Renovation and Glory: to the Forefeast, kontakia to the Renovation and to the Forefeast — alternating, and to the saint — nothing. We think that this rule will be good if the saint does not have a troparion and kontakion. In those editions where a troparion and kontakion to the saint are given, there is no reason not to take them at the hours.
[257] Thus we consider; for in the case when the typikon does not give the Kontakion of the Forefeast, this one is added later.
[258] Title XI. p. 4. b.
[259] More simply, according to the ancient rule, the cross with basil is placed on a tray. Today's Greeks more often, instead of basil, place flowers under the cross.
[260] According to the Slavic typikon — also a phelonion.
[261] According to our custom — on a pillow.
[262] Menaion 14 September.
[263] In the Greek Typikon and the Slavic one of the Lviv University nothing is said about this bringing out of the precious Cross, except the Troparion "Save, O Lord"; Απέρχεται ο Ιερεύς και ο Εκκλησιαρχης συν τω Κανδηλαπτη εν τω σκευοφυλακιω μετά λαμπάδων και θυμιατών, και λαμβανουσιν το τιμιον ξυλον του Σταυρου, ψάλλοντες και το Τροπαριον Σωσον Κύριε τον λαον σου, και φερουσιν εις την Εκκλησιαν, και επιτνθεασιν αυτό επάνω της αγίας Τραπέζης, και απτει κηρος έμπροσθεν αυτό επάνω της αγίας Τραπέζης, και απτει κηρος έμπροσθεν δι όλης της νυκτός/The priest and the ecclesiarch with the lamp-lighter go to the sacristy with candles and censers and take the precious wood of the Cross, singing the troparion "Save, O Lord, Thy people", carry it to the church and place it on the holy table, and a candle is lit before it for the whole night/. (14 September). The beginning is usual and other preparatory prayers, that is Trisagion with "Our Father", as later Slavic typikons give, longer than this entire order, for it consists only of one Troparion of the Cross, and with the Slavic addition, also of a Kontakion.
[264] Ancient Greek typikons mention nothing about a deacon, neither at the bringing out, nor at the exaltation, nor at the laying of the precious Cross, but only about one priest. The Greek typikon, similarly to the Slavic ones, prescribes for the priest to vest in all priestly vestments: αλασσει ο Ιερεύς πασαν την ιερατικην στολην /the priest vests in all priestly vestments/. The Greek Triodion (Sunday of the Veneration of the Cross) and the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, similarly to Slavic typikons, prescribes for the priest to enter with the cross from the sanctuary to the temple through the northern doors: εκ του αριστερού Βήματος /from the left side of the sanctuary/. Greek typikons, with the exception of the new Constantinopolitan, and the Slavic of the Lviv University, prescribe for the priest, having exited from the sanctuary to the temple, to head to the entrance doors that lead from the temple to the narthex, which are sometimes called royal, and there await the end of the Doxology and from there exclaim "Wisdom, attend", and then head to the tetrapod, which is before the iconostasis. Although these doors are called royal, βασιλικαι /royal/, one must understand that they were called so in the past. Today we call royal the middle doors of the iconostasis, which according to ancient custom are called holy: αγιαι ΰυραι /holy doors/ (chapter 96, Greek Typikon).
[265] According to the Slavic typikon or, speaking more precisely, according to the Pochaiv Menaion, according to the Moscow Typikon and according to the Oko Tserkovne, the deacon sings the whole litany, and the priest sings nothing. And the censer, which with us the priest holds with the cross, it would be better for the deacon to hold and cense, as the new Constantinopolitan Typikon and the Oko Tserkovne prescribe on 14 September.
[266] From the aforesaid we see that with us, according to the Typikon of the Lviv University, the priest turns first to the east, then to the north, after that to the west, to the south and again to the east. According to general Slavic typikons: to the east, to the west, to the south, to the north and again to the east. According to the Greek Typikon: to the east, to the south, to the west, to the north and again to the east. The new Constantinopolitan Typikon prescribes as with us.
[267] The rule of the Triodion of the Sunday of the Veneration of the Cross prescribes for the priest before the veneration to open the reliquary of the cross: και ανοιξας την ύηκην /and, having opened the repository/, and in the Typikon of the Lviv University: "And after the opening of the reliquary of the cross". From this it follows that they had particles of the precious Cross in monasteries. The Greek Typikon and two handwritten Slavic ones that you have, do not prescribe for the priest to sing separately "Before Thy Cross", but for the choirs; nor to bow to the precious Cross to the ground; for only the Oko Tserkovne prescribes this on 14 September.
[268] The Greek Typikon prescribes before the kissing of the Cross three prostrations, and after the kissing — one; and Slavic ones — before the kissing — two, and after the kissing — one; however, today we make only one before and one after the kissing. Also the Greek Typikon, having discarded both last litanies, immediately after the veneration gives the dismissal: Ψαλλομενης δε της μεγάλης δοξολογίας, αλασσει ο Ιερεύς πασαν την ιερατικην στολην, και εισέρχεται μετά του θυμιατού, προηγουμένων των λαμπάδων, εν τη αγία Τρεπεζη, και Ουμιων τον αγιον σταυρόν σταυροειδως, αίρει αυτόν μετά δίσκου επί καιφαλης, και προπορευόμενων δυο λαμπάδων, φέρει αυτόν μέχρι των βασιλικών πυλών του ναού, κακεισαι ισταται. Και πληρουμενης της δοξολογίας και του τρισάγιου, λέγει ο Ιερεύς μεγαλόφωνος: Σοφια ορθοί. Και αρχόμενα του τροπαρίου Σωσον Κύριε, και ούτως εισοδευει μετά του αγίου σταυρού, και ούτως ευτρεπισμενου τετραποδιου, τνθεται ο τίμιος σταυρός επάνω αυτού, και Ουμια ο Ιερεύς σταυροειδως. ЕІ6 ούτως βολών μετανοίας τρεις, καν ποια εστίν ήμερα, και λαβών ανά χείρας τον τιμιον σταυρόν γυμνον μετά βασιλικών κλάδων, ισταται έμπροσθεν του τετραποδιου, βλέπων κατ ανατολάς, και λέγει εις επηκοον πάντων: Ελεησον ημάς ο Θεός. Και αρχόμενα της πρώτης εκατοντάδας το Κύριε ελεησον, σφραγίζοντας του Ιερέως εν ταις εναρξεσιν μετά του αγίου σταυρού. Είτα κλίνει την καιφαλην όσον σπιύαμην από της γης, και καταμικρον ανισταται άχρι συμπληρωσεος της εκατοντάδας. Ηνικα δε φθάσει ενς το 97 Κύριε ελεησον , υψοι την φωνην ο Εκκλησιαρχης, ήγουν το Κύριε ελεησον τρις, και αισθομενος ο Ιερεύς τέλος λαμβάνειν την εκατοντάδα, σφραγίζει πάλιν τρις. Είτα στραφείς επί το νοτιον μέρος, λέγει: Ετι δεομεβα... και αρχόμενα της δευτέρας εκατοντάδας, και ποιεί ο Ιερεύς την δεύτερον υψωσιν, ως προγεγραπται. Ειύ ούτως στραφείς επί δυσμάς λέγει: Ετι δεομεθα, και αρχόμενα της τρίτης εκατοντάδας. Πληρωμένης δε αυτής, στρέφεται ο Ιερεύς επί το βορειον μέρος, και λέγει: Ετι δεομεθα... και γίνεται η τετάρτη υψωσις. Και ούτως στρέφεται ο Ιερεύς κατ ανατολάς, και λέγει: Ετι δεομεύα... και αρχομεΟα της πέμπτης εκατοντάδας. Μετά δε την πεμπτην υψωσιν ψαλλομεν το Κοντακιον Ο υψωθείς. ЕІІ9 ούτως: Τον σταυρόν σου προσκυνουμεν Δέσποτα τρεις. Ψαλλόντων δε των αδελφών, αποτι6ισιν ο Ιερεύς το τιμιον ξυλον εν τετραποδιω, και αρχόμενα προσκυνειν, ο τε Ιερεύς, και ο Προεστως, ποιουντες και μετανοίας τρεις κατενωπιον του τυμιου σταυρού, είτα ασπάζονται. Και μετά το ασπαζαστ)αι βαλλουσιν μιαν μετανοιαν; ειΰ ούτως εις τους χορούς δεξιά και αριστερά. Είτα εισέρχονται οι αδελφοί δυο δυο κατά ταξιν, και προσκυνουσι και ασπάζονται ομοίως. Ψαλλομεν δε και τα στιχηρα ιδιομελα, αχρις ουν προσκυνουσιν οι αδελφοί , εις ηχον β το Δεύτε πιστοί. Και μετά το προσκυνησαι παντός λέγει ο Ιερεύς: Σοφια, και Απολυσις /During the singing of the Great Doxology the priest vests in all priestly vestments and proceeds with the censer, preceded by candle-bearers, to the holy table. Having censed the holy cross crosswise, he takes it with the diskos on his head and, preceded by two candle-bearers, carries it to the royal doors of the temple, remaining there. At the end of the Doxology and Trisagion, the priest loudly exclaims: "Wisdom, attend!" and we begin the troparion "Save, O Lord". The priest enters with the holy cross and places the precious cross on the prepared tetrapod, having censed it crosswise. Then, having bowed three times, whatever day it may be, he takes into his hands the precious cross, wrapped with basil branches, stands before the tetrapod, looking to the east, and says so that all can hear: "Have mercy on us, O God". And we begin "Lord, have mercy" of the first hundred, and the priest at the beginning blesses with the holy cross. After this he bows his head to, approximately, a quarter of a meter from the ground and gradually rises until the end of the hundred. When "Lord, have mercy" is sung for the 97th time, the ecclesiarch raises his voice. Then "Lord, have mercy" is sung three times, and the priest, noticing that the hundred is coming to an end, again signs three times with the cross. Then he, having turned to the south, says: "Again we pray" and we begin the second hundred, and the priest performs the second exaltation of the cross, as prescribed. Then, turned to the west, says: "Again we pray" and we begin the third hundred. At the end, the priest turns to the north and says: "Again we pray" and the fourth exaltation takes place. Then the priest turns to the east and says: "Again we pray" and we begin the fifth hundred. After the fifth exaltation we sing the Kontakion "Thou Who wast lifted up" ("Voznesyisya"). Then "Before Thy Cross" is sung three times. While the brethren sing, the priest places the precious cross on the tetrapod and we begin to venerate. The priest and the superior, having bowed three times before the precious cross, kiss it. After kissing they bow once. Also those in the choirs on the right and left. Then the brethren approach two by two, according to rank, bowing, simultaneously and kiss. We sing the stichera idiomesa, while the brethren venerate, in Tone 2 "Come, ye faithful". And when all have finished venerating, the priest exclaims: "Wisdom!" and the dismissal follows/ (14 September).
[269] Thus our menaia and Moscow Typikon (15 September). And when the typikons say nothing about the sequential Apostle and Gospel, then, however, they can be taken in the second place, as on the Apodosis of the feast 21 September, when it falls on a Sunday, and when — not, then even on the Apodosis of the Exaltation not to take the sequential ones, so that there would be a certain coordination of rules.
[270] Menaion 15 September.
[271] Eparchial News. 4 September 1898, part XVI, p. 149.
[272] Thus our Pochaiv Menaion, Oko Tserkovne and Moscow Typikon. But our liturgikons, horologia and the Greek-Venetian Menaion of 1755 prescribe to take the Service of the Holy Fathers on the Sunday following 11 October; one must understand, that when 11 October falls on a weekday; similarly in the latest Greek-Venetian Menaion (1884) and in the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, where it is prescribed to take on the very day of 11 October, if Sunday, if — not, then on the following Sunday. What shall we say to this? We consider that all these rules are good, however, it is not good when liturgical books of one and the same church province give uncoordinated rules. For when we accept the rule of our Menaion, then let it be placed also in the liturgikons And in the horologia, for when we accept the rule of the latter, then let It be also in the Menaion. And if we adhere to the rule of the Menaion, then it is necessary to present it already on 8 October, so that, reading, one can notice about the Following Sunday. This must be understood also about the Service of the Holy Fathers of the First Six Councils on 16 July, which the menaia both ours and Greek, Prescribe to transfer back, to 13 July, if it falls on Wednesday; the Greek menaia present this not in accordance with their rule on 11 October, when they prescribe to transfer this service from 16 July back, they have to transfer it back also from 11 October. It seems to us, And it would be simpler not to transfer these services back, but to take on the very [days of] 11 October and 16 July, when they fall on Sunday, if — not, on the following Sunday.
[273] According to the rule of our Menaion, Moscow Typikon and Oko Tserkovne, first everything — to the Earthquake, and then — to the Saint. In the Greek-Venetian Menaion of 1755 Prokeimenon, Apostle, Alleluia, Gospel and Communion Hymn — only to the Saint, and in the latest, of 1884, first — to the Saint, and afterwards — to the Earthquake. In the new Constantinopolitan — Troparia of the Earthquake, and everything else — only to the Saint. According to the general Slavic typikon, which is adhered to only in cathedral churches, before the Apostle-Gospel of the Saint, the Apostle-Gospel also of the day is taken.
[274] Thus the typikons both Greek and Slavic, but since the latter are taken from the Greek ones, which generally do not have Sunday kontakia, and Slavic ones do, we think that Slavs should take also the Sunday Kontakion alternating with the others, that is on the 1st — Resurrectional; on the 3rd — of the Earthquake; on the 6th — to the Saint; on the 9th — again Resurrectional.
[275] According to the rule of our Menaion, Moscow Typikon and Oko Tserkovne —/ Resurrectional Troparion, of the Earthquake and of the Saint. Resurrectional Kontakion, Glory: to the Saint, Both now: of the Earthquake. Everything else — to the Earthquake, and afterwards — to the Saint; Apostle-Gospel — sequential, under the Prokeimenon (zaspiv). The Greek Menaion of 1755 gives nothing of the Earthquake.
[276] It would be better to transfer it to 12 November, so that with the change of the calendar there would be no confusion in new editions of church books. For already this year, 1900, the day 31 October corresponds not to 12, but to 13 November.
[277] Some consider, according to the edition of the Peremyshl Typikon of 1870, p. 271, that neither on St. Michael, nor on St. Prophet Elias, should "Blessed is the man" be sung and, that then not a single kathisma is taken, for this kathisma, as the publisher writes about it, is found only in the Pochaiv Anthologion, and in the most ancient menaia and Anthologia they are not mentioned; the reason for this is considered to be that "Elias did not die, and St. Michael, as bodiless, is not subject to death". However, this is not enough. For regarding the rule, not only the Pochaiv Anthologion (Trefologion) of 1777 and the Pochaiv Menaion of the same year, but also the Lviv Anthologion (Trefologion) of 1643 and the Great Typikon, under the title Oko Tserkovne, printed in Moscow in 1615, that is more than a century and a half before the Pochaiv Anthologion, and the manuscript Anthologion of 1736, which we have, and the Typikon of the All-Russian Church, printed in Moscow in 1859, by the decision of its Governing Synod, give also on these two feasts the kathisma "Blessed is the man". Although some rules, like the Moscow Menaion of 1782, the Greek-Venetian of 1884 do not give "Blessed is the man", it does not follow from this that no kathisma is needed, for even on Saints without Polyeleos in the Menaion a kathisma is not given, but the sequential one is meant; so here one can understand the sequential one, which three ancient handwritten Slavic typikons give: one — of the Lviv University, the second — of St. Onuphrius in Lviv, and the third — of the library of the Chapter of St. George; also Oko Tserkovne (which gives two rules: one with "Blessed is the man", and the second with the sequential kathisma). The reason that these rules give for these two feasts a sequential kathisma, may lie in the fact that their service initially had neither All-Night Vigil nor Polyeleos, but gradually, with time, grew into All-Night Vigil. About St. Elias it is written in the Pochaiv Menaion: "Let it be known that in printed Greek menaia, in handwritten typikons, and also in Slavic handwritten and printed typikons, the service of the Prophet Elias is given on 6, with Octoechos". And regarding St. Michael, the above-mentioned Slavic typikons give him a service only of the Polyeleos type, but incomplete, for they partially combine his service with the service of the Octoechos, as for a Saint without Polyeleos.
[278] According to the known general explanation of the Sacred Congregation of Indulgences, in the usual expression: Pater et Ave, the number e.g. 7 or 5, standing only before Pater, refers also to Ave. See e.g. Decrees of the Sacred Congregation of Indulgences of 22 March 1847, about the pious order of St. Joseph the Betrothed.
[279] We find the Service of St. Catherine as having Polyeleos only in our Pochaiv Menaion and in the new Greek-Venetian one; but in others — without Polyeleos. In later Greek typikons we find it given on 25 November with the Apodosis of the Feast of the Entry into the Temple of the Most Holy Theotokos, and in earlier ones — on the 24th, as it is today among Greek-Slavs. Thus the Greek-Venetian Menaion of 1615 gives: Σημειωσαι ουν, ότι ευρομεν εν τισι Τυπικοις των νεωτέρων, ότι εν τιοα των πόλεων ψαλλεται η ακολουθία της αγίας μάρτυρος Αικατερίνης εν τη κε του μηνός, εν η και αποδιδοται η εορτή. Εν ετεροις δε Τυπικοις παλαιοτεροις ευρομεν αυτήν εορτάζεσαι εν τη κδ του αυτού μηνός: εν δε τη κε ψαλλομεν την ακολουθίαν του εν αγιοις Κλημεντος Παπα Ρώμης, και Πέτρου Αλεξανδρείας, εν η και αποδιδοται η εορτή των Εισοδιων /Note, therefore, that we found in some newer typikons, that in some places the service of the holy martyr Catherine is sung on the 25th day of this month, on which the feast is also given up. In other older typikons we found that her memory is celebrated on the 24th of this month, and on the 25th we sing the service of Saints Clement Pope of Rome and Peter of Alexandria, and on this day also the feast of the Entry is given up/. This transfer from the 24th to the 25th day, in the opinion of the Greeks, as explained by the new Greek-Venetian Menaion (24 November, p. 158), was done at the wish of the monks of Mount Sinai, so that it would not coincide with the Apodosis of the feast and, so that in this way the memory of the saint would be honored more solemnly. For we know that the body of the holy great martyr was transferred by angelic power to Mount Sinai and buried there.
[280] In the typikon there is nothing about the hours, so we give it ourselves, taking the kontakia alternatingly, following the model of the rule of 1 September, when it falls on a Sunday.
[281] However, regarding the troparia, if there is only one troparion for both, then there will be the troparion according to the rule of one saint, and if there is a separate one for each, then there will be according to the rule of two saints.
[282] The ancient handwritten Menaion that we have gives the stichera of the Praises only to Peter; and the handwritten typikon — stichera of the Praises to Peter, and afterwards — the Aposticha of the feast.
[283] The Moscow Typikon prescribes to take the refrains of the odes; but since we limit the odes now to Great Lent, we take here the refrain according to the title and name of the saint, with the addition "Pray to God for us". Also the Oko gives: "and to the saints we sing the refrain by name".
[284] Where there is only one troparion for both, there will be their troparion, also Glory, Both now: of the feast.
[285] According to the ancient rule the troparion of the saints is taken with Glory, also on the 1st and 6th hours; but with us today — only the one of the day.
[286] 4 Oko Tserkovne and Moscow Typikon.
[287] According to the Moscow Typikon — troparion and kontakion also to the saint. According to our handwritten typikon — Resurrectional troparion and of the feast; Glory, Both now: kontakion of the feast.
[288] Without Polyeleos and with Octoechos, as it is in previous typikons, or with All-Night Vigil, as it is in our Pochaiv Menaion and in the handwritten Trefologion of 1736, which you have.
[289] Pochaiv Trefologion and Moscow Typikon 11 December.
[290] Our Liturgikon, in the rule before the 32nd Sunday, also the Greeks, directly before the Triodion take the Sunday about Zacchaeus, however, only in four cases, that is if between the Sunday after the Enlightenment and the Triodion there is either one Sunday, or two, or three, or four; and if there is one Sunday, then on this Sunday they take with the Slavs the 32nd Sunday (with the Greeks — 15 of Luke) about Zacchaeus; if there are two Sundays, then they take first the 29th (with the Greeks — 12 of Luke) about the ten lepers, and also the 32nd about Zacchaeus; if there are three Sundays, they take 29, 32 and 17 of Matthew, which is about the Canaanite woman; if four, then they take 29, 30 and 31 about the blind man and 17 of Matthew. (Thus have the Ευαγγελισταρια /Evangelistarion/ of the Greeks; thus also Leo Allatius in Assemani, Calend. Univ. Eccl. Tom. VI. Pag. 516.
[291] Our Liturgikon in the above-mentioned place.
[292] Rule before the 29th Sunday.
[293] Thus both our liturgikons, Pochaiv ones and others, that are reprinted from them, give six cases of Sundays between Theophany and the Triodion, according to the number of the six columns of boundary keys, beginning from the last to the first column, from the 29th sequential Sunday to the 32nd (Peremyshl edition, p. 226, 231, 236, 241).
[294] The Pochaiv Liturgikon and those from it, in the rule on 7 January; also the Moscow Typikon on 7 January prescribes to discard the superfluous ones.
[295] In the Typikon of the Lviv University: "At the wish of the superior we sing "Blessed is the man" and Polyeleos".
[296] Thus Oko Tserkovne in chapter 114 of Mark; but our and Russian typikons give also the Resurrectional Kontakion; however, if at the Liturgy the Resurrectional Kontakion is not prescribed, then why is it prescribed here?
**
[297] According to the ancient rule the service is taken also to the saint, if he has one, and the Apostle and Gospel — first to the Saturday before the Nativity of Christ, sequential, according to the Slavic typikon are taken under the Prokeimenon (zaspiv) of the Saturday before the Nativity of Christ (Menaion 18 December and Moscow Typikon).
[298] Thus the Pochaiv Trefologion on the Sunday of the Forefathers, fol. 200, on the reverse, and on the Sunday of the Fathers, fol. 215; also the Moscow Typikon, fol. 119 and 129. In Greek typikons and our Slavic handwritten one we do not find the Sessional hymn of the Fathers.
[299] Sequential ones, according to the rule of the Menaion, are not taken; and according to the Moscow Typikon, also on the Forefathers.
[300] The Typikon is silent here; but we borrow it from 24 December, when it falls on a Sunday.
[301] Thus the Pochaiv Menaion and Moscow Typikon. Regarding the troparia, our liturgikons correctly prescribe the Troparion of the Forefeast in the second place, for so they are taken on the Sunday of the Fathers, which is before the Descent of the Holy Spirit; however, there is no need to adhere to this, for the Troparion of the Fathers can be considered not of the Lord. Regarding the kontakia, our horologia do not have the Kontakion of the Fathers and give a separate Kontakion to the Forefeast, in which the Holy Fathers are mentioned.
[302] The table, which is at the end of new liturgikons, also erroneously gives the Apostle-Gospel of the Eve, not taking into account the Liturgy of the Eve on Sunday, which is dedicated to the Holy Fathers, and therefore it is not good to discard their Apostle-Gospel.
[303] Menaion 20 and 31 December, but in any case not on the Apodosis of Theophany.
[304] Pochaiv Menaion 22 December.
[305] Menaion 20 December.
[306] The Hymns "Let us sing to the Lord", which are at the end of the Psalter, the rule of the Menaion on 20 December prescribes not to take from 20 December to 14 January; however, today we do not take them not only in this interval, but generally throughout the whole year, with the exception of Great Lent.
[307] For the Greek typikon is silent, and the Slavic ones — clearly prescribe: "There is no Liturgy on this day" (Menaion 25 December).
[308] Lviv Synod, Title IV, § 1, part 2; and Title VI, chapter VI, part 4.
[309] 2 In the patriarchal Constantinopolitan church all hours are read together, περί α. ωραν της ημέρας/around the 1st hour of the day/, but without the Typika (Typikon, 1884). According to the rule of the Greek Typikon the First Hour is combined with Matins, and the others, on the Eve of the Nativity of Christ, are sung περί ωραν ζ /around the 7th hour/, on the Eve of Theophany περί ωραν εκτην /around the 6th hour/; when from the Eve they are transferred back, to the previous Friday, then they are sung γεννομενης εννατης /at the beginning of the ninth hour/. In various Russian monasteries, mentioned by the Oko Tserkovne, the first two Hours are sung "at the second hour of the day", and the other two with "The Typika" at the fifth hour of the day. Thus also Lviv typikons, but Hours I and III — at the first hour of the day; according to the rule of our Menaion and Moscow Typikon, all Hours are combined with "The Typika", and begin at the beginning of the second hour.
[310] Title IV, Chapter II. I, part 15.
[311] Typikons of some Russian monasteries, given by the Oko Tserkovne, prescribe for the deacon at each Hour to sing three litanies, that is "In peace let us pray to the Lord" at the end of the tripalm, the Small Litany before the Prokeimenon and "Let us complete" after the singing of the Gospel. This is not enough for Greek length and with unnecessary additions the Greeks distort the form of the Hours, handed down to us from the beginnings; also ancient Lviv typikons add litanies.
[312] According to Slavic typikons the priest and deacons must stand before the analogion throughout the entire service: the priest — vested in a phelonion, and the deacon — in a sticharion.
[313] In general Slavic typikons "O come, let us worship" with the preceding "Lord, have mercy" (12) and "Glory, Both now" is not mentioned, but is meant; for in the Greek ones they are unequivocally given, as also in some Slavic ones.
[314] In Slavic typikons these stichera are called troparia, and in Greek — idiomesa Ιδιομελα /idiomela (idiomesa)/.
[315] Thus has our Pochaiv Menaion. According to the Lviv Anthologion of 1643 and according to the handwritten festal Menaion of 1736 this stichera is sung once by the canonarch, with the refrain "Glory", and also "sweetly with humility both choirs, the first — one line and the left — the same", after that, at the end — Both now: the whole stichera once. The Greek-Venetian Menaion, similarly, as in ours, however, gives "Glory" for reading by the canonarch. Other typikons give also the third stichera, only twice; however, the new Constantinopolitan Typikon and the Greek-Venetian Menaion give before it the refrain "Glory, Both now", and also the stichera, which the canonarch reads ευλαβως και μεγαλοφωνως (Μηνεα: μετά μέλους) /piously and in a loud voice (Menaion: with melody)/, and at the end — the second time the same stichera, both choirs together. Russian typikons prescribe to take this stichera once without a refrain, which the canonarch or deacon reads, adding the Many Years to the Emperor, in Constantinople: λέγει το εγκωμιον του Πατριάρχου/reads the encomium of the patriarch/. The verse "We worship Thy Nativity" is sung three times, according to the typikons of distant Russian monasteries, sung each time higher, and the highest — "Show us also Thy divine Theophany", as is written in the Oko Tserkovne.
[316] In Greek typikons nothing is said about the vestments of the sacred ministers, nor about the censing. Our Menaion and the Moscow Typikon give censing at the beginning of each Hour, only at the 9th Hour they give censing before the Prokeimenon.
[317] The ancient Lviv Horologion gives the dismissal of the feast, however, since in all other cases dismissals of feasts begin with Vespers of the feast, rightly the Oko Tserkovne and Pochaiv Menaion give "dismissal of the day", with commemoration, as it seems to us, also of the saint who falls on this day.
[318] According to our most general and Russian typikons, Vespers with the Service of Basil on the Eve of the Nativity of Christ begins at the seventh hour of the day (At one in the afternoon), and on the Eve of Theophany — at the fifth hour of the day (at eleven before noon, according to the present calculation); but according to other most ancient typikons in both cases: περί ωραν δεκατην της ημέρας/around the tenth hour of the day/ (at four in the afternoon). All-Night Vigil according to the general Slavic [typikon], among which also Oko Tserkovne — at the tenth hour of the night (that is in the morning); according to others, the most ancient, on the Eve of the Nativity: περί ωραν πρωτην της νυκτός /around the first hour of the night/, and Theophany: περί ωραν δεύτερον της νυκτός /around the second hour of the night/. In the Constantinopolitan Patriarchate Vespers begins immediately after the ninth Royal Hour.
[319] According to the Slavic typikon and according to the Greek Typikon the priest serves the Proskomedia when "Lord, I have cried" begins.
[320] At the Service with Vespers the Greek-Venetian Menaion of 1755 and the new Constantinopolitan Typikon after "Blessed is the Kingdom" has "Blessed is our God" and before "O come, let us worship" — Trisagion with "Our Father". Oko Tserkovne and our and Russian menaia have everything as we have presented in the text.
[321] In the Greek-Venetian Menaion — five.
[322] The new Constantinopolitan Typikon of the Patriarchate prescribes only three readings, and after the first and after the second readings — separate troparia with verses, about which we have spoken.
[323] Thus Greek agnostiki and our menaia at Great Compline of the Nativity and Theophany prescribe for the deacon to exclaim before "Blessed is our God".
[324] Thus Oko Tserkovne and our and Russian typikons; but Greek typikons and the Ostromir Gospel give the Gospel according to Luke, zaspiv 5: "And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus", also our horologia; the same Gospel as at Vespers with the Service of Basil, as happens on the Eve of Theophany; and so it is better, for it relates more closely to the feast. Furthermore, if the Eve falls on a Saturday, then at the Liturgy there will be the Gospel of the Saturday before the Nativity according to Luke, zaspiv 72, also about the mustard seed.
[325] There is no custom for the deacon to read the Gospel, with the exception of the Liturgy, but the priest reads, as was noted also at the Royal Hours.
[326] Slavic typikons give the censing immediately after "Blessed is our God", which the priest performs, vested in a phelonion; but according to our custom, the censing takes place before "Blessed is our God", which the priest performs only in an epitrachelion or deacons in dalmatics, if there be [any], as the Lviv Synod has in appendix 36.
[327] The Greek Horologion, which we have, gives this verse at the end only once, which both choirs sing together; according to others — one choir once, then — both choirs together once. And they prescribe to sing only in Great Lent, in tone 8, and outside the Forty Days — to read fast without singing: χυρα και άνευ μέλους/fast and without singing/.
[328] To sing only the end of the troparion after each subsequent verse; we find also in the Troparion, which is sung with verses between the readings of Vespers of the Nativity of Christ and Theophany.
[329] Lviv Synod in appendix 36.
[330] Similarly also Oko Tserkovne in chapter 29: "And from the Nativity of Christ until the day of Holy Theophany to eat cheese and eggs, and milk, and meat on Wednesday and Friday, as one day; for this lasts 11 days". And again: "In the twelve days after the Nativity of Christ we allow everything".
[331] Thus: "Christ our God, Who was born in a cavern ... through the prayers of His Most Pure Mother and of the Holy Joseph the Betrothed, whose synaxis we brightly celebrate today, of the holy glorious and all-laudable apostles, and of the holy hieromartyr Euthymius, Bishop of Sardis, whose memory we celebrate today, and of all saints etc.".
[332] Thus the Menaion; and about the troparia "Have mercy on us, O Lord" and the litany "Have mercy on us, O God" the Menaion does not mention, for they are not given in general editions of Greek horologia.
[333] About this case the typikons are silent; but because the Synaxis of the Forerunner (7 January) can fall on a Saturday after Theophany, the typikons join his Synaxis to the Saturday after Theophany, and here it should be so.
[334] The Moscow Typikon adds also the sequential (it is meant, if there is no dispensation); according to the ancient rule it would be necessary to add also to the saint, if he has something, however, for a saint without Polyeleos with us usually nothing is taken.
[335] Rule of Slavic menaia at the end of 26 December, when the Nativity of Christ falls on Sunday.
[336] In chapter 23 of Mark of the Oko Tserkovne and in the Moscow Typikon the sequential Apostle-Gospel of the Sunday — under the Prokeimenon (zaspiv); however, it is meant that there will be no dispensation.
[337] Greek menaia and typikons give a rule only for two cases of Saturdays and Sundays between the Nativity and Theophany, that is: one — for two Saturdays and two Sundays; the second — for one Saturday and one Sunday, and for these one Saturday and one Sunday they give the following rule: Ει δε τύχη εν Σαββατον και μια Κυριακή, αναγινωσκεται τω μεν Σαββατω, Σαββατω μετά την Χρίστου γεννησιν, τη δε Κυριακή, Κυριακή προ των Φοτων /If there should happen to be one Saturday and one Sunday, on the Saturday is read that which is also on the Saturday after the Nativity of Christ, and on the Sunday that which is on the Sunday before Theophany/. And this rule is enough for the case of one Saturday with one Sunday, for then this Saturday falls during December (the 31st), and the Sunday — during January (the 1st); however, it is not enough for one Saturday with two Sundays, nor for one Sunday with two Saturdays, for then this Saturday falls during January (the 1st), as in the seventh row, and the Sunday — during December (the 31st), as this is in the 3rd row; and as it is not possible, according to the Greek Typikon itself, to read the Apostle-Gospel of the Sunday after the Nativity outside the feast of the Nativity, in January, but it must be transferred back, to 26 December δια το αρχήν λαμβάνειν τον Ιαννουαριον μήνα, και την των Χρίστου Γεννών εορτην αποδιδοσΟαι /because the month of January begins and the feast of the Nativity of Christ is given up/: so it is not possible to read the Apostle-Gospel of the Sunday before Theophany, within the feast of the Nativity, or the Apostle-Gospel of the Saturday after the Nativity to read in January. Therefore there is nothing strange that the Slavs supplemented their rules with what was lacking. However, the rules of our Menaion and the Russian ones, given on 26 December, for Saturdays and Sundays between the Nativity and Theophany, likely due to the negligence of copyists, in some places gave incorrectly and must be corrected, in our opinion, thus:
The rule of the first case: "If the Nativity falls on a Sunday", then it should end thus: "as in the present section in the row it will appear, if the Circumcision and Basil fall on a Sunday" (as in the following case). The rule of the third case, "if the Nativity on Tuesday", then from the words: "And on Sunday" to the end, and should be: "And on Sunday, which is before Theophany, Prokeimenon, Apostle, Alleluia and Gospel we read on the first day of January, as will be in the row, if the Circumcision and Basil fall on a Sunday". The rule of the fifth case from the words: "And on the second day Prokeimenon, Apostle, Alleluia and Gospel we read first of the Sunday before Theophany, and then — of the Saint" and everything that is there. The rule prescribes to read in this case at Matins two Gospels: one of the Sunday, and the second — sequential, we do not know from where it has this, for besides one sequential Sunday Gospel at Matins we know not, because the Sunday before Theophany has nothing at Matins.
[338] Menaion 31 December.
[339] Also in Russia the official Church marks the beginning of the civil year, as Nikolsky writes about this in the "Manual": "On the 1st of January with us (from 1700 — 20) the beginning of the new year is celebrated".
[340] The Moscow Typikon gives the Aposticha to the Circumcision, even if there is a temple of Basil.
[341] Since ancient typikons do not give All-Night Vigil, nothing is mentioned about the troparia at the blessing of loaves; but to sing: troparion to the saint once, Glory, Both now: to the feast, as the Pochaiv Trefologion has, does not correspond to the rite, according to which troparia are taken at the All-Night Vigil. — "If there is no All-Night Vigil, at Compline — Kontakion to the Saint, Glory, Both now: of the Feast". At Midnight Office, after the 1st Trisagion — Troparion of the Feast; after the 2nd — Kontakion of the Feast; we do not say the prayer "Remember", but "Lord, have mercy" (12) and dismissal. Thus in Slavic menaia.
[342] Thus have later editions, namely ours Pochaiv and the Russian, and the most ancient Greek, namely Ευχολογιον /Euchologion/ of Benedict, and of the Slavic ones — Ostromir Gospel, Oko Tserkovne and the manuscript give the Prokeimenon only to the Saint, and the Apostle-Gospel — only to the Circumcision, for the Prokeimenon of the Feast and the Apostle-Gospel to the Saint — is a later addition of the Slavs. However, now comes the time not of adding new, but of shortening ancient prayers. The ancient typikon has this: "Let the Gospel be taken at Matins to the saint, and at the Liturgy — to the Circumcision".
[343] Prescription for 26 December, Pochaiv and Moscow menaia.
[344] Pochaiv and Moscow menaia in the prescription for 26 December.
[345] Instead of "In thee rejoiceth" our service books give the irmos of the 9th ode of the canon of the feast.
[346] From the rule of the Menaion and Oko Tserkovne, which we presented on p. 175, in the notes, one could conclude that on the Eve of Theophany there is no fast. However, from another rule of the same Menaion and Oko Tserkovne, given for the Eve of Theophany, it follows that on the Eve of Theophany there is exactly the same fast as on the Eve of the Nativity of Christ, with the exception of Saturday and Sunday, that is: with one meal and abstinence from dairy and fish, and on Saturday and on Sunday – with two meals, with the same abstinence. How this is reconciled, we do not see.
[347] 1 We sing these troparia to idiomela, for in Greek typikons they are called Ιδιομελα /idiomela/.
[348] 2 Ευχολογιον /Euchologion/ of Benedict ends this litany with the exclamation "For merciful"; and the Greek Ευχολογιον /Euchologion/ of Cardinal Julian in the Cryptoferrata monastery gives this litany in a shortened form.
[349] These are the words of the Euchologion of Benedict XIV: Ιστεον ότι η παρούσα ευχή, ήγουν το Τριας υπερουσιε αναγινωσκεται μεν παρά τισιν; εν δε τη μεγάλη Εκκλησία (Царгородська), και εν τω αγιω Ορει ου λέγεται. £υ δε ει βουλει ταυτην ειπείν etc. /One must know that the present prayer, that is "O Trinity beyond all being" is read by some, but in the Great Church (Constantinopolitan) and on the Holy Mountain it is not said. But if you wish to say it etc./.
[350] 1 We find nothing about the tri-candle either in Greek typikons, or in Slavic typikons of non-united Churches, but only in our Ukrainian ones. There exists a custom of many of our churches to use three tri-candles, one for each immersion. The typikon does not mention only one and, in this case, all three tri-candles are not immersed simultaneously, but one at each of the three exclamations of the words "Great art Thou, O Lord", about which also Kulchynsky writes: Trinae candelae accensae immerguntur singulatim in aqua (Specim. Eccl. Ruth. Pars II ad 6 Jan.) /"Lit tri-candles are immersed one by one into the water" (Specimen of the Ruthenian Church, part II, on 6 January)/. Also about the immersion of fingers and blowing on the water Greek typikons are silent, but only Russian Euchologia mention the blessing with the hand.
[351] Commemoration of the Most Holy Primate the Pope of Rome is given in the Pochaiv Trefologion of 1777. The Lviv Synod orders to commemorate thus (Title III, part 6, at the end).
[352] Oko Tserkovne and menaia, ours and Russian.
[353] In Greek typikons it is noted that the troparion "When in Jordan" is sung only once, and only the priest himself sings it (Euchologion and Menaion). According to the Oko Tserkovne the priest sings "When in Jordan" twice, and according to the priest each time the same also the singers (fol. 517, on the reverse). According to our Menaion and the Moscow Typikon, the priest sings the same with the priests three times, and at the end also the choirs. According to the Typikon of the Lviv University, the priest sings once, and afterwards — the choirs three times during the sprinkling. About the crosswise blessing of the water with the cross the Ευχολογιον /Euchologion/ does not mention, but the Greek-Venetian Menaion mentions, which gives: ευλόγων τα ύδατα σταυροειδως/blessing the water crosswise/.
[354] Greek typikons order to sprinkle the temple, and our Euchologia — also the Holy Table. Slavic menaia give the following rule about the sprinkling of monks: "And the superior, having taken holy water in a bowl and turning his face to the west, holds with his left hand the precious Cross, and with his right — basil, and sprinkles crosswise on all sides. Then the priests approach first, two by two, and kiss the precious Cross, and the superior signs them with basil with holy water crosswise on the forehead; in the same way also all the brethren. All sing the troparion many times, until all the brethren are sanctified by the sprinkling with water and kissing". Similarly also the Constantinopolitan patriarch signs with holy water the hierarchs and church dignitaries (Ορφικιουχους /officials/), as the new Constantinopolitan Typikon gives.
[355] Thus typikons ours and Russian.
[356] Typikons ours and Russian.
[357] If there be no dispensation, our Menaion prescribes to read the sequential under the Prokeimenon (zaspiv), that is in the second place together with the Sunday after Theophany, and also of the saint (according to the rule of the Afterfeast of the Nativity of the Most Holy Theotokos on the Sunday before the Exaltation).
[358] The Moscow Typikon prescribes also the Prokeimenon of the Feast in the second place; however, our Menaion does not contain it, for the Prokeimenon of the Sunday after Theophany replaces the Prokeimenon of the Feast. But the Oko Tserkovne prescribes the sequential Apostle-Gospel under the section (rozdil), it is meant that there will be no dispensation. The Menaion prescribes also to the Saint, if he has something, according to the rule given before for the Synaxis of the Forerunner here on p. 201; however, for a Saint without Polyeleos now with us nothing is taken. Our Menaion and the Moscow Typikon and another handwritten one that we have, prescribes the Communion Hymn first of the Feast, and also "Praise the Lord"; however, if on the Sunday after the Exaltation "Praise the Lord" is given first, and then — of the Feast, then here too it should be so. Similarly happens also on the Apodosis of the Transfiguration and Dormition.
[359] Our Liturgikon on the Sunday of the Publican.
[360] The Constantinopolitan Τυπικον /Typikon/ prescribes to combine the service of St. Theodosius with the service of the Sunday and of the Feast; but since in this case three Apostle-Gospels coincide, that is of the Sunday after Theophany, of the Publican and of the Saint, Slavic typikons transfer the service of Theodosius to another day. And the mentioned Τυπικον /Typikon/ prescribes to take at the Liturgy the Apostle only of the Sunday after Jordan, the Gospel — only of the Triodion, and to the Saint — nothing.
[361] Similarly also on the Publican with the Apodosis of Theophany, after the Kontakion of the Feast the Kontakion of the Triodion is taken with "Glory, Both now", here on p. 204.
[362] Oko Tserkovne leaves the decision regarding the celebration of All-Night Vigil to the superior.
[363] For the Resurrectional stichera yields to this one and, all the more, the stichera of the Saints.
[364] In the general Greek typikon there is no Resurrectional Kontakion.
[365] Neither Oko Tserkovne, nor the Greek Menaion, nor the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, nor the Slavic manuscripts that we have, give the rule of the Three Hierarchs on the weekdays of Cheesefare week; from this it follows that the general rule, given in the text of their service, is taken without doubt also on the days of Cheesefare. Also on 24 February, when it falls on the days of Cheesefare, the Greek-Venetian Menaion (1884) prescribes the entire service — only to the Saint.
[366] Thus in our and Russian menaia; but the new Greek-Venetian Menaion does not prescribe to transfer the service of the Three Hierarchs to another day, but to take it on the same Wednesday and Friday with the Liturgy of Chrysostom.
[367] Similarly also in the new Constantinopolitan Typikon the Forefeast is transferred back, to Friday; and in the new Greek-Venetian Menaion the service for the deceased is transferred to the Saturday of the Prodigal [Son].
[368] Similarly the Pochaiv Menaion, Moscow Typikon 1 February and Oko Tserkovne (in chapter 35 of Mark); but we do not know from where at the Praises, at "Glory, Both now" to take the stichera of the Forefeast, for it is not good that this one, which is at the Aposticha of Matins, be repeated at the Praises; better let that be repeated, which is at the Aposticha of Vespers.
[369] Rules of menaia ours and Russian; however, the Typikon of the Lviv University prescribes to the saint only two troparia.
[370] According to Oko Tserkovne "Blessed is the man" is sung; our handwritten typikon allows to sing either "Blessed is the man", or the sequential kathisma; the Greek Triodion prescribes the sequential kathisma, similarly also the Typikon of the Lviv University.
[371] Rules of menaia ours and Russian give an entrance, however, this does not correspond to the rule of the Triodion of Cheesefare Saturday, in which an entrance is not given, nor is it prescribed to sing "Blessed is the man". Rather one could assume an entrance if "Blessed is the man" is taken; however, even "Blessed is the man" by no means corresponds to a saint who does not have Polyeleos.
[372] Menaia ours and Russian and Oko Tserkovne (in chapter 40 of Mark) here give: reading of the feast as if one, for the Greek Menaion has: τα Αναγνώσματα /readings/, and the Slavic handwritten typikon, which is with us, also: readings of the feast.
[373] The handwritten typikon, which we have, and Oko Tserkovne in chapter 40 of Mark.
[374] 3 Thus we find in all Slavic typikons.
[375] On Cheesefare Sunday, if the Afterfeast falls, the Feast is given up, for on Monday the Fast begins.
[376] Thus in chapter 43 of Mark, Oko Tserkovne, Pochaiv Menaion and Moscow Typikon; however, if there is to be uniformity in typikons, then we think that here too the 1st Theotokion of the tone should be according to the general rule of the Afterfeast of the Lord and the Theotokos, given at the end of the Pochaiv and Moscow Octoechos under the prescription about the temple of the Resurrection of Christ; and if — not, then also in the Afterfeast of other feasts there should be a stichera of the Feast, which would be in greater conformity with ancient typikons, in which neither on the Forefeast, nor on the Afterfeast, nor on the Apodosis of the Feast is the Dogmatikon given on Friday evening, but only stichera of the Feast, regardless — whether it is Saturday or another day of the week. (Our handwritten Typikon, chapter 20 and chapter 11 of Mark in the Oko Tserkovne), although general Slavic typikons on the Fore- and Afterfeast and on the Apodosis of the Feast give the Dogmatikon. Moscow Typikon 12 September, 24 March, 14 August; Oko Tserkovne 12 September, 21 September; Pochaiv Menaion 12 September; Typikon of the Lviv University, p. 87.
[377] On Meatfare Sunday there will be no Apodosis, but it will be before that, on Meatfare Friday, for the service of the Feast with the service of the Last Judgment is not reconciled.
[378] 2 On Wednesday and Friday there will be no Apodosis of the Meeting (it is written in the Menaion); if it were to fall on Wednesday, then it is given up on Tuesday; if on Friday, then it is given up on Thursday. And if on Monday, then it is given up on Meatfare Friday, as can be seen in the 1st row of the table of Apodosis. More simply our handwritten Typikon 2 February, in chapter 17 of Mark, and Oko Tserkovne, in chapter 46 of Mark, give only one rule for each day of Cheesefare Week, with the exception of Saturday, which we will give for Cheesefare Tuesday and Thursday, on p. 229-230, only on Wednesday and Friday three great prostrations are made at the litany "Have mercy on us, O God", at the end of Vespers and Compline.
[379] Thus, e.g. on the Apodosis of the Feast of the Entry into the Temple of the Most Holy Theotokos on Sunday.
[380] Our handwritten typikon and another of the Lviv University prescribe to transfer the service of the Forerunner to another day, and to sing with the Triodion, as also on fast days of other weeks. Also Oko Tserkovne 24 February; and in chapter 61 of Mark — to transfer to Cheesefare Sunday only from Monday.
[381] Our handwritten typikon gives the second reading of the Triodion with its Prokeimenon after the three readings to the Forerunner.
[382] Only our and Russian typikons prescribe to discard the Entrance, but on Cheesefare Saturday — not; about which inconsistency there was mention in note 2 on p. 229.
[383] According to the rule of the Menaion on 24 February, when this feast falls on one of the fast days of the Forty Days, Vespers with the Presanctified should be served both on the Eve of the feast and on the very day of the feast; on the Eve — with readings, and on the feast itself — with the Apostle-Gospel of the Forerunner. However, with us now the custom is adhered to of celebrating the Service of the Presanctified only on Wednesdays and Fridays, and on the other three fast days — the Service of Chrysostom, after which, in cathedral churches, the three last Hours with the Typika are also sung, and Vespers — at 11 o'clock. And where on Monday, Tuesday and Thursday the Service of Chrysostom is not celebrated, there will be no Service of the Presanctified, then, on the Eve of the feast, there will be Vespers, according to the above-mentioned rule; and on the very day of the feast, according to the rule of the Oko Tserkovne (chapter 62 of Mark) and of the handwritten typikon, which we have (24 February), there should be the Liturgy of the Presanctified, even if it were not Wednesday, and not Friday, and on it, after "Let my prayer be set forth", it is proper to take the Prokeimenon, Alleluia and Apostle-Gospel of the Forerunner, Communion Hymn "O taste" and of the Forerunner. And if, for some reason, the Liturgy cannot be celebrated, then we think that after the readings to the Forerunner there should be the Prokeimenon and Apostle-Gospel of the Forerunner, as in the rule for the Annunciation.
[384] Menaia Pochaiv and Russian.
[385] Since the Gospel of the day of this Saturday has something about fasting, our and Russian typikons prescribe here to take the Apostle-Gospel first of the day and to Theodore under the Prokeimenon (zaspiv), and then — to the Forerunner; on Cheesefare Saturday first — to the Forerunner, and then — to the Fathers and of the day under the Prokeimenon (zaspiv). Our handwritten typikon prescribes only of the day and to the Forerunner; for according to the Greek typikon more than two Apostle-Gospels at the Liturgy is not taken, nor is one read under the Prokeimenon (zaspiv) of another.
[386] General typikons end the troparia with a Resurrectional Theotokion; however, the Oko Tserkovne (on the first Sunday of Lent) discards it and ends with the Troparion of the Image, since it is — of the Lord.
[387] General typikons end the troparia with a Resurrectional Theotokion; however, the Oko Tserkovne (on the first Sunday of Lent) discards it and ends with the Troparion of the Image, since it is — of the Lord.
[388] According to the rule of the Menaion on 24 February, when this feast falls on one of the fast days of the Forty Days, Small Vespers should be served, having read the Ninth Hour in the cell, for the Great Vespers was celebrated with the Presanctified on the Eve. However, since the custom has been established with us to celebrate on Monday, Tuesday and Thursday the Service of Chrysostom, and not the Presanctified, therefore we have prescribed Vespers for the Saint, as also for the Forefeast of the Annunciation on these days. But where there is the custom to serve the Presanctified on all days of Great Lent, as in the Monastery of St. Onuphrius in Lviv, there one should adhere to the rule of the Menaion.
[389] Thus the Moscow Typikon, although, according to the Slavic typikon, also of the temple is taken.
[390] Menaia Pochaiv and Russian.
[391] Neither in Greek books, nor in our Slavic handwritten typikon do we find different rules for this forefeast, but only one, for fast days, in the text; Oko Tserkovne adds to this one another one, shortened for the Akathist Saturday, and another — for Lazarus Saturday.
[392] The handwritten typikon and Oko Tserkovne in chapter 78 of Mark give the service of the 40 Martyrs with the service of the Akathist Saturday; similarly also the Constantinopolitan Typikon, and the new Greek-Venetian Menaion.
[393] This forefeast has the peculiarity that the service to the Saint is not given for it in the Menaion.
[394] Oko Tserkovne prescribes the Canon of the Temple Saint on 4 and of the Octoechos on 4.
[395] On Friday — after the 5th, 8th and 9th.
[396] Thus give the Greek and our Pochaiv Triodion for this Wednesday; we think that it is proper to take the Triadikon Exaposteilarion once and without "Glory, Both now", for Glory: will be the Exaposteilarion of the Cross, Both now: its Cross-Theotokion.
[397] These are the consequences of the usual Slavic length. We think, therefore, that it is better in this case to discard the stichera at the Praises, for neither in Greek, nor in other editions do we find such a rule, but only in the Russian, Pochaiv and those derived from them.
[398] The Rule of the Annunciation on Friday of the 5th week of Lent.
[399] Typikons mention only the troparia at "God is the Lord"; but we, in accordance with the rule at "God is the Lord", gave the troparia and kontakia at all services. Oko Tserkovne does not give at "God is the Lord" the troparion of the Forefeast, but only of the Akathist, from this it follows that only the troparion of the Akathist should be taken.
[400] The handwritten typikon that we have prescribes the second reading of the Triodion, after the completion of the readings of the Feast.
[401] This feast has five readings, of which two, which relate more closely to this feast: "Moses came" and "The Lord created me", are read in the morning at Vespers with the Full Liturgy, and all five are read together at Vespers when the next day will be Saturday or Sunday, on which there is no Liturgy with Vespers.
[402] Our handwritten typikon prescribes to take the second reading of the Triodion with its Prokeimenon, after the completion of the readings of the Feast.
[403] According to the rule of our and Russian menaia.
[404] Our handwritten typikon adds also 3 prostrations at the last Trisagion; and the rules of our and Russian menaia, Oko Tserkovne give 3 prostrations also at "Glory to God in the highest", after the Trisagion and at the last Trisagion, but small ones.
[405] Our handwritten typikon prescribes Resurrectional ones, as usual (Mark, 32).
[406] About the Katavasia in the odes where the three-ode canon does not come, the typikon is silent. Although according to the general rule of the Apodosis of feasts the Katavasia should be of the Feast, and after each ode, however, we think that the Katavasia of the Feast in this case does not have greater weight than in the Afterfeast, for the service of the Feast on this Apodosis has little. Finally we consider that the Katavasia in this case should be only after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th odes, namely the irmos of the last canon, that is after the 3rd, 8th and 9th — the irmos of the three-ode canon, and after the 6th — of the Cross.
[407] Oko Tserkovne prescribes to sing at Vespers of the Great Canon.
[408] Our and Russian typikons give 3 prostrations at "Blessed be the name" and at the dismissal; our handwritten — at "Now the Powers" and at "Blessed be the name"; and we discard them.
[409] In the rule about the troparion and kontakion here nothing is said; however, as happens in the case of Lazarus Saturday.
[410] Since there are 4 kathismata, that is 3 sequential ones and Polyeleos, the question arises, which litanies should be sung here; for the general rule has only three. To this, since the feast has three sessional hymns, and here only two are given, then which two of the three to sing here? Regarding the litanies, our and Russian typikons mention litanies after the 3rd kathisma, from this it follows that after the 1st and 2nd kathismata there are no litanies, which the Pochaiv Triodion also excludes after the 1st kathisma before the sessional hymn of the Triodion on 25 March; and assuming such, it is proper to take two small litanies: one — before the post-Polyeleos sessional hymn, with the exclamation "For blessed is Thy name", and the second — before the sessional hymn of the 3rd kathisma, with the exclamation "For Thou art good" or "For Thine is the dominion", at choice. But because only the Russian and Romanian typikons do not prescribe the small litany at Matins on a weekday, and with us this is not adhered to, therefore we think that here only after the 1st kathisma one need not take a litany, and after the 2nd one should take with the exclamation "For Thine is the dominion", after the 3rd — with the exclamation "For Thou art good". And of the two sessional hymns of the feast let one be taken, which is after the Polyeleos, and the second — one of the first two, at choice.
[411] Pochaiv and Russian typikons give a dismissal here, and others — none.
[412] Pochaiv Typikon of 1780 adds: and in the temple of the Annunciation — refrain and irmos of the feast.
[413] Oko Tserkovne, chapter 96 and chapter 44 of Mark handwritten.
[414] Although the typikon is silent about this. Finally, according to the Greek Triodion and others, with the exception of the Pochaiv (in which about Compline: if there be), Compline should not be.
[415] Although the typikon is silent about this.
[416] The typikon has also 3 prostrations at "Glory to God in the highest", after the Trisagion and at the last Trisagion; however, small ones.
[417] Although the Menaion is silent here, however, similar has on Friday of the 3rd week of Lent.
[418] We assume that on Friday, and not on Thursday, as it is in the Oko Tserkovne at the end of chapter 79 of Mark, for on Thursday there will be Great Compline with All-Night Vigil, without canon. It will be better in this case to discard the four-ode canon completely, for this rule — is from the numerous inventions of the Slavs.
[419] About the Katavasia in the odes where the three-ode canon does not come, the typikon is silent. Although according to the general rule of the Apodosis of feasts the Katavasia should be of the Feast, and after each ode, however, we think that the Katavasia of the Feast in this case does not have greater weight than in the Afterfeast, for the service of the Feast on this Apodosis has little. Finally we consider that the Katavasia in this case should be only after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th odes, namely the irmos of the last canon, that is after the 3rd, 8th and 9th — the irmos of the three-ode canon, and after the 6th — of the Cross.
[420] According to our and Russian typikons the four-ode canon of Matins is sung here.
[421] About the troparia here, at Compline, and afterwards, at the Liturgy, the typikons do not give anything; however, since at the Hours they give only of the Feast of the Annunciation, then here too it will be sufficient to take only of the Feast, for the order of the Akathist and of the Feast — is about the Annunciation.
[422] We took the rule from chapter 104 of Mark of the Oko Tserkovne, for our and Russian menaia do not give for this case a rule with All-Night Vigil.
[423] Oko Tserkovne in chapter 105 of Mark.
[424] Thus we assume, for the typikon is silent.
[425] Our and Russian typikons leave to the choice to sing at "Lord, I have cried" stichera either to the Feast, or to the Saint; but since this feast does not have Small Vespers, nor stichera at Small Vespers, and the Saint has, then it will be better to sing only to the Saint.
[426] Our and Russian typikons prescribe stichera of the Saint from Small Vespers; however, in the same typikons the Saint has his separate stichera at the Litya, therefore, there is no need to take them elsewhere.
[427] Pochaiv Menaion of 1863.
[428] Refrains to the troparia of the canon of the feast the typikon does not give; one could append "Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee".
[429] The Typikon about "Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ" is silent; however, if on Mid-Pentecost and on Saturdays of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th weeks of Pentecost, in the case of a Saint with Polyeleos, on all other weekdays the typikon gives "Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ", then we think that here too it should be so, as we gave also in the previous case.
[430] The Venetian Menaion gives to the Feast — 3 and to the Cross — 3.
[431] In non-cathedral churches we take all this only to the Cross.
[432] The Canon of the Forefeast is not taken here, but we sing it on the previous Tuesday.
[433] The Constantinopolitan Typikon prescribes first of the Apostle, and then — of the Fathers. On the Finding of the Precious Head of the Forerunner 25 May Slavic typikons give stichera first to the Forerunner, and afterwards — to the Fathers, however, not in accordance with the rule of Matins, Hours and Liturgy, on which they give the service first to the Fathers, and afterwards — to the Forerunner, just as for the Theologian.
[434] More correctly the Oko Tserkovne has also here, instead of the Theotokion, the Troparion of the Ascension, as at Small Vespers.
[435] Thus has the Oko Tserkovne; and our and Russian typikons, instead of the feast, give on "Both now" the Theotokion, but we do not know from where to take this Theotokion.
[436] Oko Tserkovne prescribes of the Ascension.
[437] At the 1st hour the Moscow Typikon has the Resurrectional Kontakion, but it is not given either by the Oko Tserkovne (chapter 114 of Mark), or by our Menaion.
[438] Troparion of the Ascension at Vespers and here the Kontakion to the Ascension is given by the Greek-Venetian Menaion.
[439] Thus we consider, for the typikon is silent.
[440] The Co-suffering of the Most Holy Theotokos can fall up to 20 July, in the case of the latest Pascha, which is 25 April. For from Pascha to the Co-suffering there will be 69 days, that is from Pascha to the Descent — 50, from the Descent to the Sunday of All Saints and to the following Sunday (of the Eucharist) — 14, from the second Sunday to the following Friday — 5 days. If on 25 April there will be Pascha, then the 69th day from Pascha will be 2 July. If the last boundary of Pascha shifts three days back, then the Co-suffering will move to 29 June, and if eight days back, it will move to 24 June.
[441] Similarly, as in the case of the Theologian on the Apodosis of the Resurrection.
[442] Greek books do not give Polyeleos, and also Russian typikons and menaia and the handwritten typikon, which we have; but Oko Tserkovne gives Polyeleos; Pochaiv Menaion gives also All-Night Vigil, and Pochaiv Trefologion gives All-Night Vigil at choice; however, this is in view of the great piety of the Slavs.
[443] As the new Constantinopolitan Typikon gives.
[444] How the Deposition of the Precious Robe can fall on the Co-suffering, we showed in note 1 on p. 303.
[445] See note 1 of 8 November on p. 135, about the kathisma "Blessed is the man", which some discard on the feast of this Prophet and on St. Michael.
[446] То Χειρογραφον ουδέν έτερον έχει εκ της Ακολουθίας της Αγιας Αννης, ειμή τρία Προσομοια, (διαφορά και αυτά προς τα ενταύθα) τα εις τον Εσπερινον δυο Δοξαστικά, και τον ενταύθα Κανόνα. Συναπτει δε μετά τούτων και ετεραν Ακολουύιαν των αγίων γυναικών Ολυμπιάδος και Ευπραξιας (Publisher of the Venetian Menaion 1884) /The manuscript has nothing else from the service in honor of St. Anne, except three prosomia (and they are different from those here), two Doxastika at Vespers and the Canon here. To them is added also the second service of the holy women Olympias and Eupraxia/.
[447] Titul XVI /Title XVI/.
[448] The above-mentioned Menaion and the new Constantinopolitan Typikon.
[449] Pochaiv Trefologion.
[450] This procession is explained by the Greek Menaion: Προεορτια του τίμιου και ζωοποιού σταυρού, ήτοι η εξελευσις αυτού εκ του βασιλικού παλατιού εις την πολιν / Forefeast of the Precious and Life-giving Cross, that is its true procession from the royal palace to the city/. And more clearly Nilles: Profecto hoc die processionis pretiosae ac vivificae cruces lignum sanctae cruces e palatio Imperatoris Constantinopolitano prolatum, in magnam Ecclesiam S. Sophiae translatum est, ut crastino die ibidem adoranda proponeretur, ad depellendos scilicet ingruentes per aestatem morbos, uti ex libris liturgicis notant Bollandiani in praetermissis ad 30. et 31. Julii (Calendar.) /On this day they conduct a wonderful procession and carry the wood of the life-giving holy cross from the palace of the Constantinopolitan Emperor, and bring it to the Great Church of St. Sophia, so that there on the next day it may be venerated, to drive away severe infirmities of the hot summer, as the Bollandists note from liturgical books, given on 30 and 31 July (Calendar)/.
[451] As also on 1 August on Sunday.
[452] Oko Tserkovne and our handwritten typikon before the Sessional hymn of the Saint give the Kontakion of the Cross.
[453] That is particles of the true cross, on which Christ was crucified.
[454] Although Greek typikons do not give the blessing of water on this day, however, this custom, inherent to Greek-Slavs, is taken from the Greeks, who once had the custom of performing the blessing of water at the beginning of each month and, accordingly, on 1 August, according to the testimony of Balsamon in the explanation of Canon V of the Trullan Synod: Haec statuente canone, novilunium quidem festum ante annos omnem memoriam supeantes cessavit; eius loco, Dei gratia, ut et ipse propitious reddatur, preces, as Aquae lustrales in Ecclesia a populo fideli fiunt in uniuscuiusque mensis principio (Asseman. Calend. Tom. I. Cap. XI. Pag. 156) /Establishing this canon, truly the new moon feast, which from ancient times erased all memory of it; in its place, thanks be to God, and better prayers take place, and sanctification of water in the church, which the faithful people perform at the beginning of each month (Assemani, Calend., Vol. III, Part I, Chapter XI, p. 156)/.
[455] According to the Lviv Synod; and according to the ancient — of crimson color.
[456] Thus have our and Russian typikons.
[457] More precisely, after the anaphora (Αντιδωρον /antidoron/, which was distributed after "Blessed be the name of the Lord"), as it is in our handwritten typikon, Oko Tserkovne, Pochaiv and Russian menaia.
[458] Pochaiv [Trebniks] of 1792 and 1771 and those after them.
[459] Although the Pochaiv Trebnik of 1771 does not give this.
[460] In our typikons and Oko Tserkovne, at the end.
[461] Our Trefologia give this service with Polyeleos, Oko Tserkovne — with All-Night Vigil, with the consent of the superior, and our Handwritten Typikon and the Greek Menaion give without Polyeleos.
[462] Our and Russian typikons give only the Kontakion of the Dormition; however, since on Sunday they give also of the Image, then here too it should be so, so as not to fall into contradiction.
[463] Similarly, as on 1 September on Sunday.
[464] Similarly also the feast of the Falling Asleep of John the Theologian on 26 September, if it falls on Monday or Tuesday, so as not to coincide with the Protection, we transfer to the previous Sunday, as you have here on p. 129.
[465] Thus gives also "Pastoral Theology" of Bishop Pelesh, on p. 334.
^[466] The Moscow Typikon concludes the Sunday troparia with the kondakion of the Triodion, as if it were a feast of the Lord; our service books provide the Theotokion as well, and this is better, for the kondakion of the Triodion is not festal, but penitential.
^[467] This is against the Armenians, who fast on Friday of this week in memory of the fast of the Ninevites, and on Saturday in memory of St. Sergius the General. The Greeks, hostile to the Armenians, invented a fable against them, that they fasted then for Artzibur, the dog of the Armenian bishop Sergius, devoured by wolves, whom Sergius sent before him to every city and village where he wished to go himself (Nilles Calend. Part. 2, p. 8).
^[468] According to Greek rubrics, in these Sundays neither the Polyeleos nor "By the waters of Babylon" is sung, but only "The Blameless"; for the Greek Typikon prescribes the Polyeleos on Sundays only from September 2 to the Nativity of Christ (Chapter 51).
^[469] Thus in the rubric at the end of the Sunday of the Prodigal [Son].
^[470] Both at Vespers and at Matins we take the two litanies "In peace let us pray to the Lord" and, at the end, "Have mercy on us, O God" for the dead, although the rubric of the Triodion does not prescribe this; however, it provides for a Panakhida (Parastas) after Vespers, in which these litanies would be present. Since in reality we do not serve a Panakhida today after Vespers, we say its litanies at least at Vespers and at Matins; although our Horologia (at the end) provide the litany for the dead "Have mercy on us, O God" only at the end of Matins. After the dismissal of this [service], we add also "In blessed falling asleep" just as at the Parastas. At Matins we say the small litanies in their places, that is, after the Kathisma and in the Canon, after Odes 3, 6, and 9; we say the usual ones, and not for the dead, since our Pochayiv Triodion does not prescribe litanies for the dead at that time. Tserkovne Oko and the Moscow Typikon prescribe the litany for the dead after Ode 6. The Greek Triodion prescribes commemorating the dead at the litany after the Kathisma and at all litanies of the Canon: "At all litanies of the Stichology and of the Canon, all our departed fathers and brethren are commemorated". Our Manuscript Typikon agrees with this, in which: the priest pronounces the petitions; either after the Kathisma or after the Canon he always mentions the dead. The Euchologion of Benedict XIV on the litany for the dead gives the prayer only when it begins with "Have mercy on us, O God", and never if it begins with "Again and again".
^[471] Exactly so both our Manuscript Typikon and Tserkovne Oko prescribe: "and the verses – of Vespers". The usual verses given in the Horologion for "Alleluia" after "God is the Lord" are sometimes read on Saturdays throughout the year on which a saint has a service but does not have a troparion.
^[472] "Making usually the prostrations at Vespers, and at Matins, and at the Hours." (Triodion on Cheesefare Wednesday, at Matins). Exactly so we sing also Great Compline with prostrations, as the Triodion prescribes; the Midnight Office with the usual 16 prostrations just as in Great Lent.
^[473] On Wednesday evening for Thursday the Triodion has nothing more than what will be given.
^[474] See note on p. 319.
^[475] About two saints the rubric is silent here, however, on Monday of the first week of Lent Tserkovne Oko prescribes as we give.
^[476] Since in Greek Triodia the triodion does not always have two heirmoi, but sometimes only one, the Greek Triodia give for these cases the following rubric: "In the odes where we sing the Triodion, we always omit such odes of the second Canon of the Octoechos entirely. And if the Triodion is with two heirmoi, we omit also the odes of the two Canons of the Octoechos."
^[477] The Greek Typikon Chapter 5 does not prescribe prostrations after the pre-introductory psalm, however, the Greek Triodion prescribes them on Monday of the 1st week of Great Lent. The Pochayiv Triodion prescribes inaccurately: "at Vespers we begin prostrations"; more accurately – Tserkovne Oko and the Moscow Typikon: "from the beginning of Vespers we begin prostrations". Otherwise, where the rubrics inaccurately indicate prostrations here, there they must be supplemented by the rubric of Great Lent.
^[478] These troparia, according to our Horologia and our Manuscript Typikon, are sung in Tone 1; according to the Greek Triodion (1724 Bologna) – in Tone 2; according to Russian rubrics – in Tone 4, according to the Greek Horologion of the Propaganda – in Tone 5. The Troparion "Beneath thy tender mercy" in the Greek Triodion is prescribed without singing. "Is said without prostration, and without melody" (On Cheesefare Sunday evening). The Horologion of the Propaganda prescribes singing this troparion also, and in this case adding "Glory" to "Intercede", and "Both now" – to "Beneath thy tender mercy", and with this in the new Constantinopolitan Typikon the Patriarch of Constantinople Gregory VI agrees (On Cheesefare Sunday).
^[479] The Greek Typikon prescribes only 15 (Chapter 5); our Greek Triodion – 16 (on Monday of Lent).
^[480] Regarding the place of "Lord, have mercy" (3), Glory, Both now: "More honorable", "In the name of the Lord", "Blessed" (or "O God, be merciful to us", or "Through the prayers of our holy fathers") we distinguish three distinct types of editions. Some place them before the prayer of St. Ephrem (our Horologia, Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon); some place them before the prayer "O Heavenly King" (Greek and Pochayiv Triodia, Horologion of the Propaganda and Russian rubrics; some do not present them at all (Greek Typikon Chapter 5).
^[481] We suppose that the Greeks are somewhat more correct to extend the hand first, and then cross themselves, than we — to cross ourselves first, and then extend the hand, for in the East extending the hand is a sign of respect and it is good when this sign precedes the sign of the cross.
^[482] Empress Irene in her Typikon gives prostrations of great and small type, however, not at the prayer of St. Ephrem, but at "O God, be merciful, I have sinned before Thee, O Lord, forgive me"; gives for the first and second bending of the knees, and the difference between the first and second consists in that the great is done more slowly, and the small — faster. At the beginning of the prostration she prescribes extending the hand, as does the Moscow Typikon of 1859 at the prayer of St. Ephrem (Nilles Calend. T. 1, p. LVII).
^[483] The Greek Triodion which we have, and the Moscow Typikon do not mention prostrations at the second "O come, let us worship", but Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon mention them.
^[484] These prostrations we make from the first day of Great Lent, for the rubric prescribes here only generally: "We celebrate Great Compline with prostrations"; exactly so at the Midnight Office.
^[485] So in the Moscow Typikon; somewhat obscurely prescribed in the Pochayiv Triodion and in Tserkovne Oko: "troparia of the day and temple".
^[486] "We stichologize three kathismata, bowing three times at each 'Glory' to the ground". Tserkovne Oko on the 1st Monday of Great Lent. However, the Greek rubric does not have "to the ground".
^[487] Greek Triodion.
^[488] Corrected by me (Ivan Dutka), because it was written «stichoslov'i» [stichology].
^[489] "We, however, at the completion of the Praises, that is at the Glory to God in the highest, make three prostrations" (Greek Typikon Chapter 5).
^[490] This we have supplemented from the rubric of Great Matins of Lent, for here, in the Triodion, only generally is mentioned about prostrations.
^[491] The Peremyshl Typikon prescribes also "Save, O God"; in other rubrics this is not found, although the service of these days should have a Lenten form, but not in all parts; in this way here only two kathismata are taken and in the canon — Octoechos, while in Great Lent — three kathismata and canons without Octoechos.
^[492] "In the odes where we sing the Triodion, such odes of the Octoechos, and of the Menaion are omitted".
^[493] Tserkovne Oko.
^[494] This Martyricon is a Sessional Hymn, and it is taken from the Sessional Hymns of Matins of the Octoechos, which is after the second Kathisma. If the saint has a kondakion, then this Martyricon is sung after the 1st Kathisma together with the compunctionate Sessional Hymns, that is penitential ones, before their Theotokion, with the Martyric refrain "Wondrous is God". "At the 7th Ode the Martyricon is said, if the Menaion does not have a Kondakion, but if it has, this is said together with the Sessional Hymns". (Triodion, at the end of the Octoechos, after the Sessional Hymns).
^[495] Since the rubric of this Wednesday imprecisely defines the prostrations, we have supplemented it with the general rubric of the Greek Typikon and Tserkovne Oko, when "Alleluia" is sung (Typikon, Chapter 5, and Tserkovne Oko, Chapter 15). At the second verse of the Troparion "In the morning" only Tserkovne Oko and the Moscow Typikon prescribe prostrations.
^[496] Pochayiv Triodion on Monday of the 1st week of Great Lent.
^[497] Other rubrics do not prescribe for the choirs, but only for the reader to bend the knees. "And while we answer, he (the reader) makes a prostration to the ground, likewise also at the other two verses". Thus in our Greek Triodion and Manuscript Typikon on the 1st Monday of Lent. Tserkovne Oko prescribes for the reader to make only one prostration to the ground, after the 2nd verse (1st Monday of Lent), although not in accordance with this in the 13th chapter prescribes 3 prostrations. And the Moscow Typikon prescribes bending of knees for both the choir and the reader: "When the canonarch reads the verse, at this time we bend the knees, and when the singers read, then he bends the knees" (chapter 9).
^[498] Exactly so according to the Slavonic rubric: all this is sung together.
^[499] In Oko: "prostration to the ground".
^[500] According to Slavonic rubrics, if the saint does not have a troparion, then it will be the troparion of the weekday with the Theotokion in its tone; the Greek Triodion gives the troparia "Virgin Theotokos".
^[501] Title IV, Chapter I, part 4.
^[502] See note on p. 319.
^[503] The rubrics are silent, however, one cannot take the troparia of the day, for here there will be no service of the day. According to the general Greek rubric, it should be the Troparion of the Fathers.
^[504] We do not sing the Biblical Odes, although the Triodion prescribes them. 
^[505] See the note on prostrations on p. 326.
^[506] Triodion, at the Praises.
^[507] Thus we sing also in the middle of a feast, e.g. Jan. 7 and Sept. 15.
^[508] Regarding the litany, we do not find unity in the rubrics. For some rubrics are silent about it, others prescribe it, and some exclude it. Those that are silent about it are the manuscript Vatican Typika... Those that prescribe the litany: The Greek Bologna Triodion 1724, Kyivan-Pechersk 1640, Lviv 1753 and some manuscripts. Those that exclude it: The Moscow Typikon 1859... Tserkovne Oko and the ancient manuscript Typikon... We suppose that the rubrics which do not prescribe the litany are more logical, for at all other Lenten Vespers and Matins this litany is not present...
^[509] Although the Pochayiv Triodion after the three great prostrations prescribes: "and the rest, as usual", however, in all other Greek and Slavonic rubrics we find only 3 great prostrations.
^[510] At this last Trisagion our Pochayiv Triodion and the Moscow Typikon do not prescribe prostrations, however, Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon prescribe them, and, in general, Greek rubrics...
^[511] These prostrations are prescribed by all Slavonic rubrics.
^[512] Tserkovne Oko.
^[513] So in the Moscow Typikon, according to the Greek Typikon; and Tserkovne Oko and our Pochayiv Triodion at the odes in which there is no triodion, prescribe not only the canon of the saint, but also both canons of the Octoechos...
^[514] Tserkovne Oko on Tuesday of the first week of Lent and Pochayiv Triodion on Monday of the first week of Lent.
^[515] This, almost everything, - and in the Greek Triodion...
^[516] Pochayiv Triodion.
^[517] "The appointed monk sings the Prokeimenon in Tone 6: In the morning; and while we answer, he makes a prostration to the ground, likewise also at the other two verses" (Greek Triodion on Monday of the 1st week of Lent).
^[518] The Greek Triodion prescribes singing the 3rd and 6th Hours about the 3rd hour, and the 9th Hour, Typika and Vespers - about the 9th hour. Similarly in Slavonic rubrics, however, it is permitted to sing all this also together.
^[519] Other Slavonic rubrics and the Greek Triodion which we have, do not prescribe transferring the prayer of the 9th Hour to the Typika and therefore, according to these rubrics, it should be recited at the 9th Hour...
^[520] The Pochayiv Triodion and the Greek which we have, prescribe only a prostration metanoia; the Horologion of the Propaganda: metanoia megale /great prostration/; Tserkovne Oko, our Manuscript and Moscow Typika: "Prostration to the ground". According to our editions "Remember us, O Lord" is sung not only three times, but also before that, that is once - at "Glory" and once - at "Both now", however, without a prostration.
^[521] The Pochayiv Triodion prescribes the dismissal, but other rubrics, immediately after the 16 prostrations, having omitted the Trisagion with "Our Father", the prayer of the 9th Hour and the dismissal, prescribe beginning Vespers from "O come, let us worship", which we think is better...
^[522] Tserkovne Oko of Great Lent, fol. 38. In the Greek Triodion and in our Manuscript Typikon at "It is truly meet" we do not find a prostration...
^[523] Pochayiv Triodion, fol. 39 verso. Moscow Typikon, fol. 154 verso.
^[524] The reason for transferring the psalm "O God, come to my assistance" before the beginning of the canon may be that the beginning of this psalm agrees with the beginning of the canon, for the canon begins: "Helper and protector".
^[525] This refrain is given also in the Greek Triodion.
^[526] Although the Triodion here imprecisely defines these prostrations, nevertheless, Tserkovne Oko defines them more precisely (Great Lent, fol. 41-44). In the Greek Triodion it is noted generally: "We make the usual prostrations". Other prostrations, which we give here as great, in Greek rubrics are called only metanoias, without adding megalas, and at "Light of Christ" they do not give any prostration.
^[527] Greek Triodion, Tserkovne Oko, our Manuscript Typikon and Moscow Typikon.
^[528] Of the six stichera given in the Octoechos at "Lord, I have cried", the first and three last are - Martyria, the second, generally speaking, is - Hierarchal, the third - Monastic.
^[529] We consider that it is proper to exclaim "Let us attend. Peace be to all. Wisdom, let us attend" not only before the first, but also before the second prokeimenon.
^[530] About the triple-candle is mentioned also in Tserkovne Oko... But better in Greek rubrics they mention only about a candlestick with a candle...
^[531] In the Greek Euchologion it is prescribed for the singer to sing "Let my prayer be set forth", in the Triodion - for the Domesticus, in Slavonic rubrics - for the reader, in other Greek ones of Morellius and Barberini - for the priest, which corresponds also to the new Constantinopolitan Typikon...
^[532] In Bulgaria the priest sings "Let my prayer be set forth" at each of the four corners of the holy table.
^[533] In Greek copies censing is not mentioned, only in the oldest Barberini...
^[534] Pochayiv Triodion, fol. 35.
^[535] Moscow Typikon, fol. 319.
^[536] Title IV, Chapter I, part 3.
^[537] For some reason on every Saturday the memory of St. Great Martyr Theodore is honored... (Nilles in Eortologion). In Constantinople there was a great cult of one holy martyr... for the sake of the miracle of peace and for the sake of this miracle a more special feast was established, on which the annual memory is celebrated, on the first Saturday of the forty-day fast. Julian the Apostate... 362. St. Theodore the Tyro appeared at night to the bishop of the imperial city... (Nilles Calend. Part 2, p. 106).
^[538] We assume this, for the rubrics prescribe only: "Theotokion".
^[539] So in Slavonic rubrics.
^[540] Tserkovne Oko and Greek Triodion; similarly the Pochayiv.
^[541] Thus, with a third canon Great Compline would be endless.
^[542] Orthodoxy means correct belief, that is the correct faith regarding the veneration of holy icons, which the Iconoclasts destroyed. The Seventh Ecumenical Council (Second of Nicaea) in 787 restored their veneration. Another council, convened in Constantinople in 842, under St. Methodius, with the support of the holy Empress Theodora, ordered the commemoration of this restoration every year on the first Sunday of Great Lent.
^[543] On account of Sunday the Triodion prescribes an All-Night Vigil, which once was every Sunday.
^[544] So in our Manuscript Typikon, Tserkovne Oko and the Moscow Typikon, and with this agrees the Greek Triodion... evidently, incorrectly given in the Pochayiv Triodion of 1784: Sunday Canon, Theotokos and Triodion on 6.
^[545] Tserkovne Oko.
^[546] So we consider, relying on the rubric of Meatfare Saturday, for the rubric is silent here; and the Kondakion of the day "To Thee, O Lord, the Planter" in the whole service of these Saturdays is not mentioned.
^[547] For we do not take it throughout the whole year at Matins and at Panakhidas for the dead on all Friday evenings we do not sing it.
^[548] So we assume, because the rubrics are silent.
^[549] According to the rubric of the Triodion this veneration next week will be only on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, and only at the 1st Hour. Instead of "Direct my steps" the troparion "Before Thy Cross" is sung.
^[550] Corrected by me (Dutka Ivan), because it was written «sixth», but the 6th Sunday is the Entry of the Lord into Jerusalem.
^[551] After the 50th Psalm immediately, is written in the Greek and Pochayiv Triodia; so also in Tserkovne Oko: "then the 50th Psalm and canon". Not good in the Peremyshl Typikon is prescribed "Save, O God".
^[552] Tserkovne Oko.
^[553] The Moscow Typikon and the new Athenian Triodion prescribe Katavasia only after the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th; but Tserkovne Oko and the Kyiv Triodion of 1640 prescribe Katavasia after each ode, which, we suppose, is more correct, for also on other days, on which the Canon of the Triodion is taken last, it has Katavasia after each ode, as on Meatfare and Cheesefare Saturdays and on Cheesefare Wednesday and Friday (although also for these two days the rubrics of the Triodion are imprecise). In the Greek Typikon, called of Sabbas, and the Typikon of the Lviv University there is nothing about Katavasia. Rubrics of other Triodia are imprecise: the Greek Triodion which we have, and the Pochayiv of 1784 prescribe Katavasia after all odes, except the 4th and 6th. The Pochayiv of 1767 and 1744 prescribe only after the 3rd, 8th and 9th, the Lviv – only after the 1st, 8th and 9th.
^[554] Kyiv and Lviv Triodia.
^[555] The Order of the Akathist, that is the Non-Sitting [Hymn], is sung in memory of the triple deliverance of Constantinople from the invasion of enemies, thanks to the intercession of the Mother of God, whose precious robe, brought from Jerusalem and placed by St. Pulcheria in the Blachernae church, and the Icon of the Hodegetria, painted, in the opinion of the Greeks, by St. Luke, were carried around the city, invoking her help. The first invasion was under Emperor Heraclius (reigned from 610 to 641) from the Persian army, led by the satrap Sarvar, and also from the Scythian army, under the command of the Khagan. Part of the enemies were destroyed by a small number of armed Christians who came out of the temple of the Most Holy Theotokos, and partly — by a strong sea storm which destroyed their ships. The second invasion was 36 years later, that is under Constantine Pogonatos (668-685) and ended partly by the disease of the soldiers, and partly — by a sea storm when they were returning home. The third was under Leo the Isaurian (717-741) and ended by a sea storm, famine, division of forces against the Bulgarians, by whom they were beaten (Synaxarion of this Saturday, about which also Nilles, Calend. vol. 2, p. 152).
^[556] Besides the initial Kondakion "To the Directress", the rest of the Akathist consists of 12 Ikos and 12 Kondakia, together — of 24 members according to the number of 24 letters of the Greek alphabet, with which each member, in the Greek text, begins in sequence.
^[557] In the Patriarchal Church of Constantinople the Akathist is sung not at Matins, but before that, at Small Compline, that is at "It is truly meet" — the first station by the Patriarch himself, the second — after the 3rd Ode of the canon of the feast by the Bishop of Caesarea, the third — after the 6th Ode by the Bishop of Ephesus, the fourth — after the 9th Ode by the Bishop of Heraclea (New Constantinopolitan Typikon).
^[558] The Greek Triodion does not prescribe any censing. Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon prescribe 4 censings, as do ours and the Russian rubrics, however, they order to cense only the icons and the brethren, ours and the Russian — only the icons and the brethren, and at the other three stations — only the Superior and the choirs. It would be better for us to cense only once, at the beginning.
^[559] Title IV, Chapter IV, part VIII.
^[560] In the Pochayiv Triodion: "we sing usual Compline". By Tserkovne Oko and, following it, Russian rubrics Great Compline is prescribed and then, after the 1st Trisagion, the Troparion of the feast is sung, after the 2nd — usual troparia "Have mercy on us, O Lord"; after the Canon of Lazarus, instead of "It is truly meet", — Heirmos of the 9th Ode of the Canon and, after the Trisagion, — Kondakion of the feast.
^[561] Similarly also the new Constantinopolitan Typikon... but Russian Typika prescribe the Biblical Odes.
^[562] Greek vaïon /palm branch/ means a date branch, that is a palm branch, whence also the Latin Dominica Palmarum /Palm Sunday/, for John 12:13 also says: "Took branches of palm trees", although undoubtedly people cut branches of olive trees, for Christ entered Jerusalem from the Mount of Olives. Where date palms do not grow, there only olive branches are used; and among us, since olives also do not grow, willow branches are used, hence also in Tserkovne Oko: "reciting the prayer over the willow".
^[563] But a Greek — from his Euchologion.
^[564] The first of these prayers is given in Greek Euchologia and the Moscow Typikon, the second — in Tserkovne Oko.
^[565] The Patriarch of Constantinople blesses the branches... before the Praises and distributes at the Praises...
^[566] The service of these days is Passion-Penitential, foretelling the sufferings of Christ the Lord, Who here is presented in the image of the Patriarch Joseph, persecuted by his brothers, and the Jewish synagogue, which is depicted in the image of the unfaithful and adulterous wife of Potiphar; with the addition of the Gospel stories of these days, that is on Monday — about the withered fig tree, on Tuesday — about the Last Judgment, on Wednesday — about the woman who anointed with myrrh and about the conspiracy of Judas with the Jews.
^[567] The Pochayiv Molitvoslov of 1793 prescribes this dismissal "on Sunday evening, on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of HOLY and Great Week at Matins and at the Hours"; the Pochayiv Horologion of 1811 adds to Wednesday also Thursday at Matins. However, the rubrics of the Triodion at these Matins do not indicate a dismissal, for they are small and on the first three days — of Lenten form and are combined with the 1st Hour. At the Hours one should not omit this dismissal, nor at the Presanctified, as we consider; Tserkovne Oko of 1615 and, before it, the Liturgikon of Ballaban of 1604 extend this dismissal to the whole Passion Week, except Saturday.
^[568] Tserkovne Oko and the new Typikon of the Patriarchate of Constantinople do not prescribe the Kondakion of the Triodion, but only "O Lord of Hosts, be with us". In the Greek Triodion nothing is mentioned about what Compline should be and what troparia to recite at it.
^[569] So in our and the Russian Menaia. More correctly Tserkovne Oko prescribes also on Wednesday evening Great Compline, and only on Thursday and on Friday evening, — Small, in view of the long duration of Passion and Tomb Matins. Also the Greek Typikon of Sabbas at the end of Compline...
^[570] Neither our Manuscript Typikon, nor the Typikon of the Lviv University, nor Tserkovne Oko, nor the Pochayiv Triodion of 1767, nor the Ostromir Gospel prescribe here the Gospel at Matins. Two most ancient Vatican codices prescribe it... also the Greek Typikon of Sabbas, of the new ones — Pochayiv Triodion 1786, Greek Bologna Triodion 1724, new Constantinopolitan Typikon and new Athenian Triodion.
^[571] In Greek rubrics "Save, O God" is not mentioned, but it is mentioned in Tserkovne Oko, and after it, in our and the Russian Triodia.
^[572] So in our and the Russian Triodia.
^[573] In the new Typikon of the Patriarchate of Constantinople it is not even mentioned.
^[574] The Pochayiv Triodion of 1786 gives the following: "Immediately the holy Four Gospels are placed on the decorated analogion between two lit candlesticks. All stand with uncovered heads, and the priest censes the whole temple and the brethren: at the 6th Hour he censes only the Gospel, and at the 9th — the Gospel, the whole temple and the brethren, then reads the Gospel". Russian Typika: "The priest censes around the analogion, the altar, the whole church and the brethren according to the order". In the Greek Triodion nothing of this is mentioned, but only: "The Four Gospels are read on Monday, on Tuesday and on Wednesday and completed".
^[575] So the Pochayiv Triodion according to Tserkovne Oko. And the Moscow Typikon: "In the cells are made until Great Friday".
^[576] The subject of the divine service of Great Thursday is the Mystical Supper, the washing of feet, the betrayal of Judas and, partly, Christ's passion.
^[577] Our Manuscript Typikon, Tserkovne Oko and the Ostromir Gospel do not prescribe the Gospel, but others — prescribe it.
^[578] Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon prescribe on 12.
^[579] Tserkovne Oko.
^[580] If our Pochayiv Triodion has such on Great Tuesday, then here also it should be so.
^[581] About this we mentioned for Palm Sunday evening here, on p. 378, part 5.
^[582] Tserkovne Oko.
^[583] The subject of the divine service of Great Friday is the Passion of the Lord, which begins at Vespers, which anticipates Friday. But since the Liturgy which is joined to this Vespers is of Thursday, therefore the subject of the service of Thursday appears at this Vespers. On this day in cathedral temples only one conciliar hierarchal Liturgy is celebrated. And before Vespers (at 9 o'clock) the hierarch consecrates antimensions, at the Liturgy, after "And may the mercies be", — consecrates chrism, and after the prayer behind the ambo — washes the feet.
^[584] Synod of Lviv, Title IV, Chapter IV, part VII.
^[585] Greek Typikon of Sabbas and the new Athenian Triodion: "By the blessing of the priest we sing the Six Psalms". Evidently the first part of Matins falls out, from the usual beginning to "Glory to the Holy".
^[586] So in Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon.
^[587] Our Greek and Pochayiv Triodia, and in the new Athenian Triodion and Constantinopolitan Typikon is added also: "Glory to Thee".
^[588] In Greek rubrics and in one Slavonic manuscript Triodion which we have, neither censing at any of the 12 Gospels, nor small litany is prescribed. Tserkovne Oko prescribes a small litany both at the first Gospel and before all five Sessional Hymns, and prescribes leaving the censing at the 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th Gospels. The new Constantinopolitan Typikon prescribes one censing not at the Gospel, but at the beginning of Matins, during the Two Psalms according to the general rubric of Matins. But since among us at Small Matins this censing is omitted, at least here we have given at the first [Gospel] — censing not only of the holy table, but also of the icons, and choirs, according to the general rubric of the beginning of Matins. Although Greek rubrics at these Gospels do not prescribe censing, nothing strange, for in Greek and Slavonic Typika at Matins Gospels censing is not prescribed. Tserkovne Oko prescribes at the first Gospel two censings: one — at the beginning, only of the holy table and the whole sanctuary, the second — at the end: of the whole church, images and choirs. At the six following — censing of images, the Superior and choirs (however, here it inconsistently agrees with itself, when it is given that at the Sessional Hymns the priest or deacon censes also the holy table); at Gospels 8, 9, 10 and 11 it does not prescribe censing, and at the 12th again prescribes censing of the whole church, choirs and brethren. The Moscow Typikon follows Tserkovne Oko, however, at the 1st Gospel prescribes only one censing, at the beginning — of the whole temple; it prescribes inaccurately that the litanies of the Sessional Hymns are said up to the 8th Gospel, for the Sessional Hymns extend only to the 6th Gospel. Although Greek rubrics do not prescribe censing at the Gospels, nevertheless, at the Sessional Hymns they prescribe standing. "We do not sit at such Sessional Hymns, but we sing them standing".
^[589] In the Patriarchate of Constantinople the first — the Patriarch, the twelfth — the Grand Archdeacon from the ambo; and at the beginning, at the Two Psalms, censes the Grand Archimandrite, dressed in a golden phelonion (New Constantinopolitan Typikon).
^[590] Today it is sufficient to sing once.
^[591] Tserkovne Oko prescribes repeating also the Theotokion, however, since the Theotokion serves to end the troparia, it should not be repeated; in the Triodion the refrain "Glory, Both now" is given together before the Theotokion.
^[592] The Moscow Typikon prescribes 9, it must be understood — with "Glory, Both now"; Tserkovne Oko prescribes 10; our Pochayiv and Greek Triodia — 8, however, inaccurately, for they give only 7, except the two at "Glory, Both now".
^[593] Tserkovne Oko.
^[594] If on Great Tuesday our Triodion gives such, then here also it should be so.
^[595] New Constantinopolitan Typikon and new Athenian Triodion.
^[596] So in general Slavonic editions; but Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon prescribe this litany in full, as usual.
^[597] In the new Constantinopolitan Typikon the Great Dismissal is prescribed, but we have the custom to impart the Great [Dismissal] — at Great Matins.
^[598] Latins in the three days of Christ's death not only do not expose the Holy Mysteries, but do not even keep them in the temple; tombs of Christ among them are erected without the Holy Mysteries.
^[599] According to the rubric of the Greek Triodion, our Pochayiv and the Moscow Typikon — are sung all together at the 2nd hour of the day; according to our Manuscript Typikon, the 1st Hour — at the 1st hour of the day, and the others — at the 7th hour of the day. According to Tserkovne Oko all — at the 7th hour of the day; according to the new Constantinopolitan Typikon — at the 1st hour of the day.
^[600] The magnificent rite of the Shroud in ancient Triodia and Typika is not given, for it was introduced later; however, today it is used among all followers of the Greek rite, and among us — also with the exposition of the Holy Mysteries, according to the custom of the Latins of the Austrian State and various German dioceses (Nilles, Calend. T. 2, p. 312). It is described in our Service Books, published in Pochayiv back under Stanislaus Augustus in 1767, then in Russian Typika and in the new Typikon of the Patriarchate of Constantinople. However, in our Service Books the procession with the Shroud is given only at Vespers, in Russian rubrics — only at Saturday Matins, after the Great Doxology, and in the Constantinopolitan Typikon the bringing out into the temple to the tomb is prescribed at Vespers, the procession around the temple — at Matins.
^[601] Many rubrics add to "The noble Joseph" also the troparion "The angel stood by the tomb" (with the refrain "Glory, Both now"). But Tserkovne Oko, our Manuscript Typikon and the Manuscript Triodion which we have, give only "The noble Joseph", and so they take in the arch-altar temple.
^[602] According to the rubric of the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, the placing of the Shroud into the tomb takes place during the singing of the Aposticha, in the following way: "The Aposticha are sung, and six priests with uncovered heads, dressed in priestly vestments, go out from the left door of the sanctuary, carrying with reverence on their heads the Epitaphios /Shroud/, of whom the Archimandrite holds also the Holy Gospel, preceded by singers, the Primicerius holding the Divamboulon (a type of candlestick with two lamps), the Deacons with lamps and censers, and thus proceed up to the prepared canopy, and the singers stand in order, singing the Aposticha, and the Deacons censing go around 3 times with the Priests around the canopy. Then they place the Epitaphios inside the canopy, the doorkeeper sprinkles fragrant flowers upon the Epitaphios, and having approached the Patriarch venerates the Epitaphios, blesses the Christians, and ascends the throne. Then the doorkeeper offers him flowers prepared. Then also the holy hierarchs, two by two, venerating the Epitaphios, receive flowers from the Patriarch, likewise also the Ecclesiastical officials. This being done, the 2nd choir sings the Doxastikon, and from the Doxastikon... Now lettest Thou" and the rest. The description which we have from the island of Corfu gives this: "The icon of the Epitaphios is carried on Holy and Great Friday from the sanctuary at the end of Vespers, while the Dismissal Troparia 'The noble Joseph', etc. are sung, and is placed on a prepared table in the middle of the presbyterium, where there are already and remain lit candles with vessels of flowers throughout the whole day until the hour of Matins of Great Saturday (which is usually celebrated on the evening of Great Friday). Where again at the end of the Great Doxology at 'Holy God', the Epitaphios is carried out, but inside the church and, if circumstances permit, — outside and again is placed on this same table until the time of the Liturgy of Great Saturday, when one priest privately in an epitrachelion places it in the sanctuary in the usual place".
^[603] So in our Pochayiv Triodion; other editions, from the usual beginning to "God is the Lord", give everything — as usual, only the Typikon of the Lviv University prescribes beginning from the Six Psalms.
^[604] Our Triodion and the Greek which we have, the Typikon of the Lviv University do not prescribe twice, nevertheless, Tserkovne Oko, the Manuscript Triodion and Typikon which we have, prescribe twice.
^[605] In our Pochayiv Triodion nothing is prescribed to cense, it is noted only: "and, having censed crosswise". In the Greek Triodion censing is mentioned only at the 2nd and 3rd stations and it is not mentioned what should be censed. In Tserkovne Oko censing is prescribed at the 1st station of the whole church and brethren according to the order, and at the others — only of the choirs. In the Constantinopolitan Typikon is prescribed — only at the 1st station, only of the Shroud and the people: "The Patriarch... censing the Epitaphios, and the whole people".
^[606] Tserkovne Oko.
^[607] This troparion is prescribed only once: Typikon of Sabbas, Greek Triodion, Greek Typikon, our Manuscript Typikon, another of Lviv University; other rubrics prescribe it twice, the second time — with the refrain "Glory, Both now". Tserkovne Oko prescribes it first once, then Glory: the ending, Both now: whole. Obviously, all rubrics have this troparion; and the troparion "The noble Joseph", which is sung before it, is prescribed primarily by various Greek and Slavonic rubrics and the Greek Typikon of Sabbas. The sticheron "Come, let us bless" only our editions have, and the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, before the troparion "The noble Joseph" prescribes also the Resurrection Troparion "When Thou didst descend" and "The angel stood by the tomb". Before the troparion "The noble Joseph" our and Greek rubrics prescribe: "Let us attend. Peace be to all. Wisdom, let us attend", others Slavonic — only "Wisdom, Aright"; and since they do not prescribe here "The noble Joseph", they prescribe "Wisdom, Aright" to exclaim before the Troparion of the Prophecy. Tserkovne Oko prescribes "Wisdom, Aright" before "The noble Joseph", and before the Troparion of the Prophecy: "Let us attend. Peace to thee. Wisdom, let us attend". The Entrance, according to the Russian rubric, takes place in the following way: "Then the Superior enters the holy altar with the priests and deacons, vests in all sacred vestments, and the priests — only in phelonia, comes out with the Gospel under the Shroud, with priests who support, and deacons who cense. At this time ringing is done with all might. He is preceded with candles and with two candlesticks, and both choirs sing the funeral Trisagion. The Abbot, having come before the holy royal doors, stands here, awaiting the conclusion of the last Trisagion. When it ends, the Superior with the Gospel enters the royal doors and places the Gospel on the altar, and the Shroud — on the prepared table, in the form of a tomb. In monasteries, after the dismissal, the kissing of the Shroud, placed in the tomb, takes place". This is — the Moscow Typikon. In the Patriarchate of Constantinople it takes place thus: "Great Doxology. Then we begin the sung [Trisagion], preceding the Epitaphios, and going out of the temple, the Entrance takes place, as is customary; as soon as we return, the Patriarch enters directly into the holy sanctuary, with the rest, and immediately exclaims 'Let us attend. Peace be to all. Wisdom'. And the Troparion 'When Thou didst descend' is sung. He censes around the holy table, preceded by the Epitaphios, then 'The angel stood by the tomb' up to 'appeared as a stranger'. After this is sung 'The noble Joseph', up to 'wrapped, laid', and they place the Epitaphios on the holy table. At once the canonarch from outside reads the Troparion, the Prophecy and the Apostle, and the Gospel is said by the Patriarch, in front of the Gate" (New Constantinopolitan Typikon). In various parts of Greece, according to the testimony of Allatius, the procession takes place in the following way: "The custom prevailed, that, while Ps. 118 is sung, and at individual verses individual Troparia are sung, Christ beautifully carved, or skillfully painted on a board, and placed in a bier, with a solemn apparatus of burning candles, Priests, dressed as when they celebrate the sacred solemnities of Masses, the rest of the Clergy accompanying not without order, and the faithful of Christ following the bier through the streets of the city, is carried, and set forth to all to be adored, and kissed: and thus is open to the veneration of all. Meanwhile flowers placed on the image, are sought by all with the greatest zeal, which they promise to themselves for the greatest good, not only of the body, but of domestic affairs" (Nil). Kalend. vol. 2, p. 241).
^[608] According to rubrics: at 10 o'clock in the day; to end the Liturgy — at the 2nd hour of the night. "At the 2nd hour of the night".
^[609] 2 Manuscript rubrics which we have, and Tserkovne Oko prescribe only three verses: 1. "God stood"; 2. "How long will ye judge"; 3. "They know not". The Greek Typikon of Sabbas prescribes the whole psalm of five verses.
^[610] So according to the rubric of our and the Russian Triodia; similarly also the Greek Typikon of Sabbas, only, instead of violet, prescribes dark vestments: "The singer being about to begin the present verse, Arise O God, the priests stand up, take off the black phelonia, and put on white instead of them". According to the Greek Triodion, Tserkovne Oko and another manuscript rubric, white vestments are prescribed from the beginning of Vespers. Mauros we translate as dark, and not as black, for black will be — melas.
^[611] In the new Athenian Triodion this service is called Pannychis /Vigil/.
^[612] 2 Lviv Service Book of 1780 and Moscow Typikon.
^[613] In Constantinople the Patriarch places the Shroud on the holy table.
^[614] So it takes place in Russia, according to the testimony of Muralt, letter 14: "around the holy Table, on which the Shroud is spread, which remains here until the Day of the Ascension".
^[615] According to the ancient rubric of community life the procession goes from the temple into the narthex through the northern doors of this narthex and there, before its central doors leading into the temple, the beginning of Matins is sung. Carried are: Gospel — by the priest and censer — by the deacon, preceded by candle-bearers, brethren with lit candles, as you have in the Greek Pentecostarion. To this the Pochayiv Triodion adds the icon of the Resurrection of Christ, and Tserkovne Oko — also the icon of the Most Holy Theotokos and other holy icons, carried by priests and deacons, so that in such a way the procession would be more majestic, than only with candles. According to the custom of the surroundings of Greece, independent of the Patriarch of Constantinople, before this procession the bishop or priest, standing in the holy doors with a lit candlestick in hand, exclaims in a loud voice: "Come ye, take light from the unwaning light, and glorify Christ, who is risen from the dead", that is "Come, receive light from the unwaning light and kiss Christ, risen from the dead". And so all approach one by one, to light their candles from him, forming after this the procession (The Holy Passions. Athens. 1892)
^[616] In the Greek Triodion this procession is described thus: "About the hour of Matins all the semantrons sound. And the ecclesiarch distributes candles to the brethren; the priest with the deacon vest in all their priestly attire. Then, taking, the priest the holy Gospel, and the deacon the censer, and preceded by lamps, we go out to the narthex, holding lit candles, and singing 'Thy Resurrection, O Christ Savior', etc. And in the temple remaining alone the candle-lighter lights all the candles and lamps; and having made a fire, and having put incense into it, places it in the middle of the temple /About the time of Matins all clappers gave notice. The ecclesiarch distributes candles to the brethren, and the priest with the deacon vest in light sacred vestments. Then the priest, having taken the holy Gospel, and the deacon — the censer, preceded by lights, and we all go out to the narthex, holding lit candles and singing: 'Thy Resurrection, O Christ Savior'. In the temple remains only the sacristan, who lights all candles and lamps, after which, having lit a fire, throws incense into it and places in the middle of the temple/."
^[617] Slavonic rubrics before that prescribe to cense everyone, but we, according to the Greek rubric, cense here only directly the church doors. Evidently also our, or Russian rubrics, according to Tserkovne Oko prescribe for the priest to sign with the censer three times crosswise the church doors. The Typikon of the Lviv University orders to cense crosswise, but not three times and not the church doors: "Makes a cross with the censer, saying: 'Glory to the Holy'". The Greek Pentecostarion gives only: "and censing says" /and, having censed, exclaims/.
^[618] So the Greek Typikon of Sabbas, the Typikon of the Lviv University, manuscript Flower Triodia which we have, and our Apostles and Service Books. Pochayiv 1788 — at the Liturgy of Easter, Moscow Typikon — at Resurrection Matins, other rubrics prescribe three times.
^[619] According to the new custom of the Greeks, which Slavs do not accept, before the beginning of Matins the priest sings the Sunday Gospel of Matins, usually — the 2nd. This the Greek Typikon of Sabbas does not have, but only newly published Greek Pentecostaria. Also according to the custom (and not according to the church rubric) of the Greeks, independent of the Patriarch of Constantinople, the entrance into the church is accompanied by questions and answers taken from the 23rd Psalm: "Lift up your gates, O ye princes, and the King of Glory shall come in" etc. and when is sung: "The Lord of Hosts, He is the King of Glory", the doors are opened and the entrance into the church takes place... "Especially the custom prevailed to enter through question and answer: Lift up gates, and to open the door only at The Lord of powers, he is the king of glory /Especially the custom prevailed, that the entrance into the church be accompanied by dialogue, question and answer 'Lift up the gates', and the doors are opened only at 'The Lord of Hosts, He is the King of Glory'/, — is written in the description from Corfu. This custom we meet also among Greek-Melkites, and Italians, and also in various churches of the Latin rite... However, neither in Greek nor in Slavonic rubrics is this met, nor the words of the named psalm fit well here, for according to general explanation they refer not to the descent of Christ into hell, but to His Ascension...
^[620] "The priest censes at the beginning of the Canon, according to the order /The priest censes at the beginning of the canon, as prescribed/ (Greek Triodion).
^[621] That which is prescribed in Tserkovne Oko and, following it, in our and the Russian Triodia, that the small litany after each ode "will be on this holy day outside the sanctuary", does not agree with the Greek Triodion, for in it, instead of "outside the sanctuary", is given "inside the sanctuary", ... as have also the Typikon of the Lviv University and the manuscript Slavonic Triodion which we have. However, this contradiction can be eliminated if we say that the Greek Triodion and other rubrics order on this day to sing all litanies for the priest, and not for the deacon, and for the deacon — only to carry the censer and recite the verses "Let God arise"; and with this assumption the priest sings all litanies inside the sanctuary, at the holy table... "At each Ode takes place by the Priest, inside the Sanctuary, a small Litany /At each ode by the priest, inside the sanctuary, is sung a small litany/, — is written in the Triodion, which also other litanies prescribes to the priest. Finally, "inside" and "outside", differ only by one letter, therefore we see that copyists could easily make a mistake.
^[622] According to the rubric of the Greek Triodion the kissing takes place thus: "The Priest takes the holy Gospel, and stands before the doors of the holy Sanctuary but the Superior having come, and having kissed the holy Gospel, and the Priest, receives it from his hands, and stands on the right of the Priest. Then the Brethren all, according to their order, kiss first the holy Gospel, then the Priest and the Superior, and stand also there where they happen to be, and kiss one another /The priest takes the Holy Gospel and stands before the doors of the sanctuary. And the Abbot, having come and kissed the Gospel and the priest, takes it from his hands and stands on the right side of the priest. Then all brethren, according to their rank, kiss first the Gospel, and then — the priest and the abbot, and stand there, where possible, kissing mutually/. According to the rubrics of our Pochayiv, Russian Triodia, Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon, the kissing first takes place in the sanctuary between the sacred ministers, then — in the church, before the iconostasis, between clerics and elders, and at the end — between the faithful and sacred ministers and between themselves. This is — the rubric: "The kissing of the Superior with other priests and deacons in the holy altar takes place in this way: He who approaches says: 'Christ is risen', and he answers: 'Truly He is risen' and they kiss. Then the Superior, having taken the cross, stands outside before the holy royal doors, also all priests, as many as there be, and deacons, having taken each the Gospel and holy icons, according to their rank, stand in a row to the right of the Superior. Approach first the most worthy clerics and elders, one by one, and, bowing slightly before the Superior, kiss each the precious cross and Gospel which the priest and images hold, and the Superior himself on the mouth, saying: 'Christ is risen', and he answers: 'Truly He is risen'. In such a way they kiss also the priests, and they themselves, in order, kiss among themselves, standing in a row to the right of the priests. After them similarly kiss also the faithful" (Moscow Typikon and Pochayiv Triodion 1786).
^[623] The Synod of Lviv here, on p. 21, in the notes.
^[624] So in our Service Books, but in our and Russian Triodia is not prescribed "Shine", instead of "More honorable", nor, instead of "Glory to Thee, O Christ God, our hope", — "Christ is risen" up to "trampling down death by death", with the response: "and upon those in the tombs bestowing life". Greek rubrics do not prescribe anything of this, nor the dismissal with the cross, but prescribe the dismissal "Who rose from the dead", as on Sunday (Roman Euchologion 1873, p. 79).
^[625] Compare the rubric of the Sunday of Ap. Thomas in the evening with the rubric of Small Vespers of the Ascension of the Lord. About this also in the new Typikon of the Patriarchate of Constantinople is written: "Many also after the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, ignoring, invoke the O Heavenly King Comforter, etc. in which this is not pardoned, our Savior being still on earth, except from the 1st of the Ascension, or from the first Pentecost, because at the third hour of this day descended the Holy Spirit... as from this therefore the invocation of the Comforter Spirit took beginning, from this day, which ceases from the day of the Resurrection until Pentecost. (On Monday of the Holy Spirit) /Many not considering, also after the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, read 'O Heavenly King, Comforter' etc., which — is inadmissible, when our Savior will still be on earth until the first hour of the Ascension, or until the first hour of Pentecost, for at the third hour of this day descended the Holy Spirit ... as, finally, from this began to invoke the Holy Spirit the Comforter, from that day, which ceases from the day of the Resurrection until Pentecost (On Monday of the Holy Spirit)/.
^[626] So about "Christ is risen" in our Service Books, except "We have seen", and in its place they have "Christ is risen", however, such is our custom and so in the Pochayiv Triodion of 1786... and in the Moscow Typikon of 1859... Ancient Greek rubrics prescribe "Christ is risen" only instead of "Blessed be the name" and instead of the psalm "I will bless the Lord", as in the Slavonic Typikon of the Lviv University. A later custom of the Greeks — to sing "Christ is risen" after "Blessed is the Kingdom" three times and, instead of "We have seen the true light" and instead of "Blessed be the name of the Lord", — three times. However, some of them, after "Blessed is the Kingdom" sing "Christ is risen" with its verses, as is given at the beginning of Resurrection Matins. The Moscow Typikon follows them, but the new Constantinopolitan Typikon does not go. What we said about the custom of the Greeks, we took from a description which we have from the island of Corfu, in which is written the following: "After 'Blessed is the kingdom' the priest 'Christ is risen', and successively repeat it, first the right followed by the left choir; and this happens on all the days of Pascha until the Ascension. But on the great Sunday, and on those of the New Week we follow to sing it after its verses unchanged; as was said previously at Matins... Is sung successively 'Christ is risen' - as much on the great Sunday as on the remaining days of Pascha at 'With fear' instead of 'We have seen the light', and before the Dismissal three times flowingly instead of 'Blessed be the name', and at the end, at the Dismissal instead of 'Through the prayers' /After 'Blessed is the Kingdom' the priest: 'Christ is risen', successively again repeat it: first — the right, then — and the left choir. And so it will be on all days from the Resurrection to the Ascension. But on the Great Sunday and on the days of Bright Week we continue to sing invariable this with its verses, as is taken at Matins ... Successively is sung 'Christ is risen' on the Great Sunday as much as on the rest of the days of the Resurrection: at 'With fear', instead of 'We have seen the light' and before the dismissal three times flowingly, instead of 'Blessed be the name' and at the end, at the dismissal, instead of 'Through the prayers of our holy fathers'/.
^[627] Tserkovne Oko gives this: "And at each exclamation or station! of the Gospel they strike in the church once the candela, the paraecclesiarch — outside the church the great clapper and the great bell. At the last exclamation they strike all bells and the great clapper".
^[628] "Then is read the Holy Gospel by the Patriarch, and by the holy High Priests (periodically in different dialects, as is customary) /Then is read the Holy Gospel by the Patriarch and by other hierarchs (by turn, in different languages, as is customary)/. New Constantinopolitan Typikon, on the day of Resurrection at Vespers.
^[629] Or, as in the Triodion — after the dismissal of the Liturgy.
^[630] In the Rite of the Panagia, given in the Horologion before or after the 9th Hour, it is recounted how the apostles after Christ's Resurrection, before the dispersion throughout the whole world, stayed together in Jerusalem, having the custom to dine together and at this time to leave at the table an empty place, on which they placed a pillow, and on it —: a piece of bread in Christ's portion, that is in memory of Jesus Christ, and after dinner they elevated the piece, saying: "Glory to Thee, O Christ God, help us"; from the Resurrection to the Ascension: "Christ is risen". When the apostles did this after the Dormition of the Most Holy Theotokos, she appeared to them in the air alive, in light radiance, surrounded by angels, saying: "Rejoice, for I am with you all days". And they frightened, instead of "Glory to Thee, O Christ God", exclaimed "All-holy (Panagia) Theotokos, help us". This rite of the Panagia, named so from the name Panagia /All-holy/, by which the apostles invoked then the Most Holy Theotokos, imitating the apostles, was repeated once by the emperor in the Court... and by people in churches or homes, and predominantly daily in monasteries, as is seen from the service of the meal, given in the Horologion, however, more solemnly — in Bright Week, in which not a piece of bread, which they ate, but a whole (whole) bread they offered on all days of the week, not eating until Bright Saturday, but only kissing it. And this rite was initially served only at the meal, as it is in the Greek Pentecostarion. The Slavs, for the sake of greater solemnity, did not serve the whole rite only at the meal, but daily, throughout the whole Bright Week, preceded by lights and the icon of the Resurrection carried the Artos from the church to the meal and from the meal to the church, to the sounds of bells, as for Tserkovne Oko has our Pochayiv Triodion and Russian Typika. Today this rite is celebrated among us only in Bright Week and not with all prayers and rites, as the Triodion gives, but only as here, in the text, we gave, however, not only in monasteries, but also in all other churches. The prayers for the blessing and breaking of the Artos the Slavs added to themselves, for in Greek books they are not encountered; the prayer for breaking is not given even in Slavonic rubrics, except ours, but others break it without prayer.
^[631] If a bishop serves, we consider that he should begin Vespers in the sanctuary, censing before the holy table and from there read the verses, after which depart to his throne. And at "O Gladsome Light", after the blessing with the di- and trikirion he enters the sanctuary and from the holy doors reads the Gospel, after which returns to his throne.
^[632] Some consider (among them also the new Typikon of the Patriarchate of Constantinople) that throughout the whole Bright Week Vespers should begin not from "Blessed is our God", but from "Glory to the Holy", as Matins. However, they are mistaken, for in all editions which we have, is indicated clearly "Blessed is our God": "Blessed is our God" ... and the Greek Typikon of Sabbas: "Signs crosswise with the censer, saying: 'Blessed is our God'" (On the Sunday of the Resurrection, at Vespers).
^[633] The previous rubric at Vespers of Monday evening and other days of Bright Week is silent about sacred vestments. However, since on Monday, at the beginning of Matins, it clearly prescribes only the epitrachelion, then also at the beginning of Vespers it should be so. At the beginning, after Matins, in the Pentecostarion: "without however the priestly robe /probably without the priestly chasuble/; and the Typikon of the Lviv University, our Manuscript and Moscow Typika — exactly so; similarly also our Pochayiv Triodion of 1786, however, adds: "or which is the custom where" and "in secular temples the priest vests in vestments", that is in the phelonion. Tserkovne Oko prescribes also the phelonion.
^[634] Regarding censing, our Triodion and the Moscow Typikon do not mention here any censing. However, the Greek Pentecostarion, our Manuscript Typikon, the Typikon of the Lviv University and Tserkovne Oko prescribe censing at the beginning of Matins only of the holy table and sanctuary, and at the beginning of the canon — only of the temple and brethren, as usual. "It is necessary to know, that after the priest blesses, while 'Christ is risen' is sung, he censes the holy Table, as usual, and all the Priesthood; at the beginning of the Canon he goes out, and censes the Temple, and the brothers, according to the accustomed order".
^[635] According to the rubric of the Triodion the Artos is broken after the dismissal of the Liturgy, without prayer.
^[636] For throughout this whole period the Flower Triodion where there will be "O Heavenly King", prescribes, instead of it, "Christ is risen" (3).
^[637] Before "and to us He has granted life eternal" among us they sing "and upon those in the tombs bestowing life" three times. However, we do not meet this in any rubric. And the words "and to us He has granted life eternal" etc. we meet only in Slavonic Triodia, and only in Bright Week and at the Liturgy on the Leavetaking of the Resurrection with the preceding "Christ is risen" (3).
^[638] In the Triodion this is not present, only in our Liturgikon on the day of Resurrection at the Liturgy.
^[639] So Tserkovne Oko and ours and the Russian Triodia; for the Greek Triodion and Slavonic, which we have, our Manuscript Typikon and the Typikon of the Lviv University prescribe "Christ is risen" only once, also on Sundays, except Bright Week.
^[640] So our and Russian rubrics and the new Constantinopolitan Typikon, also Tserkovne Oko — on the Sunday of the Myrrh-bearers; in other rubrics — nothing.
^[641] Our Manuscript Typikon, on Easter at the Liturgy, and our Service Books.
^[642] Our Service Books.
^[643] Our and Russian Triodia and Tserkovne Oko.
^[644] According to others — Glory, Both now: "Thee, who art clothed with light".
^[645] So the Greek Triodion and the Typikon of the Lviv University. According to Tserkovne Oko, our Manuscript Typikon and our Manuscript Triodion, before the Sessional Hymn — Kondakion of the Resurrection, and according to ours and the Russian rubric, before the Sessional Hymn — Kondakion-Ikos of the Resurrection.
^[646] "More honorable" we do not sing until the Leavetaking of the Resurrection on all Sundays (Our and Russian Triodia).
^[647] So ours and Russian rubrics; if the saint does not have a troparion, then the Troparion "The noble Joseph" is sung, Glory: "When Thou didst descend", Both now: "The angel stood by the tomb".
^[648] Moscow Typikon, fol. 363 verso. To a saint without Polyeleos nothing is taken, only to one with Polyeleos thus: at the 1st - "The noble Joseph", Glory: to the saint; at the 3rd - Sunday, Glory: to the saint; at the 6th - to the Myrrh-bearers, Glory: to the saint; at the 9th - again "The noble Joseph", Glory: to the saint. We suppose that, according to the previous rubric, should be taken thus: Troparion to the saint even without Polyeleos, if he has one. Among us today the saint without Polyeleos is limited to the 3rd and 9th Hours.
^[649] Our Service Books and the new Constantinopolitan Typikon prescribe the Kondakion to the Resurrection. Tserkovne Oko is silent here, however, prescribes it on the Sunday of Ap. Thomas.
^[650] So in our and the Russian Triodia.
^[651] Moscow Typikon, fol. 366 verso.
^[652] Without the cross, — prescribe our and the Russian Triodia. To begin the dismissal they prescribe from "Who rose from the dead"; according to our custom remains the dismissal of the Resurrection.
^[653] Tserkovne Oko and our Manuscript Typikon prescribe the Hours of the Resurrection. Our and Russian Triodia prescribe the usual Hours, and so it should be. Since in Greek rubrics there is nothing about this, we conclude that the Hours of the Resurrection should not be read.
^[654] This is not in Greek, nor in Slavonic rubrics, with the exception of our Service Books, it (the service of the Holy Trinity) in temples of the Most Holy Trinity is not good to reject.
^[655] Generally, other rubrics do not prescribe: "immediately after the Liturgy", but "earlier", in the morning.
^[656] In the Greek Triodion, after the petition "For the peace of the whole world", is given immediately a separate petition "For the people here present". Other editions do not give separate petitions.
^[657] So among us, for the rubrics prescribe reading it from the altar... ours and Russian rubrics: from the altar, to the people.
^[658] Since the last prayer "O God great and eternal" — the eighth of the prayers that the priest reads during the pre-introductory psalm, should remain there or here. The number of these prayers is a difference in various editions of Triodia. Our Pochayiv Triodion gives seven prayers, as does the Greek Triodion of the Propaganda. The Slavonic Manuscript Triodion, which we have, gives seven prayers, however, the prayer "O God great and eternal" it does not give, but gives another — "O Master Almighty". Tserkovne Oko gives only four prayers: 1. "O Most Pure", after the Prokeimenon; 2. After "Let us all say" — "O Lord our God"; 3. and 4. After "Vouchsafe" — "O Ever-flowing" and "O Heavenly King". The Moscow Typikon gives — five: "O Most Pure", "O Lord Jesus Christ", and after "Vouchsafe" — "O Ever-flowing" and the other two that are in the Triodion. The Typikon of the Lviv University and another manuscript one, which we have, mention in general only three prayers.
^[659] The Lviv Triodion of 1746 gives, instead of "The Blameless", the Canon of the Holy Trinity. Sunday Midnight Office of the current tone (7th).
^[660] Synod of Lviv, Title XI, 4.a.
^[661] Synod of Lviv, Title IV, Chapter IV, part III, 8.
^[662] Rubric of our Service Books at the end of the Liturgy of Chrysostom.
[663] Lviv Synod, Tit. IV, Chap. IV, p. VII.
[664] However, since such numerous blessings with the Holy Mysteries are imparted more out of piety than for a certain reason, it would be better to adapt to the Roman Church and leave for the people only one blessing, which is imparted among us upon the return of the procession to the church, as the Lviv Synod also prescribes for the feast of the Eucharist in the case when, during the encirclement of the church, there are not four altars (Tit. 4, Chap. 3, p. III).
[665] Greek books do not provide any rubrics for temple feasts; of the Slavonic ones, only ours have some, and more broadly — in the Russian ones, which follow the Eye of the Church of 1615.
[666] If the temple is of a minor saint, who in the Menaion has no stichera at Small Vespers, nor stichera at the Litiya, nor Aposticha at Great Vespers, nor Sessional Hymns, nor Stichera at the Praises at Matins, then all this can be borrowed from the Common Service of the Anthologion [Trephologion], under the general heading of either a Venerable, or a Martyr, or another.
[667] The Eye of the Church (About Temples, Chapter 26) and, following it, the Moscow Typikon do not prescribe the service of the Afterfeast on Sunday.
[668] Eye of the Church, Chapter 26.
[669] The Eye of the Church and the Moscow Typikon provide numerous specific rubrics for temple saints, but we provide only for some, since the number of our temple saints is small (about 25) and many of them are subject to the general rubrics which we presented before.
[670] All this regarding Small Vespers we presented according to the rubric of the Moscow Typikon, for in the Eye of the Church and other rubrics there is nothing about this.
[671] All this for Small Vespers is provided also by the Lviv Trephologion of 1633.
[672] So in the Eye of the Church; in the Moscow Typikon stichera of both the temple and the Indiction are provided.
[673] So also in the Lviv Trephologion.
[674] The Lviv Trephologion does not provide the Sunday Kontakion and Ikos, but provides after the 6th Ode the Kontakion and Ikos of the temple; however, if it is a Sunday, it should not be omitted.
[675] The Eye of the Church prescribes to discard the Sunday stichera, and take 4 of the Indiction and 4 of the temple; the Moscow Typikon prescribes 9: 3 Sunday, 3 of the Indiction and 3 of the temple.
[676] Eye of the Church, Chapter 23.
[677] Eye of the Church, Chapter 29, Temple.
[678] This is all — according to Chapter 49 of the Eye of the Church.
[679] Chapter 50 of Mark in the Eye of the Church.
[680] Chapter 50 of Mark in the Eye of the Church, fol. 79.
[681] The Moscow Typikon in Chapter 29 "Temple": "In everything the service of the Fathers takes precedence"; however, Chapter 50 of Mark in the Eye of the Church, fol. 80 better provides first the service to the temple, and afterwards — to the Fathers.
[682] Chapter 50 of Mark in the Eye of the Church, fol. 51v, prescribes the service to the temple on Monday; and the Moscow Typikon — on Cheesefare Sunday, with which we also agree, for we also transfer the feast of the Meeting to Cheesefare Sunday, as you have here on p. 220.
[683] In Chapter 50 of Mark of the Eye of the Church it is prescribed first to Theodore on 6, then to the temple on 8; in our opinion, however, the temple feast is greater than the Saturday of St. Theodore. And if on the Finding of the Precious Head, when it falls on the Saturday of Theodore, in Chapter 63 of Mark of the Eye of the Church the Canon of the temple saint is prescribed in the first place, in the second — of the Forerunner, and in the third — of Theodore, then why here, on the very day of the temple feast, put it in the second place?
[684] This is all — from Chapter 53 of Mark of the Eye of the Church.
[685] Eye of the Church. "About Temples", Chapter 29, fol. 222.
[686] According to the rubric of Chapters 50 and 51 in the Eye of the Church, fol. 81 and 84.
[687] This is — according to the rubric of Chapter 55 of Mark in the Eye of the Church and Chapter 36 of the Moscow Typikon "Temple".
[688] The Eye of the Church does not prescribe transferring the service of the temple to another day, but prescribes singing it together with the service of the day on which it falls.
[689] So the Eye of the Church in Chapter 37 "Temple". From this it follows that in this case in Bright Week there is no Vigil; although in the Moscow Typikon, in Chapter 104 of Mark, it is left to choice to serve a Vigil, and in the event of a Vigil, two Vespers are prescribed, after the pattern of the Annunciation.
[690] Eye of the Church, in Chapter 42 "Temple", fol. 237. Chapter 117 forged of Mark in the Eye of the Church prescribes for this day two Great Vespers with the same stichera and readings: one with kneeling prayers, together with the Liturgy, and the second — at the Vigil. Which, however, is superfluous. In the Moscow Typikon only one Great Vespers with kneeling prayers is rightly prescribed, and then, in its own time, — Small Compline, Midnight Office and Matins without Vigil.
[691] Eye of the Church, Chapter 45 "Temple", fol. 238.
[692] All these Heirmoi are given at Matins on all Fridays of the Octoechos of the 4th Tone and on Akathist Saturday, also on the Annunciation, however, on this feast the 6th, 8th and 9th Odes have a separate Heirmos.
[693] This we should have said on p. 212. Finally, the Constantinopolitan Typikon and the Greek Menaion which we possess give without exception also for this Sunday the Katavasia of the feast. The Greek-Venetian Heirmologion gives the Katavasia of the Triodion not only for Meatfare Sunday, but also for the Sundays of the Prodigal and Cheesefare.
[694] Greek rubrics prescribe the Katavasia of Pascha also on its Apodosis.
[695] We present this litany according to the edition of our Pochaiv Menaion. The Greek-Venetian Menaion, which we possess, does not add to any of its five petitions "Let us all say"; in the rest it agrees with the Pochaiv one, except for the second petition, for not having either a Pope or a Tsar, they pray only generally for Orthodox Christians.
[696] The Lviv Synod forbids the service for the deceased only on Polyeleos feasts; however, it would be better not to take it also on Doxology feasts, as also the circular of the Metropolitan of Nov. 1, 1901 commands.
[697] Services of the Menaion we present according to the edition of the Pochaiv Menaion of 1761, and services of the Triodion — according to the edition of the Pochaiv Lenten Triodion of 1784 and Flower Triodion of 1786.
[698] Ed. Note. The signs that were given in the original have been replaced with others for the purpose of facilitating the determination of the kind of service. In view of this, footnotes 3 and 5 in these notes have also been replaced.
[699] Thus we present according to ancient rubrics; according to the new — in our Horologia troparia to saints are added for all days.
[700] In the Typikon of Lviv University and our manuscript one only — feast on 4 with Apostle-Gospel at Liturgy.
[701] In the Eye of the Church, as also in the Typikon of Lviv University, — feast on 6 with Small Doxology.
[702] In the Greek-Venetian Menaion, in the Greek Horologion and in our manuscript Typikon the memories of these two Jonahs are not given, but they are given in the Menologion of Basil; in our and Russian rubrics their service is given at Compline; likewise in the Typikon of Lviv University.
[703] In the Typikon of Lviv University the Kathisma is — usual of the season.
[704] With the exception of the Chiefs of the Apostles Peter and Paul on June 29 and the Beloved Apostle on September 26 and May 8, to whom the rubrics prescribe a Vigil, to other Apostles and Evangelists ancient rubrics prescribe a service only on 6, without Doxology; but in our and Russian rubrics Polyeleos is prescribed to them.
[705] Polyeleos — at choice; and then to the martyrs we sing at Compline or transfer to the 13th and sing — only on 4 with Troparion. In the Typikon of Lviv University is prescribed to them — on 14, also only on 4 with Praises stichera.
[706] In the Pochaiv Trephologion Polyeleos is given to him. In the Roman Breviary, May 1, it is assumed that he was supposed to be one of the twelve.
[707] Also this Paraskeva, as that of October 14, is given in the Menaion on 6, without Great Doxology, and Polyeleos — only at choice. In the Typikon of Lviv University she is not even mentioned; and Greek Menologia do not have any of these Paraskevas.
[708] Our Menaion leaves at choice — to sing Polyeleos or only on 6 with Doxology, or without Doxology, but others — without Doxology. By decision of the Metropolitan in 1901 — with Great Doxology.
[709] In the Eye of the Church prescribed on 6. In the Typikon of the University — on 4 and, at choice, Praises stichera.
[710] If on the Sunday to which the service of St. Josaphat is transferred falls a Polyeleos saint, as on Nov. 13, 14 or 16, then it is necessary to transfer the service of the Polyeleos saint to Nov. 15 or 18; if on Sunday fall the services of Saints John and Nilus — transfer them to another day. The Lviv Synod appointed the service of St. Josaphat on Nov. 12 according to the Gregorian [calendar], afterwards, however, all our three ordinariates appointed it on the 12th according to the Julian [calendar]. ("Eparchial News," June 8, 1900, part VII), and this we observe until the calendar is changed.
[711] Because the Fast before the Nativity of Christ begins, the Menaion gives "Alleluia," except Saturday and Sunday.
[712] The second Barlaam and Josaphat the Metropolitan Ordinariate ordered not to take ("Eparchial News," Nov. 16, 1901).
[713] The Pochaiv Trephologion of 1777 (not the Menaion, as we noted on p. 136) prescribes Polyeleos to the saint.
[714] Our Menaion gives: "Alleluia" or Troparion, because according to the previous rubric on fast days of the Fast before the Nativity of Christ "Alleluia" was sung.
[715] Because the Fast before the Nativity of Christ begins, the Menaion gives "Alleluia," except Saturday and Sunday.
[716] Our Menaion gives: "Alleluia" or Troparion" because according to the previous rubric on fast days of the Fast before the Nativity of Christ "Alleluia" was sung.
[717] Our Menaion gives: "Alleluia" or Troparion, because according to the previous rubric on fast days of the Fast before the Nativity of Christ "Alleluia" was sung.
[718] Our Menaion gives: "Alleluia" or Troparion, because according to the previous rubric on fast days of the Fast before the Nativity of Christ "Alleluia" was sung.
[719] Our Menaion leaves to the decision of the superior to sing the service of St. Barbara with Vigil or with Polyeleos, or on 6 with Doxology, or without Doxology; others give also on 6, without Doxology. By decision of the Metropolitan — on 6 with Great Doxology.
[720] Our Menaion gives: "Alleluia" or Troparion, because according to the previous rubric on fast days of the Fast before the Nativity of Christ "Alleluia" was sung.
[721] Our Menaion gives: "Alleluia" or Troparion, because according to the previous rubric on fast days of the Fast before the Nativity of Christ "Alleluia" was sung.
[722] According to general rubrics the service of this feast — only on 6 without Doxology; in the Moscow Typikon — with Doxology.
[723] Our Menaion gives: "Alleluia" or Troparion, because according to the previous rubric on fast days of the Fast before the Nativity of Christ "Alleluia" was sung.
[724] Our Menaion gives: "Alleluia" or Troparion, because according to the previous rubric on fast days of the Fast before the Nativity of Christ "Alleluia" was sung.
[725] Eye of the Church, our manuscript Typikon and the Typikon of Lviv University prescribe "Alleluia".
[726] Our Menaion gives: "Alleluia" or Troparion, because according to the previous rubric on fast days of the Fast before the Nativity of Christ "Alleluia" was sung.
[727] The twelve-day fast-free period, from December 25 to January 6 both inclusive, we understand with the exception of the Eve of Theophany, for with it there would be thirteen days.
[728] Days 26 and 27 of December, although in the Menaion they do not have a Vigil, nor even Polyeleos, however, for the greater honor of the Nativity of Christ are marked among us by abstention from work and presence at divine service; to St. Stephen the Lviv Ordinariate prescribes Great Doxology ("Eparchial News," Nov. 16, 1901). To Euthymius — at Compline on another day.
[729] In Greek Menaia the service of this saint is not given, only in the Synaxarion is his name mentioned.
[730] Service to many Hieromartyrs.
[731] The Eye of the Church, Pochaiv Trephologion of 1777 and our manuscript Typikon provide also the service of the Translation of the Relics of the Holy Passion-Bearers of Rus' Boris and Gleb; however, since neither our Pochaiv Menaion, nor the Moscow Typikon provide it, nor even mention it, it remains at choice whether to sing it or not, whether to sing with Polyeleos, as the Eye of the Church and Pochaiv Trephologion have, or without Polyeleos, together with the service of St. Athanasius, as our manuscript Typikon provides. Finally, the memory of the Holy Martyrs falls on July 24 and then we sing their service; but where there is a temple, one should not reject.
[732] Their service — at Compline or on another day, by decision of the superior.
[733] In Greek editions only Peter, Dionysius and Seven Virgins are given, and Theodotus — only on June 7. 3 "Alleluia" or Troparion.
[734] St. Apostle Hermas, one of the 70 disciples (the Apostle mentions him in the Epistle to the Romans 16:14; Roman and Flower Martyrologion), we do not present here because in the divine service he has nothing, nor is he mentioned in the Greek Menologion.
[735] St. Apostle Hermas, one of the 70 disciples (the Apostle mentions him in the Epistle to the Romans 16:14; Roman and Flower Martyrologion), we do not present here because in the divine service he has nothing, nor is he mentioned in the Greek Menologion.
[736] Eye of the Church, our manuscript Typikon and the Typikon of Lviv University prescribe only on 6, without Doxology.
[737] Our Menaion and the Eye of the Church leave to the decision of the ecclesiarch to sing to Ven. Onuphrius with Vigil. The Metropolitan Ordinariate — on 6 with Great Doxology.
[738] The Eye of the Church prescribes to him only on 6, without Doxology; our manuscript Typikon — only on 4.
[739] Our manuscript Typikon and the Typikon of Lviv University prescribe this service (just as that of August 31) — only on 6, with Octoechos. The Moscow Typikon and the Greek-Venetian Menaion prescribe the whole service — only to the Theotokos, however, of the small kind, only at Matins, from the Canon to the end, — of the large kind; however, the Greek-Venetian Menaion, instead of the regular Katavasia "I will open my mouth," gives the Heirmos of the last Canon and only after the 3rd, 6th and 9th Odes. The Eye of the Church and our Menaion prescribe — with Polyeleos; and our Menaion adds: "if there is no Vigil"; but this we do not do.
[740] The Lviv Synod (in the Ukrainian text) appointed the day of memory of these saints on July 5 according to the Gregorian calendar, however, later our ordinariates appointed it on July 5 according to the Julian. St. Athanasius of Athos was transferred from July 5 to July 6 ("Archeparchial News," June 8, 1900).
[741] Everything — according to the rubric of the Theologian, when it falls on the Sunday of the Fathers before Pentecost, with the exception of the Vigil. At the Liturgy: Troparia of all three services — according to their order. Prokimenon-Alleluia, Apostle-Gospel — to the Fathers and Vladimir; we do not take the daily ones (Note on p. 296). Communion Hymn — "Praise" and to Vladimir.
[742] Our manuscript Typikon, Greek [Typikon] and [Typikon] of Lviv University and the Eye of the Church prescribe the service of St. Anna on 6, together with the [Holy] Women and with the Octoechos, without Doxology, likewise the Moscow Typikon, however, with Doxology. The Greek-Venetian Menaion gives Great Vespers, and Matins — Great only from the Canon.
[743] Troparion or "Alleluia".
[744] See July 2, note 1.
[745] Typicon S. Sabae; Codex Vatican. An. 1317, sub num. 784; to it corresponds also the one printed in Venice in 1615, Library of St. Augustine in Rome.
[746] See note 1 on p. 427.
[747] Ed. Note. Instead of letters, which in the modern Ukrainian alphabet do not have a direct equivalent, their names in Cyrillic are given.
[748] The discrepancy is determined after adding 13 days to the Greek Pascha.
[749] M. – March, A. – April, 0 – coincide.
[750] Only the Gospel of the 28th Sunday, when it falls before or after the Sunday of the Forefathers, we leave for the Sunday of the Forefathers, and on the 28th — one of the regular [Gospels] of the Forefathers.
[751] I had a student, a Bulgarian, who performed this service on the Holy Mountain [Athos].
[752] So holds the Eye of the Church in Chapter 7. Finally, now among us the holy doors are high [lattice-work/open], and therefore we do not use a curtain.
[753] The translation from Latin was made according to the edition: Ordo Celebrationis vesperarum, matutini et Divinae Liturgiae iuxta recensionem rutenorum, Sacra Congregatio pro Ecclesia Orientali, Roma 1953.
[754] Ed. note. In ancient times, "Royal Doors" referred to those doors that led from the narthex to the temple, for at them the Patriarch met the Emperor. Later this name was applied with improper meaning to the middle doors of the iconostasis. In the rubrics of modern Greek liturgical books, "holy doors" are given (see Akolouthia tou Esperinou kai tou Orthrou, Roma 1950, p. 16), therefore we also consistently correct "Royal Doors" to "Holy Doors" everywhere in this Typikon.
[755] According to our custom, the holy doors remain open already after the carrying out of the Plaschanitsa [Epitaphios].

 

