27: "After the Prefatory Psalm and 'Alleluia,' the first deacon sings the litany 'In peace let us pray to the Lord.' The Priest continues to read the Prayers of Vespers at that same place, and at the end of the litany exclaims: 'For to Thee belongs.' Afterward, all three, having bowed together, exit the sanctuary: the first deacon, and after him the Priest, through the southern door, and the second through the northern, and they sit there behind the Holy Table: the Priest in the middle, the first deacon to the right, and the second to the left of him. After the first Kathisma, that is, after 'Blessed is the man,' the second deacon, having come out to the front of the Holy Doors, sings the Small Litany, and the Priest, having risen, exclaims from his place: 'For Thine is the dominion.' If there is no deacon, then this litany, according to local custom, is said by the Priest quietly, and the Choir responds to its petitions aloud.
111: "From the beginning of Vespers until the stichera at 'Lord, I have cried' everything is similar as at Great Vespers without Vigil; only here, instead of the 1st Kathisma ('Blessed is the man'), the current Kathisma will be [read]; if on the previous day there was a Vigil, then on account of the vigil labor, the current Kathisma is not taken at such Vespers; and because formerly, according to the Typikon, the Vigil was every Sunday, therefore, according to that same Typikon, at Vespers on Sunday for Monday there is no Kathisma, even though now there is not a Vigil every Sunday. The stichera at 'Lord, I have cried' will be not 10 and not 8, but 6, at the end of which there will be no Prayer of the Entrance because there is no Entrance. Upon the conclusion of the stichera: 'Wisdom! Upright!', 'Gladsome Light,' 'Let us be attentive! Peace be unto all! Wisdom! Let us be attentive!' and the Prokimenon of the day from the Horologion; there will be no readings, nor is there at this place the litany 'Let us say all,' but immediately 'Vouchsafe, O Lord' and everything else until the end as at Great Vespers without Vigil, only here after the troparion of the Saint, because He is not a Polyeleos one, the Theotokion is not taken from the Sunday ones, but from the Daily Dismissal ones, according to the tone of the troparion of the Saint and according to the day of the week. If two Saints occur, then are taken: the troparion of the first Saint, Glory: the troparion of the second, Both now: the Dismissal Theotokion, according to the tone of the troparion of the second Saint; in the middle of a Feast also at this Vespers we do not conclude with the Dismissal Theotokia, but with the troparion of the Feast. Furthermore, upon the conclusion of the troparia, the Priest sings the litany 'Have mercy on us, O God' and makes the middle dismissal, that is, He exclaims: 'Wisdom!', and the Choir immediately: 'More honorable' and everything else as at Great Vespers without Vigil. At 'Christ our True God' the Priest turns to the people."
120: "This Vespers is celebrated just as Daily [Vespers][^18], however, without a Kathisma and without litanies, except for the last 'Have mercy on us, O God,' which only the Slavonic Typikons present, but the Greek do not prescribe. The stichera at 'Lord, I have cried' will be only 4. The dismissal, although it can begin from 'Glory to Thee, O Christ God,' yet with us is exclaimed also before that: 'Wisdom!' and 'More honorable' just as at Daily Vespers."
186: "After the troparia the Reader reads the current Kathisma, given according to the content in the Psalter (according to the current local custom, only a few verses). Then follows the Small Litany with the exclamation 'For Thine is the dominion,' which according to local custom the Priest says quietly, sitting at his place, while the Choir sings its responses aloud; then follows the Sessional Hymn and Glory, Both now: its Theotokion.
187: After this -- one more current Kathisma, on account of Sunday, either the 17th, which is called 'The Blameless,' or the 19th, which is called 'Polyeleos' ('Plenteous in Mercy'), after which go the troparia 'The Angelic Council' and the Small Litany with the exclamation 'For blessed is' and the Hypakoe of the current tone; on the occasion of a Feast the 19th Kathisma (Polyeleos) is always taken, after which go the 'Magnification' and the Small Litany with the exclamation 'For holy Art Thou' and the Polyeleos Sessional Hymn[^27]. When the service is Sunday and the service of some Polyeleos Saint, then only the 19th Kathisma is taken and immediately the 'Magnification,' and also 'The Angelic Council' and the Small Litany with the exclamation 'For blessed is,' the Hypakoe of the tone, then all three Sessional Hymns of the Saint, that is the first and second once each, without Theotokia, Glory: His Polyeleos Sessional Hymn once, and Both now: its Theotokion, because after the first and second Kathismata the Sunday Sessional Hymns were taken, and the Sessional Hymns of the Saint did not have a place there. Regarding the Polyeleos, let it be known that it is sung on all Feasts which have Great Vespers and Great Matins. On the occasion of Sunday it is sung only on the Sundays from the Apodosis of the Holy Cross to the Forefeast of the Nativity of Christ, excluding both, that is from September 22 to December 19, both inclusive; and from the Apodosis of Theophany (January 14) exclusively to Cheese-fare Sunday, which precedes the Great Forty Days inclusive. On other Sundays of the whole year the 17th Kathisma is used; from the 19th Kathisma, that is the Polyeleos, only the two first psalms (134th and 135th) are prescribed; according to our current custom only selected verses are taken, that is from the first psalm we sing four verses, and from the second -- four; from the first verses: 1, 2, 13 and 21; from the second: 1, 6, 12 and 26. And in the middle, and at the end of the verses, 'Alleluia' is added, necessary for the perfect development of pleasant singing."
210: After the 3rd, 6th and 9th Ode of the canon, immediately after the Katavasia, the Small Litany is taken (according to the model given at the first Kathisma of Matins), each with its own exclamation, and after the litany at the 3rd Ode the Sessional Hymn is sung, at the 6th - Kontakion and Ikos, and at the 9th - the Exaposteilarion (Hymn of Light) is read. Both the Kontakion and Ikos are taken once each, the Sessional Hymn on Feasts of the Lord and of the Theotokos - twice, that is once - simply the Sessional Hymn, and the second time - with the refrain Glory, Both now. And the Exaposteilarion on Feasts of the Lord and of the Theotokos is taken three times, that is twice - simply, and the third time - with the refrain Glory, Both now. On the Feast of a Polyeleos or non-Polyeleos Saint, which is celebrated, according to the Slavonic Typikon, on 6, the Sessional Hymn and His Exaposteilarion are taken twice[^35], then Both now: His Theotokion. If the Saint has two Sessional Hymns or Exaposteilaria, then they are taken once each, that is the first - simply, the second - with the refrain Glory, then Both now: His Theotokion[^36]. When several services coincide, each with its own Sessional Hymn, Kontakion-Ikos and Exaposteilarion, then they are taken one after another, according to the order of services; however, the Kontakion-Ikos of the first service is taken at the 6th Ode in its place, and the Kontakion-Ikos of the second, according to the Slavonic typikons[^37], is transferred to the 3rd Ode and goes immediately before the Sessional Hymn. The sequence of Sessional Hymns and Exaposteilaria in the middle of a Feast of the Lord and of the Theotokos ends with the Sessional Hymn or Exaposteilarion of the Feast. After the Katavasia of the 9th Ode, according to the Slavonic Typikon, 'It is truly meet' is taken, if it is not Sunday. If it is Sunday, 'It is truly meet' is not taken, but then, between the Small Litany and the Exaposteilarion (Exapostolarion) we sing, according to the tone of the Prokimenon of the Liturgy, the troparion 'Holy is the Lord our God' (3)"[^38].
301: [^41]: Let it be known that besides the Great Forty Days there exist two other periods in which the rubric of the Menaion on September 21 prescribes also a 3rd Sessional Hymn with a Small Litany and a Kathisma before it. The first period lasts from the Apodosis of the Feast of the Holy Cross, which falls on September 21, to the Forefeast of the Nativity of Christ, which falls on December 20 exclusively. The second lasts from the Apodosis of the Feast of Theophany to Cheese-fare Sunday exclusively, that is in these two periods, in which at Sunday Matins the Polyeleos is given. However, in the content of our Psalter three Sessional Hymns and three Kathismata are given only in the Great Forty Days, so we use them.