Glory be: Now and for ever: Accept the supplication of your servants, O most holy Virgin and Mother of God; intercede for us that we may obtain peace and the forgiveness of our sins.

It is good to give thanks...; Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; Standing in the temple..., (p. 147) the rest as on Matins of the Great Fast until the end.

The Fifth Saturday of the Great Fast (Akathist Saturday): we take the Akathist to the Most Holy Theotokos. The troparion and kontakion are on page 1249.

FIFTH SUNDAY OF THE GREAT FAST

The service of the resurrectional tone of week is taken; and instead of the saint of the day, the common service of the venerable Mary of Egypt is taken. For Vespers and Matins: resurrectional troparion; Glory be: In you, O Mother Mary..., (p. 1244); Now and for ever: O gracious Lord..., (p. 1273).

SUNDAY MATINS

Everything resurrectional; after Psalm 50: Open to me the doors..., (p. 434).

Canon (resurrectional and the following):

Ode 9, Hirmos (Tone 8): O Mother of God and spouseless Virgin, by your word you ineffably conceived the true God. You are higher than the most pure powers; with our unceasing hymns we extol you.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!

Grant me the poverty of Lazarus, O Christ; in Your power, restrain my drives for pleasure; grant me the rich abundance of virtue, that I may praise and extol You.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!

We all know the parable of the Lord: let us detest the heartlessness of the rich man, that we may avoid the same punishment; and then, in the bosom of Abraham, we shall rejoice with an unending joy.

Glory be: Now and for ever: You have carried the invisible God in your arms, the One Whom the angels glorify in heaven, and Whom all creation praises; through you, He grants us salvation, and in faith we extol Him.

Katabasia (Tone 4): Do not weep for Me, O Mother, even though you have seen lying in the tomb the Son to Whom you gave birth in a wondrous manner; for I shall arise and be glorified; and in my divine glory, I shall forever exalt the faithful who love you and sing the praises of your glory.

Holy is the Lord our God (3x).

Sunday Exapostilarion and the following:

Glory be: Now and for ever: O sweetness of the angels and consolation of the afflicted, O protectress of Christians, O Virgin Mother of the Lord, deliver us and save us from eternal punishment.

Stichera at the Praises

From the resurrectional tone of the week, then:

Glory be: (Tone 1): The Kingdom of heaven is not eating and drinking,* but it is justice and holiness.* Therefore, the rich cannot enter,* unless they share their treasures with the poor.* For the prophet David taught us, saying:* The just ones show mercy all day long* and place their delight in the law of the Lord;* they walk in the light and their steps do not falter.* All this was written for our understanding,* to join good deeds with fasting:* and in exchange for earthly goods,* the Lord will grant the riches of heaven.

Now and for ever: (Tone 2): You are truly most blessed..., (p. 140).

SUNDAY VESPERS

(see note on page 464)

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

From the Triodion the following stichera are taken:

(Tone 1, Podoben – Prekhvalnii muchenycy): Even though You were rich, O Christ,* You became poor to enrich us mortals* with the treasure of Your immortal light.* And even though I have been impoverished by the pleasures of this life,* grant me the abundance of virtues;* give me a place with Lazarus the poor* and spare me from the punishment of the rich man* and from the torments that my deeds deserve.

I have amassed treasures of luxury and evil deeds;* taking delight in the pleasures of this life,* I have become liable to the fires of Hades.* My spirit knows the poverty of Lazarus,* for I have been abandoned at the gate of good deeds.* Have mercy on me, O Lord, wretch that I am.

With fervor, let us begin the sixth week of the holy Fast;* O faithful, let us sing a hymn of praise to the Lord* in preparation for the feast of Palms.* For He comes in glory and the power of His divinity;* He draws near to Jerusalem to vanquish death.* Therefore, let us prepare symbols of victory, the palms of our virtues,* that we may cry: Hosanna to the Creator of the world.

Three stichera from the saint of the day; Glory be: of the saint of the day; Now and for ever: theotokion.

Prokimenon: You have granted me the heritage... (p. 472).

Aposticha

(Tone 1): Wondrous is the benevolence of the Lord for us;* foreseeing the future as though it were already present,* He set before us the parable of Lazarus and the wicked rich man.* Considering the end of each of them,* let us avoid the selfishness and hard-heartedness of the latter,* and imitate the strength and endurance of the former,* so that we may cry out with him in the bosom of Abraham:* O Lord and just Judge, glory to You.

Verse: I have lifted up my eyes..., (p. 34).

Do not condemn me, O Christ, to the fires of Hades* with the rich man who had no mercy for Lazarus;* but hear the prayer I offer You with tears;* in Your love grant me a drop of water,* O God of tenderness and Lord of compassion.

Verse: Have mercy on me, O Lord..., (p. 34).

Through the supplication of all the saints and of the Theotokos,* grant us Your peace, O Lord, and save us,* since You alone are compassionate.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Samopodoben): O joy of the angels in heaven* and protectress of the human race on earth,* save us who seek refuge in you, O pure Virgin;* for, next to God, our hope is in you, O Mother of God.

Canticle of Simeon; the rest as on page 464.