SUNDAY MATINS

Everything resurrectional; the troparia as at yesterday’s Vespers; after Psalm 50: Open to me the doors..., (p. 434).

Canon (resurrectional and the following):

Ode 9, Hirmos (Tone 4): Christ, the cornerstone not hewn by human hands, was hewn of You, O Virgin and untouched mountain; it is He Who united the two distinct natures. Therefore, filled with joy, we extol You, O Theotokos.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!

Contemplating the Church once again adorned with the holy icons, in faith we hasten to sing out joyfully: We extol You, O thrice-holy Lord.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!

Possessing Your precious cross and the venerable icons of the saints as a high honor, the Church extols You with a joyful heart, O Lord.

Glory be: Now and for ever: The condemnation of the first mother is wiped out, O Holy Mother of God, for you have given birth in an ineffable manner to the Master of the universe, Whose image we now venerate in His icon.

Katabasia: Christ, the cornerstone... (see above).

Holy is the Lord our God (3x).

Exapostilarion and the following:

Glory be: Now and for ever: The sword of heresy has disappeared and its memory has vanished; and when we see your temple, O Mother of God, adorned with the grace of the venerated icons, we are filled with joy and delight.

Stichera at the Praises

Stichera from the resurrectional tone of the week and the following three:

(Tone 4, Podoben – Dal jesy znamenije): The Church now rejoices in You,* O Lord and Lover of Mankind,* its Spouse and Creator;* for You have saved it from the deceit of idols by Your divine will* and united it to You by Your precious blood.* Your Church accepts the restoration of the holy icons* and praises and glorifies Your name.

Exposing Your bodily image for veneration, O Lord,* we proclaim the great mystery of Your work of salvation.* O Christ and Lover of Mankind;* You have been shown to our eyes,* not merely as an appearance as the Manichaeans falsely believe,* but in the reality of the flesh, whose nature brings us to Your love.

Today is a day of joy and gladness,* for the truth shines brightly.* The Church of Christ is resplendent with the brilliance of the holy icons that have been restored,* and peace reigns among the faithful.

Glory be: (Tone 6): Moses received the Law while fasting;* Elijah, by fasting, closed the heavens;* and the three holy children of Abraham* were victorious over the evil tyrant through their abstinence.* By fasting, grant that we may partake in Your resurrection,* as we sing aloud, O God and Savior:* Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: (Tone 2): You are truly most blessed... (p. 140).

SUNDAY VESPERS

(see note on page 464)

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

From the Triodion take the following three stichera:

(Tone 4, Podoben – Dal jesy znamenije): Grant contrition and estrangement from evil* to my soul submerged in the abyss of passions* and separated from You, O divine King of the universe.* I have no other hope but You. May I find uprightness and virtue.* Save me, a poor sinner, in Your immense goodness,* O almighty Lord and Savior of our souls.

Moses the divine prophet was purified by fasting,* and he contemplated the One Whom he desired.* And you, O my poor soul, hasten to imitate him.* In this time of abstinence purify yourself of every evil,* so that you may also contemplate the Lord Who grants you forgiveness.* He is good and the Lover of Mankind, the Lord almighty.

(Tone 6): Let us begin this second week of the fast in joy;* O faithful, let us exert ourselves from day to day* as did the prophet Elijah the Tishbite.* May the four principal virtues be our chariot of fire!* Let us lift our spirit by turning away from passions,* and through purity, let us struggle against the flesh,* so that we may resist and conquer the Enemy.

Three stichera of the saint; Glory be: of the saint; Now and for ever: theotokion.

Prokimenon: Ps 60 (Tone 8)
You have granted me the heritage, O God, of those who fear Your name.

Verse: From the end of the earth I call; my heart is faint.
Verse: I will hide in the shelter of Your wings.
Verse: I will always praise Your name.

The Prokimenon is immediately followed by the Deign, O Lord... and Let us complete our prayer....

Aposticha

(Tone 8): Come, let us purify ourselves by sharing with the poor,* not sounding the trumpet for our almsgiving,* nor making public our good deeds.* May our left hand know not what our right hand does,* lest vainglory rob us of our fruit.* But in secret, let us say to Him Who knows all secrets:* Forgive us our trespasses, Father,* in Your goodness for humanity.

Verse: I have lifted up my eyes..., (p. 34).

Wondrous indeed is the weapon of prayer and fasting.* To Moses it revealed the Law,* and as a sacrifice it inflamed the zeal of Elijah.* By keeping it we faithfully cry out to the Savior:* Against You alone have we sinned, have mercy on us.

Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord..., (p. 34).

O martyrs of the Lord, you sanctify all places,* and you heal all diseases.* Therefore, we implore you:* Pray that our souls be delivered from the snares of the enemy.

Glory be: Now and for ever: The heavens sing your praise, O spouseless Mother,* and we glorify your giving birth in a manner beyond words;* O Mother of God, intercede for the salvation of our souls.

Canticle of Simeon; the rest as on page 464.

SECOND SUNDAY OF THE GREAT FAST

At Vespers, all from the tone of the week and of the saint.
(For the service of St. Gregory Palamas see pp. 1374 ff.)
