Sunday Vespers and Monday Matins after God the Lord...:

Rejoice, O woman who at the angel’s greeting contained the Joy of the world!* Rejoice, for you gave birth to your Creator and Lord!* Rejoice, for you were made worthy to become the Mother of God.

Monday at the end of Matins:

Rejoice, O gate of the King of glory,* through which none but the Most High has passed,* and which was left sealed for the salvation of our souls!

Monday Vespers and Tuesday Matins after God the Lord...:

With hymns of praise let us, the faithful, exalt the Mother of God,* the solid foundation of our faith* and the precious gift to our souls:* Rejoice, O woman who contained in your womb the Rock of life!* Rejoice, O hope of the world and helper of those who are in trouble!* Rejoice, O bride and Virgin forever!

Tuesday at the end of Matins:

O pure Virgin, in your motherly tenderness be moved* and save us through your prayers to your Son and our God!

Tuesday and Thursday Vespers; Wednesday and Friday Matins after God the Lord...:

When the Mother beheld upon the cross* the Lamb, the Shepherd, and the Savior of the world,* she exclaimed tearfully:* The world rejoices at the sight of its redemption,* but my heart is afire as I see Your pain on the cross,* which You accept for the sake of all, O my Son and my God!

Wednesday and Friday at the end of Matins:

O pure one, the fruit of your womb* is the perfect fulfillment of the prophets and of the Law.* Therefore, O Mother of God, we glorify you with thanks,* and we exalt you with great devotion.

Wednesday Vespers and Thursday Matins after God the Lord:

O pure Mother of God, you are the gate of spiritual life,* save from all dangers those who run to you with confidence* to glorify your holy birthgiving* for the salvation of our souls.

Thursday at the end of Matins:

O pure Virgin, in your motherly tenderness... (see above).

Friday Vespers and Saturday Matins after God the Lord...:

O gracious Lord... (see above).

Saturday at the end of Matins:

O pure Virgin, in your motherly tenderness... (see above).

O Lady, receive the prayers of your servants, and deliver us from all sorrow and tribulation.
