SUNDAY MATINS

After God the Lord... (Tone 7): the troparion: Though the tomb..., (p. 1254).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 1): The disciples were in hiding out of fear of the Jews,* and they gathered in the upper room in Zion.* You stood in their midst, O Lord of goodness;* and though the doors were closed, You appeared and filled them with joy.* You showed them Your hands and the wound of Your side,* saying to the doubting disciple:* Stretch forth your hand and know that it is I Who have suffered for you.
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 1, Podoben – Hrob tvoj Spase): Although the doors were closed, O Christ,* You appeared to Your disciples as the Life of all.* You showed them Your hands, Your feet, and Your side,* to strengthen their faith in Your resurrection from the grave.* But Thomas was not with them and so he said:* If I do not see with my own eyes* I will not be convinced by Your words.
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

After the Polyeleos we sing the Exaltation:
We extol You,* O Life-giving Christ,* because You descended into Hades for our sake,* and You resurrected all with You.
Verse: The Lord is king, with majesty enrobed.
Verse: For He bursts the gates of bronze and shatters the iron bars.
Verse: He led them forth from darkness and gloom and broke their chains to pieces.
Verse: The Lord arose as though from sleep, and He smote their enemies.
Verse: Let God arise, and let His enemies be scattered.
Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 1, Podoben – Hrob tvoj, Spase): When the Lord rose from the grave* and appeared to His disciples in a marvelous manner, He said:* O Thomas, having seen My side and the marks of the nails,* why do you doubt My resurrection?* Thomas, called the Twin, answered the Creator:* You are truly my Lord and my God.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon (Tone 4), (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps. 147 (Tone 4)
O praise the Lord, Jerusalem! Zion, praise your God!
Verse: He has strengthened the bolts of your gates; He has blessed the children among you.

The rest as on an ordinary Sunday – and the first resurrectional Gospel (Mt. 28:16-20).

Canon (Paschal and Sunday)

Ode 9: Omit the Magnificat; immediately after Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the 9th hirmos with its verse:

Verse: O my soul, extol Him, Who delivered man from Hades and granted us resurrection.

Hirmos (Tone 1): O most radiant Lamp, O God-bearer, you are the brilliant glory of the Lord and are exalted above all creatures; with our hymns we extol you.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!
On this most bright day, filled with the light of Your grace, O Christ, You appeared to Your disciples in all Your beauty and goodness; with our hymns we extol You.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!
Your side was examined and touched by a mortal hand, yet it was not burned by Your divinity; with our hymns we extol You.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Christ, You rose from the tomb, and You are our God. Though we have not seen Your resurrection with our own eyes, yet we eagerly believe in You, and with our hymns we extol You.

Verse: O my soul, extol Him, Who brought Thomas out of unbelief to belief.

Katabasia: Shine in splendor, O new Jerusalem! For the glory of the Lord is risen upon you. O Zion, sing with joy and rejoice! And you, pure Mother of God, rejoice in the resurrection of your Son.

Holy is the Lord our God (Tone 1) (3x).

Exapostilarion (Tone 3): O Thomas, do not refuse to believe in Me,* for I was wounded for your sake.* Examine My wounds with your hand;* be of one mind with the other disciples* and proclaim that I am the living God.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Today the fragrance of Spring arises,* and the new creation rejoices.* Today the locks are pulled from the door of the disbelief of Thomas,* and the nails of doubt are broken by the presence of the Lord.* In an act of faith the apostle confesses:* You are indeed my Lord and my God.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 1, Podoben – Prechvalnii muchenicy): After Your wondrous resurrection,* O Lord and Source of life,* You entered even though the doors were locked,* just as You did not break the seals of the tomb.* You filled Your glorious disciples with joy,* and in Your goodness, You gave them Your Spirit of truth.

When You appeared to Your disciples, O Lord,* Thomas, who was called the Twin, was not with them.* Thus he did not believe in Your resurrection,* and he said to those who saw You:* Unless I place my finger into His side* and into the marks of the nails,* I will not believe that He is risen.

O Thomas, touch Me as you wish,* extend your hand and realize that I am flesh and bones;* know that I truly have a human body, said Christ.* Do not persist in your unbelief, but now believe.* And Thomas responded: You are my Lord and my God!* Glory to Your holy resurrection!

Glory be: (Tone 6): Eight days after Your resurrection,* O only Son and Word of God,* You appeared to Your disciples through locked doors* and granted them Your peace.* To the unbelieving disciple You showed the marks of Your passion, saying:* Reach out and examine My hands, feet, and the wound of My side.* he was convinced and cried out to You:* my Lord and my God, glory to You!

Now and for ever: (Tone 2): You are truly most blessed..., (p. 140).

After the great doxology, the troparion: Though the tomb..., (p. 1254); the litanies, and dismissal of Thomas Sunday.

FOR SUNDAY VESPERS (and the entire week): stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...” – three of the feast and three of the saint; Glory be: of the saint; Now and for ever: of the feast. On Sunday Vespers: the entrance and prokimenon: What God is great..., (p. 25). Stichera of the aposticha: of the feast; the troparion: of the saint; Glory be: Now and for ever: Though the tomb..., (p. 1254); then the dismissal of St. Thomas Sunday.

FOR MATINS (and the entire week) we take: the troparia as on Vespers; the sessional hymns of the feast; Having beheld the resurrection...; the canon, and exapostilarion of Thomas Sunday; stichera of the aposticha: of the feast.
