MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion: The supernatural bread... (p. 1259).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 7): Christ, our great and most holy Passover,* offered Himself to God as a pleasing sacrifice,* which is consumed as bread and slain as a lamb.* Let us piously worship His most pure Body and most pure Blood and fervently say:* You are always with us;* therefore, no one can harm us in any way.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Mother of God, ever-Virgin Mary!* Behold the Body of your Son, Christ our God,* which was conceived in your womb by the power of the most Holy Spirit,* and which, at the Mystical Supper, He gave to His disciples, saying:* Take, eat – this is My Body;* and, Drink – this is My Blood.* Implore Him with a Mother’s confidence,* that He may not judge us, the partakers of His mysteries,* but that He may save our souls.

(Tone 4, Podoben – Nebesnykh chynov): Christ took bread and chalice, and having blessed them,* presented them to the heavenly Father, and then gave them to His astonished apostles, saying:* Whoever eats My Body and drinks My Blood,* shall have life everlasting, and I shall raise him up on the last day.* For this reason, we, though unworthy,* today adore the most pure mysteries of Your Body and Blood and partake of them,* because we firmly believe that You, O Christ, Son of our God,* came into the world to save sinners.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O most pure Mother of God!* You conceived without seed by the power of the Holy Spirit* and gave birth to Christ our God.* We prostrate ourselves before His most pure Body,* as before our God and Savior.* Desiring to become partakers of His Body,* we hasten to you, as to our Mother, and pray and beseech you:* Accept our prayers and present them to your Son and our God,* for the salvation of our souls.

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung:
We extol You,* O Christ, Giver of life,* Who for our sake changed bread into Your Body and wine into Your Blood.* Today we adore Them as the incarnate God.
Verse: Great is the Lord and highly praised in the city of our God built on His holy mountain.
Verse: What return can I make to the Lord for all His goodness to me?
Verse: I will take the chalice of salvation; and I will call upon the name of the Lord.
Verse: He made His miracles a memorial, the good and merciful Lord; He gave food to them that fear Him.
Verse: He rained down manna to feed them.
Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 3, Podoben – Krasoti divstva tvojeho): O eternal and unoriginate God!* You took upon Yourself human nature,* and, having come with Your disciples to the prepared chamber,* You celebrated the ancient passover and instituted a new mystical one,* in which, O Savior, You took bread and transformed it into Your Body,* and wine into Your Blood,* and gave Them to us as food and drink.* Having witnessed, today, this divine mystery, we humbly say:* Glory to Your mercy, O Lover of mankind!

Gradual Hymn: Antiphon (Tone 4), (p. 126).

Prokimenon (Tone 4)
Whoever eats My Flesh and drinks My Blood, has eternal life* and I shall raise him up on the last day.
Verse: With the food of angels is man fed; He gave them food in abundance.

Gospel: Jn 6:54-58.
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “Whoever eats My flesh and drinks My blood has eternal life, and I will raise him on the last day. For My flesh is true food, and My blood is true drink. Whoever eats My flesh and drinks My blood remains in Me and I in him. Just as the living Father sent Me, and I have life because of the Father, so also the one who feeds on Me will have life because of Me. This is the bread that came down from heaven. Unlike your ancestors who ate and still died, whoever eats this bread will live forever.”

After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse as on Sunday, then the following stichera:

(Tone 6): Today the angels, in wonderment, gaze upon the people adoring You with fear,* the incarnate God, hidden in the holy mystery,* and yet You give Yourself to them as food.* Together with them, O Master and Lover of mankind,* we, too, on earth praise You, crying out:* Make us worthy to partake of Your most pure Body and Blood,* O merciful Lord!

Canon (Tone 2)

Hirmos 1: Come, faithful, let us sing a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the sea and led the people across it, who were delivered from the bondage of Egypt, for He is covered with glory.

Hirmos 3: I heard, Lord, reports about Your providence and I glorified You, the only Lover of mankind.

Hirmos 4: You dispelled the fog of the prefigurements, and, with the appearance of truth, You illumined the hearts of the faithful through the divine Virgin; therefore, illumine us also, with Your light, O Christ!

Hirmos 5: O Lord, Giver of light and Creator of ages, guide us by the light of Your commandments, for, besides You, we know no other God.

Hirmos 6: A great abyss of sins has engulfed me; therefore, like the prophet I cry out to You, Lord: Save me from perdition!

Hirmos 7: The Chaldean furnace, blazing with fire, was bedewed by the presence of the Holy Spirit, and the youths sang: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers!

Hirmos 8: The sun and the moon praise and glorify You, Who cover the earth with water, establish the boundaries of the sea with sand, and sustain all things. All creation forever sings a hymn to You, as to the Creator of all.

Ode 9: Omit the Magnificat; immediately after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings:

Verse: O my soul extol the Lord, Who gave His Body as mystical food.

Hirmos (Tone 2): You are our only desire, our only sweetness, O Word of God, Son of the Virgin, the only God, Lord, most Holy of Holies. For this reason, we extol You together with Your Mother.

Verse: Glory be to Your Body and Blood, O Christ!
Behold Christ! Taste and see that He is the Lord, as He always was. For our sake He offered Himself to His Father as a sacrifice once for all, and continually offers Himself and sanctifies the partakers.

Verse: Glory be to Your Body and Blood, O Christ!
O Savior, let Your Body and Blood be for me as fire and light, so that they may cleanse from sin, consume the thorn of concupiscence, and enlighten all, who worship Your Divinity.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Lady, God took flesh from your pure body; for this reason, all the nations praise you, and the heavenly powers glorify you; for through you the Lord almighty became man.

Verse: O my soul, extol Christ our God, Who gave His Body for the salvation of the human race.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 4): Let everyone on earth dance for joy in spirit.* Let the heavenly ranks celebrate in honor of the sacred feast.* O Mother of God, let them cry:* Rejoice, ever-blessed Theotokos and ever-virgin.

Exapostilarion: In the midst of Your disciples, who were present at the Mystical Supper,* looking at You intently, Lord,* You took bread into Your sacred hands,* raised Your eyes to God the Father,* gave thanks, blessed, broke, and gave it to Your holy disciples.* Give also this bread to us, Your unworthy servants.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O most pure Virgin, Mother of God,* in these holy mysteries we worship Him* Whom you carried in your motherly womb and later in your arms.* Intercede with Him in our behalf, that He may save our souls.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 1, Podoben – O dyvnoje chudo): O marvelous wonder!* The Source of life appears on the altar and gives Himself to mankind as food.* Rejoice, O holy Church adorned with the bread of the Body of Christ!* Let us, the faithful, sing together with John the Theologian:* The Word became flesh and dwelt among us,* and we have seen His glory,* the glory of the only-begotten of the Father.

O marvelous wonder!* True God of true God, prefigured in the manna, assumed human nature.* Rejoice, today, O human race, seeing that God gives Himself in the flesh! Sing with joy and heartfelt thanksgiving to God:* The Word became flesh and dwelt among us,* and we have seen His glory,* the glory of the Only-begotten of the Father.

O marvelous wonder!* Wisdom has slain her victims, prepared her wine, and has set her table, summoning all:* Come, eat My bread and drink the wine which I have prepared for you.* Rejoice, all you kings; give thanks all you hierarchs,* for the Word became flesh and dwelt among us,* and we have seen His glory,* the glory of the Only-begotten Son of the Father.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him:* I am the Bread of life that came down from heaven.* Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink His blood,* you shall not have life in you.* Whoever eats My flesh and drinks My blood,* shall have everlasting life,* and I shall raise him up on the last day.

After the great doxology, the troparion: Your memorial, O Christ..., (p. 1259), the litanies, and the great dismissal.
