SUNDAY MATINS

After Glory to the holy..., if it is the custom, we kneel and sing Heavenly King (Tone 6); then: Glory to God in the highest....
After God the Lord, the troparion: Blessed are You.., (p. 1258).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 4, Podoben – Zdyvuvavsia Josyf): Come, O faithful, let us celebrate the feast of the Fiftieth Day,* the day which concludes the Feast of feasts;* the day on which the pre-ordained promise is fulfilled;* the day when the Comforter descends upon the earth in tongues of fire;* the day of the disciples’ enlightenment.* revealed as initiated into the heavenly mysteries,* the light of the Comforter has illumined the world.
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 4, Podoben – Zdyvuvavsia Josyf): The fountain of the Spirit rushes down to earth,* mystically divided into flaming streams,* both refreshing and enlightening the apostles;* the fire became for them a cloud of dew,* raining enlightenment upon them.* From them we have received grace by fire and water,* for truly the light of the Comforter has illumined the world.
Glory be: Now and ever: (repeat the above).

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung:
We extol You,* O Christ the Giver of life,* and we venerate Your most Holy Spirit,* Whom You sent upon Your holy apostles from the Father.
Verse: The heavens proclaim the glory of God, and the firmament shows forth the work of His hands.
Verse: By His word the heavens were made, by the breath of His mouth all the stars.
Verse: Fire goes before Him, and consumes His enemies round about.
Verse: When You send forth Your Spirit, they are created, and You renew the face of the earth.
Verse: The Lord will give strength to His people; the Lord will bless His people with peace.
Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Refrain (Bolharskyj): Glory be to You, Most Holy Trinity: Father, and Word, and Holy Spirit! Glory be to You, O God!

Sessional Hymn (Tone 8, Podoben – Povelinnoje tajno): After Your resurrection from the grave, O Christ,* and Your divine ascension into the highest heavens,* You made Your glory descend upon the witnesses of Your divinity,* and You renewed a spirit of righteousness in the hearts of Your disciples.* Therefore, they have filled the world, O Savior,* with the sounds of Your teaching and Your work of salvation,* as a melodious harp mystically played with the divine plectrum.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon (Tone 4), (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 142 (Tone 4)
Let Your good Spirit guide me in ways that are level and smooth.
Verse: Lord, listen to my prayer; turn Your ear to my appeal.

Gospel: Jn 20:19-25.
On the evening of that first day of the week, when the doors were locked, where the disciples were for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in their midst and said, “Peace be with you.” When He had said this, He showed them His hands and His side. The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord. Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you.” As the Father had sent Me, so I send you. And when He had said this, He breathed on them and said to them, “Receive the Holy Spirit, whose sins you forgive are forgiven them, and whose sins you retain are retained.”

Having beheld the resurrection of Christ... is omitted; after Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: the verse, as on Sunday, then Heavenly King (Tone 6), (p. 729).

Canon – Ode 9

The Magnificat is omitted; immediately after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings:

Verse: O my soul, extol the Holy Spirit, Who proceeds from the Father and the Son.

Hirmos (Tone 7): You have conceived in all purity, and the Word and Creator of the universe takes flesh in you, O spouseless Mother and virginal Birthgiver of God, the dwelling place of the One Whom none could contain, and the abode of the infinite One, your Creator. For this, we extol you.

Verse: Most Holy Trinity, our God, glory be to You!
The laws of nature are surpassed; wonderful thing is now heard: while the apostles resound with one voice, by the grace of the Holy Spirit, people, nations, and languages all understand in their own way the wonders of God, for they have been initiated into the knowledge of the Holy Trinity.

Verse: Most Holy Trinity, our God, glory be to You!
He who formerly was taken up in a chariot of fire, the prophet who was filled with zeal and fervor, prefigured the brilliant coming of the Spirit, Who descends upon the apostles this day; and shining with the brightness of this fire, they make the Trinity known to all.

Glory be: Now and for ever: I wish to praise the virginal source of Life, Who alone has hidden in her womb, the Word Who heals the human race, and Who now from the right hand of the Father, sends us the grace of the Holy Spirit.

Verse: O my soul, extol the one God in three Persons.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 4): Rejoice, O Queen and glorious Virgin Mother!* What orator, rich in eloquence, could find the proper words* to fashion a hymn of praise worthy of you?* For every spirit shudders before the mystery of your holy birthgiving:* and we also unite our voices to glorify you.

Exapostilarion (Tone 3): O most Holy Spirit, Who proceeds from the Father through the Son,* and Who has now descended upon the uneducated disciples,* save and sanctify all those who recognize You as God.

Glory be: Now and for ever: The Father is Light and the Word is Light;* the Holy Spirit also is Light!* He is sent upon the apostles in the form of tongues of fire,* and through Him the whole world receives the light of baptism* to adore the Holy Trinity.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 4): All the peoples have seen wonders today* in the city of David,* when the Holy Spirit descended in tongues of fire,* as told by the God-inspired Luke, who said:* The disciples of Christ were gathered together;* there was a sound like a mighty wind,* and it filled the whole house where they were sitting.* And they began to speak in foreign tongues,* teaching the doctrine of the Holy Trinity.

The Holy Spirit was, is, and always will be* without beginning and without end,* but always one with the Father and the Son.* He is Life and Giver of life;* He is Light and Giver of light,* good by nature and source of goodness.* It is through Him that the Father is known and the Son glorified;* and all people have come to know the one power, and the one substance,* and the same adoration of the Holy Trinity.

The Holy Spirit is Light and Life,* the living Spring mystically gushing forth,* the Spirit of wisdom and Spirit of knowledge,* good, upright, and understanding,* majestic, and purifying from sin.* He is God and deifies us;* Fire proceeding from Fire,* speaking, acting, and distributing gifts.* It is through Him that all the prophets and the apostles of God* have received the crown, together with the martyrs.* A strange report to hear and strange to see:* the fire is divided for the sharing of gifts.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): Heavenly King, Comforter,* Spirit of Truth,* You are everywhere present and fill all things.* Treasury of blessings and Giver of life,* come and dwell within us,* cleanse us of all stain,* and save our souls, O gracious Lord.

After the great doxology, the troparion: Blessed are You, O Christ our God..., (p. 1258).; the litanies; and the dismissal.

Vespers with the Kneeling Prayers

After Blessed is our God..., Heavenly King... (Tone 6) is sung while kneeling; then Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and Psalm 103; then the deacon intones the litany:

In peace let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (after each petition).

For the people here present who are awaiting the grace of the Holy Spirit, in order that they may become His temples and dwelling-places, let us pray to the Lord.
For those who bow their knees and hearts before the Lord, let us pray to the Lord.
That our faith and irreproachable love be preserved through the grace of the Holy Spirit and that we be shown to be partakers of His divine nature, let us pray to the Lord.
That we may receive forgiveness of sins and the knowledge of spiritual grace and not be deprived of the Holy Spirit on the terrible and just day of the judgment of Christ, let us pray to the Lord.
That we may always, in spirit and body, glorify the holy consubstantial Trinity in unity, let us pray to the Lord.
That He may accept the bending of our knees as incense before Him, let us pray to the Lord.
Protect us, save us, and have mercy on us, O God, by Your grace.
Remembering our most holy, immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another, and our whole life, to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord,
Priest: For to You is due all glory, honor, and worship, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

Six stichera from Saturday, (pp. 726-727); Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): Heavenly King..., (p. 734).

The entrance: O Joyful Light; the great Prokimenon: What God is great..., (p. 25).

Immediately after the prokimenon the deacon intones:
On bended knees, let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).
Then everyone kneels, and the priest says aloud the following prayer:

First Kneeling Prayer

O Lord, most pure, incorruptible, without beginning, invisible, incomprehensible, unsearchable, unchangeable, unsurpassable, immeasurable, and forbearing: You alone have immortality; You live in unapproachable light; You made heaven and earth and the sea and all things created in them. You grant to all their requests even before they ask. We pray to You, and we beseech You, O Master Who loves all people, the Father of our Lord, God, and Savior, Jesus Christ. For our sake and for the sake of our salvation, He came down from heaven and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and Mary, the ever-Virgin and the most glorious Godbearer. At first He taught us with words which were then later confirmed through deeds when He endured the saving passion, giving us, Your humble, sinful, and unworthy servants, the example of offering supplications to You, with necks bowed and on bended knees, for our sins and for the people's acts done in ignorance.

Hear us on whatever day we call upon You, for You alone are most merciful and the Lover of mankind! However, especially hear us on this present day of Pentecost on which, after our Lord Jesus Christ had ascended into heaven and was seated at Your right hand, O God and Father, He sent down the Holy Spirit upon His holy disciples and apostles. The Holy Spirit came upon each of them, and filling all of them with His inexhaustible grace, they spoke of Your grandeur in various tongues, and they prophesied. Now, therefore, hear us who are praying to You, and remember us, lowly and condemned as we are, and return our souls from the captivity of sin, for we have Your loving-kindness interceding for us. Accept us who fall down before You calling out: We have sinned! To You we have been committed from birth. From our mother's womb, You are our God!

Everyone stands, and the deacon says the litany Let us all say..., (p. 27), after which the deacon intones:

On bended knees, again let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).

Second Kneeling Prayer

O Lord Jesus Christ, our God, You bestowed Your peace upon us and You granted us the gift of the most Holy Spirit. And, while still yet being present with us in this life, You continue to bestow upon the faithful this inheritance that can never be taken away. On this day, in a vivid manner, You sent down this grace upon Your disciples and apostles, confirming their lips with fiery tongues so that, through them, we and the whole human race have received the knowledge of God through our own ears in our own language. We have been enlightened by the light of the Spirit and have been delivered from error, as though from darkness, by the distribution of visible and fiery tongues. Through this mysterious action, we have thereby been taught faith in You; and having been illuminated, we bless You, together with the Father and the Holy Spirit, as one Divinity and Power and Authority.

You are also the Splendor of the Father, the unchangeable and immutable Image of His essence and His nature, and the Source of wisdom and grace. Open my sinful lips and teach me the manner in which and for what needs I should pray. For You know the great multitude of my sins, but their enormity can be vanquished by Your lovingkindness. For behold, I stand before You with fear, and I cast the despair of my soul into the depth of Your mercy. Guide my life along Your ways, for You govern all creation by a word with the ineffable power of Your wisdom; show me the way in which I should walk, O tranquil Haven of those who are turbulently perplexed. Grant the Spirit of Your wisdom to my deliberations, giving the Spirit of understanding to my ignorance. With the Spirit of Your fear, overshadow my deeds and renew a steadfast spirit deeply within me. And with Your sovereign Spirit, stabilize the indecisiveness of my thoughts, in order that being guided every day by Your gracious Spirit toward those things that are profitable for me, I may be deemed worthy to fulfill Your commandments. Let me be constantly aware of Your coming in glory when You will judge our deeds.

Protect me from the corrupting pleasures of this world; strengthen me with the desire to strive for the treasures of the world to come. For You have said, O Master, that whatever anyone asks for in Your name, it will be received without hindrance from Your Father, the co-eternal God. Therefore, on this feast of the descent of Your Holy Spirit, I, a sinner, also entreat Your goodness so that You would grant me whatever I have asked that is for salvation. Indeed, O Lord, You are the bounteous Giver of all benefits; and You are a gracious provider Who gives most abundantly those things for which we ask. You are the compassionate One and the merciful One Who sinlessly became a partaker of our flesh; and unto those who bend their knees to You, Who became the purifier of our sins, You extend Your infinite lovingkindness.

O Lord, grant then Your generosities to Your people. Hear us from Your holy heaven. Sanctify us by the power of Your saving right hand. Cover us beneath the shelter of Your wings, and do not despise the works of Your hand. We have transgressed against You alone; against You only have we sinned, but only You do we worship. We do not know how to worship a strange god; neither do we stretch out our hands, O Master, to any other god. Pardon our transgressions and accept our prayers that we offer on bended knees. Extend the hand of Your help to all of us. Accept the prayer of all as if it were pleasant incense, acceptable before Your most gracious kingdom.

Everyone stands and recites the hymn Deign, O Lord..., (p. 28), after which the deacon intones:

On bended knees, again let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).

Third Kneeling Prayer

O ever-flowing, living, and enlightening Source; O creative Power, co-eternal with the Father, Who most marvelously fulfilled the entire plan concerning our salvation; O Christ our God, Who shattered the indissoluble bonds of Death and the bolts of Hades: You trampled upon a multitude of the evil spirits, offering Yourself for us as a blameless Victim and giving Your most pure Body, untouched and unapproachable by any sin, as a sacrifice. And, through this awesome and inscrutable sacred sacrifice, You have given us eternal life. For by descending into Hades and smashing the eternal gates, and having shown the way to heaven to those who were sitting in darkness, You ensnared the Prince of evil and the snake of the Abyss with divinely-wise enticements. And You bound him with the chains of gloom by Your immeasurable power, and You shackled him in Tartarus, the deepest infernal region of Hades, and through Your might confined him to the unquenchable fire and the eternal darkness. Thus, O greatly-eminent Wisdom of the Father, You manifested Yourself as the great Helper of the misfortunate, and You enlightened those who were sitting in darkness and in the shadow of death.

You indeed are the Master of all, O God our Savior, the Hope of all those at the ends of the earth and of those far away at sea. On this last and great salvific day of the feast of holy Pentecost, You showed us the mystery of the Holy Trinity, consubstantial and co-eternal, without division or confusion, and You also showed us the descent and arrival of Your holy and life-creating Spirit being poured out in the form of fiery tongues on Your holy apostles, appointing them to be the proclaimers of the good news of our faith, and showing them to be confessors and preachers of the true, divine teaching. Also, on this salvific feast on which everything was totally accomplished, You deigned, therefore, to accept supplications in behalf of those who are imprisoned in Hades; and to those being held in bondage, You promised great hopes for their release from the grievous bonds constraining them by sending down Your consolation. Hear us, Your humble servants, beseeching You, and grant repose to the souls of Your servants who have already departed into a place of light and a place of refreshment and peace from which all illness, sorrow, and sighing have been taken away. Commit their souls to the places of the just, and make them worthy of peace and of repose. For the dead cannot praise You, O Lord, nor do those in Hades venture to offer confession to You. But we, the living, do bless You, and we do pray and offer You supplications and sacrifices for their souls.
