Verse: So let the wicked perish at the presence of God, and let the righteous ones rejoice!
The myrrh-bearing women* arrived just before the dawn* at the tomb of the Giver of life* and found an angel seated on the stone* who spoke these words to them:* Why do you seek the Living among the dead?* Why do you mourn the Incorruptible among those subject to decay?* Go, announce the good news* to His disciples.

Verse: This is the day that the Lord has made; let us exalt and rejoice in it!
Pasch so delightful,* Pasch of the Lord is the Pasch,* most honored Pasch now dawned on us.* It is the Pasch!* Therefore, let us joyfully embrace one another.* O Passover, save us from sorrow;* for today Christ has shown forth from the tomb* as from a bridal chamber* and filled the women with joy by saying:* Announce the good news* to my apostles.

Glory be: Now and for ever: This is the resurrection day.* Let us be enlightened by this Feast,* and let us embrace one another.* Let us call brethren* even those who hate us,* and in the resurrection* forgive everything; and let us sing:
Christ is risen from the dead!* By death He conquered Death,* and to those in the graves He granted life. (3x).

Homily of St. John Chrysostom on the Resurrection

Let every pious and God-loving soul enjoy this splendid and luminous feast; let every faithful servant enter joyfully into his Master’s joy! Let the one who has borne the burden of fasting now receive his pay, and the one who has toiled since early morning, let him obtain his due reward! If anyone came after the ninth hour, let him gratefully join in the feasting; and the one who tarried until the noon hour, let him not be afraid of missing anything! If there is one who waited until the third hour, let him come unhesitatingly; and even the laborer who came at the fifth hour, let him not fear because he came late. For the Lord is generous and receives the last even as the first; He gives rest to the worker of the last hour even as to the one of the first. He has pity on the last, and serves the first; He rewards the first, and gives freely to the last. He receives the fruits of labor, and accepts good intentions; He honors the deed, and praises the effort. And so, enter into your Master’s joy: you the first and you the last will receive the bounty. Come together, you rich and you poor: abstinent or indulgent, honor this day. You who have kept the fast and you who have not, be joyful now: the table is laden, take of it all of you without any scruple. There is enough of the fatted calf for all: let no one go away hungry.

All of you, come and taste the banquet of faith; all of you enjoy the abundance of mercy. Let no one bemoan his poverty, for the Kingdom of us all has appeared to us; let no one complain about his sins, for pardon has risen from the tomb; let no one be afraid of death, for the Lord’s death has delivered us. He has destroyed it by enduring it; He went down into the Abyss and stripped the Abyss; He made it bitter for having tasted of His flesh. That is what Isaiah had foretold: the Abyss, he said, was made bitter when it met You beneath the ground; it was made bitter because it was reduced to naught; it was made bitter because it was fooled; it was made bitter because it was put to death; it was made bitter because it was annihilated! It seized a corpse, and lo! discovered God; it took hold of earth, and behold! encountered heaven! It captured the seen, and fell before the unseen. O death, where is your sting; Abyss, where is your victory? Christ is risen, and you are cast down; Christ is risen, and the demons are crushed; Christ is risen, and the angels sing for joy; Christ is risen, and life has overcome. Christ is risen, and the tomb is emptied of the dead for Christ the Resurrection has become the first-fruits of the dead. To Him be glory and power for ever and ever. Amen. (Pochaiv Triodion, 1746).

Then the litany Have mercy on us, O God... the litany Let us complete our morning prayer..., (pp. 142-143); and the Paschal dismissal:

Deacon: Wisdom!
Choir: Give the blessing.
Priest: Blessed be Christ our God always, now and for ever, and ever.
Choir: Amen. O God strengthen the holy Orthodox (Catholic or true) faith now and for ever.
Priest: Most holy Mother of God, save us.
Choir: Shine in splendor, O New Jerusalem! For the glory of the Lord is risen upon you. O Zion, sing with joy and rejoice! And you, pure Mother of God, rejoice in the resurrection of your Son.
Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ, our God, our hope, glory be to You!
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, by death He conquered Death, and to those in the graves He granted life. Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God, risen from the dead, by death conquering Death and granting life to those in the graves, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother and all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.

The priest, raising the cross, intones three times: Christ is risen! The people respond: Indeed, He is risen! – then everyone sings three times: Christ is risen..., and end with the words: And He granted us eternal life, we bow to His holy resurrection on the third day.

BLESSING OF THE ARTOS

(on Saturday of Bright Week)

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.

The priest says the following prayer: O Lord, God almighty, Who through Your servant Moses, at the exodus of Israel from Egypt, and the liberation of Your people from the bitter bondage of Pharaoh, commanded that a lamb be slain, foreshadowing the Lamb, Your beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, Who because of our deeds, of His own good will, was slain on the cross, and took away the sins of the whole world; we humbly entreat You, look upon this bread, and bless † and sanctify † it. For we, Your servants in honor and glory and commemoration of the glorious resurrection of Your Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom also, we have received freedom and release from the eternal snares of the enemy and the unbreakable bonds of hell, now before Your majesty, on this exceeding bright, and all-glorious, and saving day of Easter, offer this bread. Grant that we who offer it, and those who shall kiss it and shall taste of it, may be partakers of Your heavenly blessings; and by Your might root out from us all sickness and infirmity, granting health to all: For You are the Source of all blessings, and the Giver of health, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and ever. Amen.

The priest sprinkles the artos, saying: This artos is blessed by the sprinkling of this holy water, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Then he exits from the sanctuary and places the artos on the tetrapod; and the people kiss it as they come to receive the antidoron.
