SUNDAY MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion: O Christ our God... (p. 1250), Glory be: Now and for ever: We have been buried..., (p. 1251).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): Carrying palms in spirit and with our souls purified,* as the children of old, let us praise Christ in faith;* and let us sing to Him with a full voice: Blessed are You, O Savior,* Who come into this world to save Adam from the ancient curse,* and Who have willed to become the new spiritual Adam.* O Word, You have fulfilled all things for our salvation, glory to You.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Having raised Lazarus who had been in the tomb four days, O Lord,* You teach us to cry out with palms and branches:* Blessed is He Who comes to us.

(Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): O Christ, You shed tears over Your friend,* and You raised Lazarus from the dead,* even though he was already buried.* Thus, You showed Your tender compassion;* the multitude of children heard of Your coming, O Savior,* and they went out today with palms in their hands, crying out to You:* Hosanna! Blessed is He Who comes to save the human race!

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 1): O peoples and nations, sing with one voice:* The King of the angels comes, seated upon the colt of a donkey,* to conquer the enemy by the power of the cross.* The children carry palms and cry out to Him:* Glory, victory and welcome;* glory to You, O Christ our Savior;* glory and praise to our only God!

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol You,* O Christ the Giver of life,* and we also sing to You: Hosanna in the highest:* blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord!

Verse: The Lord is great in Zion. He is supreme over all the peoples.
Verse: Mount Zion rejoices: the people of Judah rejoice.
Verse: O praise the Lord, Jerusalem! Zion, praise your God!
Verse: May the name of the Lord be proclaimed in Zion, and His praise in the heart of Jerusalem.
Verse: The Lord will reign forever, Zion's God, from age to age.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 8, Podoben – Povelinoje tajno): He is seated upon the Cherubim,* and for us now mounts upon a colt; He hears the children crying to Him: Hosanna!* The crowds also shout: Blessed are You, O Son of David!* Hasten to save those whom Your hand has fashioned:* for our salvation, You have come to reveal Your glory.

Gradual Hymn: Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 8 (Tone 4)
On the lips of children and of babes, You have found praise.
Verse: How great is Your name, O Lord our God, through all the earth!

Gospel according to Matthew (Begin. 83; 21:1-11; 15-17).
[At that time,] when [Jesus] drew near Jerusalem and came to Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples, saying to them, “Go into the village opposite you, and immediately you will find an ass tethered, and a colt with her. Untie them and bring them here to me. And if anyone should say anything to you, reply, ‘The master has need of them.’ Then he will send them at once.” This happened so that what had been spoken through the prophet might be fulfilled: “Say to daughter Zion, ‘Behold, your king comes to you, meek and riding on an ass, and on a colt, the foal of a beast of burden.’” The disciples went and did as Jesus had ordered them. They brought the ass and the colt and laid their cloaks over them, and He sat upon them. The very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches from the trees and strewed them on the road. The crowds preceding Him and those following kept crying out and saying: “Hosanna to the Son of David; blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord, hosanna in the highest.” And when He entered Jerusalem the whole city was shaken and asked, “Who is this?” And the crowds replied, “This is Jesus the prophet, from Nazareth in Galilee.” When the chief priests and the scribes saw the wondrous things He was doing, and the children crying out in the temple area, “Hosanna to the Son of David,” they were indignant and said to Him, “Do You hear what they are saying?” Jesus said to them, “Yes; and have you never read the text, ‘Out of the mouths of infants and nurslings you have brought forth praise’?” And leaving them, He went out of the city to Bethany, and there He spent the night.

The Hymn of the Resurrection is omitted. During Psalm 50 the priest incenses the willow branches on the tetrapod on all four sides; then begins:

The Blessing of Willow Branches

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: O Lord our God, Who sit upon the Cherubim, and Who restored the might of Your Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, that through His cross and burial and resurrection He might save the world; Who, also, when today He entered Jerusalem to embark upon His voluntary passion, was met by the people who sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, bearing the symbols of victory, boughs of trees and branches of palms, emblematic of the resurrection: keep and preserve us also who on this prefestal day in imitation of them bear in our hands palms and boughs. And like those nations and children who cried to You: ‘Hosanna!’ may we likewise with hymn and spiritual song be made worthy of the life-giving resurrection through Christ Jesus, our Lord, with Whom You are blessed together with Your all-holy, gracious, and life-giving Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Peace be with all!
Choir: And with your spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord!

The priest says the prayer of the blessing:
O Lord God, Ruler of the universe! During times of the righteous and just Noah, You revealed the ark to be a prefigurement of the Church, foretelling the coming of the most Holy Spirit through the dove that brought the olive branch. This prefigurement was fulfilled by the Jewish children who greeted You with olive and palm branches, giving You praise, and shouting: Hosanna in the highest! Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord! Therefore, just as You blessed the greeting people bearing branches, so too, O Lord Jesus Christ, our God, bless and sanctify these boughs and willow branches, so that all who receive them, may receive through them protection of their souls and bodies; may they be a medicine for our salvation and a sacrament of Your grace. Every place where they will be placed, may those, who dwell there, receive Your blessing. Having driven away all hostile powers, may Your right hand protect those, whom You have redeemed with Your most precious blood; so that we may all sing together: Hosanna, blessed is He Who judges justly with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and forever.
Choir: Amen.

The priest then sprinkles the willow branches with holy water, saying:
These willow branches are blessed by the sprinkling of this holy water, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

The choir sings:
Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 2): Today Christ enters the city of Bethany, seated upon the colt of a donkey, to signify the submission of the pagans to the Wisdom and the Word of God.
Verse (Tone 6): Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness. In Your compassion, blot out my offense.
Today the grace of the Holy Spirit has gathered us together; and taking up Your cross, we all say: Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest.

Canon (Tone 4)

Hirmos 1: The springs of the abyss have held back their floods: the foam of the sea no longer hides its foundations; with a sign You have made the waters flow back and saved Your chosen people, who sing a hymn of victory to You, O Lord.

Hirmos 3: The people of Israel drank from the hardened rock which was changed into a spring at Your command; and You Yourself, O Christ, are the rock of our life. On this rock the Church was founded; and we now sing to You: Hosanna, blessed are You, O Lord Who is coming.

Hirmos 4: Christ is coming and reveals Himself as our God; He shall come without delay; coming forth from a spouseless Virgin. He comes from the overshadowed mountain, as the prophet of old has spoken. And we join our voices to sing: Glory to Your power, O Lord.

Hirmos 5: Go and announce on the mountain of Zion the good news for Jerusalem; lift your voice and proclaim the glory which comes to the city of God: Peace be upon Israel and salvation to the Gentiles.

Hirmos 6: The hearts of the just exult with joy; a new covenant is granted to the world: The covenant is renewed in the blood of God.

Hirmos 7: You saved the children of Abraham from the furnace, and You made the Chaldeans perish in the fire they themselves had prepared: O Lord, most worthy of our hymns, blessed are You, O God of our ancestors.

Hirmos 8: Rejoice, O Jerusalem, and keep a feast, all you who love Zion! The One Who reigns forever, the Lord of powers, has come; the universe bows before Him, and the earth praises Him: Bless the Lord, all you works of the Lord.

Ode 9: The Magnificat is omitted; after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the ninth hirmos with its verse:

Verse: O my soul, extol Christ Who sits on the colt of a donkey.

Hirmos (Tone 4): God is the Lord and He has revealed Himself to us; let us celebrate this feast in joy. Come, with palms and branches, let us extol Christ. Let us cry out to Him in joy: Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord, our Savior.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!
Why this tumult among the nations? O scribes and Pharisees, why do you murmur in vain when you say: Who is this to Whom the children sing as they carry their palms and branches, and say: Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord, our Savior?

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!
This is God Who has no equal! Having opened the path to holiness, He has given it to Israel His beloved; then He revealed Himself in our humanity, so that, having seen Him, we may sing: Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord, our Savior.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Why do the rebellious people place so many obstacles on the path of salvation? Their feet hasten to pour out the blood of the Lord; but surely, He shall rise to save those who sing to Him: Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord, our Savior.

Refrain: O my soul extol Christ...
Katabasia: God is the Lord... (see above).

Holy is the Lord our God (Tone 4) (3x).
Exapostilarion is omitted.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 4): A great multitude of people* spread their garments along Your path, O Lord;* others cut branches to strew along the way.* The crowds who went before You, along with those who followed, sang out:* Hosanna to the Son of David;* blessed is He Who comes and Who shall come in the name of the Lord.

Come, all you peoples and nations,* and contemplate today the King of heaven;* He enters Jerusalem humbly seated upon a colt as upon an exalted throne.* O peoples, see the Lord Who became flesh to save us,* according to the vision of the prophet Isaiah.* Behold, the Spouse of the new Zion;* for His most pure and immaculate wedding feast,* the multitude of innocent children run after Him, singing praise.* Therefore, with the angels, we also sing:* Hosanna in the highest;* blessed is He Who brings salvation to us.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Before Your passion, O Christ our God,* You confirmed the belief in the resurrection of all:* by Your power, You raised Lazarus at Bethany on the fourth day,* and You gave sight to those who were blind, O Savior and Giver of light.* Then You entered the holy city with Your disciples, O Lord,* seated upon a colt as upon the throne of the Cherubim,* to fulfill the prophecies.* The Hebrew children carried palms and accompanied You.* Therefore, we also carry our branches, and in thanksgiving, we cry out:* Hosanna in the highest;* blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord.

After the great doxology, the troparion: O Christ our God..., (p. 1250), Glory be: Now and for ever: We have been buried..., (p. 1251), the litanies, and great dismissal.
