SUNDAY MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion, as at yesterday’s Vespers.

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 6): When the tomb was shown to be open and Hades was lamenting,* Mary cried out to the apostles who were hiding and said:* Come out, laborers of the vineyard, and proclaim the news of the resurrection;* for the Lord is risen, granting the world great mercy.

Glory be: Now and for ever: You called Your Mother blessed,* and You willingly went to Your passion.* Your light shone from the cross,* for You desired to go in search of Adam,* To the angels You proclaimed: Rejoice with Me,* for the lost coin has been found.* You do everything according to Your wisdom;* glory to You, O Lord and God!

(Tone 6): Truly our Life was placed in the grave,* and seals were applied to the stone.* The soldiers guarded Christ as they would a sleeping king.* But, striking His enemies with blindness,* the Lord arose.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Virgin and Theotokos, pray to your Son, Christ our God,* Who was willingly nailed upon the cross and rose from the dead,* that He might save our souls.

Hosts of angels; the rest as on an ordinary Sunday in tone 6; the tenth resurrectional Gospel.

Canon (resurrectional (Tone 6) and the following):

Ode 9, Hirmos (Tone 6): For mortals it is impossible to see God upon Whom even the angels dare not gaze; but the Word-made-flesh has been manifested to us through you, O all-pure One. When we extol Him with the heavenly armies, we also proclaim you blessed.

Verse: O holy fathers, pray to God for us!
Tone 6. The Word Who is from before all ages, and Who shares the same throne and eternity with the Father in heaven, fills you with the power of the Spirit and unites you in council: He makes you His companions in battle, and now with the heavenly armies, O holy Fathers, you glorify Him forever.

Verse: O holy Fathers, pray to God for us!
As wise physicians of body and soul, you have stopped Arius and his terrible heresy; you established the Symbol of Faith for the people, and we, who now profess this faith, glorify your sacred memory without ceasing.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Light all-pure. You deliver my soul from the darkness of passions by the prayers of these holy bishops, O Christ; in council they proclaimed You to be eternal and uncreated, the Creator of the universe, and the God Who shares the same eternity with the Father.

Katabasia (Tone 4): O Mother of God, and Queen, by your ineffable birthgiving which no one can comprehend, resurrection is given to the dead; for the Lord of life comes from you. He is clothed in our flesh; and dispelling the darkness of death, He has filled the whole world with light.

Holy is the Lord our God (Tone 6) (3x).

Exapostilarion

The two sons of Zebedee, with Peter, Nathaniel, and Thomas,* and two others were fishing in the Lake of Tiberias.* By the command of Christ, they cast the net on the right side* and drew out many fish.* Peter, recognizing Christ, came swimming towards Him.* This was the third appearance of the Lord after His resurrection.* Then He shared with them bread and fish from the fire.

Glory be: (of the Fathers): Celebrating today the memory of our holy fathers,* we beseech You through their prayers, O Master of tenderness:* Safeguard Your people from all error and heresy;* and grant that we may praise Your glory, O Lord:* the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit.

Now and for ever: (of the Ascension): O Christ, You were raised up to heaven in the sight of Your disciples;* You again went up to share Your Father’s throne.* The angels who came to meet You at the heavenly gate cried out:* Open your gates and lift up your lintels* so that the King of glory may come in,* for our King comes again to the Source of light.

Stichera at the Praises

Stichera from resurrectional tone 6 and the following three stichera:

(Tone 6, Podoben – Vse Otlozhyvshe): Having brought together all spiritual knowledge,* and having carefully pondered all things in the Holy Spirit,* the noble fathers composed the Symbol of Faith in letters divinely inscribed.* they clearly proclaim the Word to be coeternal and consubstantial with the Father,* unerringly following the apostolic faith.

The blessed preachers of Christ received the torch of the Holy Spirit;* they spoke with divine inspiration,* using few words, but rich in meaning.* They proclaimed with boldness the doctrines of the Gospel* and the traditions of righteousness.* Clearly they have been illumined with truth from on high;* they have made firm the foundation of the faith as a strong mountain.

The chosen servants of God,* enlightened with the understanding of divine mysteries,* cast out the devouring wolves from the sheepfold of the Church.* they were faithful shepherds,* blazing with the wrath of righteous judgment,* and have slain the destroyers with the mighty sword of the Spirit.

Glory be: (Tone 8): The choir of the holy fathers hastened from the ends of the earth* to proclaim the unique essence and nature* of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,* and to transmit clearly the divine teaching to the Church.* Praising them in faith, we call them blessed and we sing:* Divine guard of the Lord and brilliant stars of the spiritual firmament,* unconquerable watchmen of the mystical Zion,* sweet flowers of paradise and golden mouths of the Word,* you are the glory of Nicea and the splendor of the universe;* intercede with the Lord for our souls.

Now and for ever: (Tone 2): You are truly most blessed..., (p. 140). After the great doxology; the troparion: You came forth from death..., (p. 141); the litanies; and the great dismissal.

SUNDAY VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

Three from the Council Fathers, (p. 718); three from the saint of the day; Glory be: of the Fathers, (p. 719); Now and for ever: O Christ, splendor and glory..., (p. 718).

Stichera of the aposticha: those from Matins, at the praises, (p. 724), with the following verses:

Verse: Blessed are You, and praiseworthy, O Lord, the God our fathers, and glorious forever is Your name!
Verse: Summon before Me My people who made covenant with Me by sacrifice.

Glory be: (Tone 3): you were the guardians of the apostolic teachings, O holy fathers;* and as teachers of the true faith,* you professed the holy and consubstantial Trinity.* Together in council, you rejected the blasphemy of Arius;* and with him you also refuted Macedonius* who denied the divinity of the Holy Spirit.* you condemned Nestorius, Eutyches, and Dioscorus,* together with Sabellius and Severus.* Through your prayers, preserve us from all false doctrine,* and guard our lives blamelessly in the true faith.

Now and for ever: (Tone 6): God goes up with shouts of joy,* the Lord goes up amid trumpet blast,* in order to raise up the fallen image of Adam,* and to send down upon us the Holy Spirit,* the Comforter Who will sanctify our souls.

Troparion: of the Fathers, (p. 1257); Glory be: of the saint of the day; Now and for ever: of the Ascension, (p. 1256).

Note
On Saturday before Pentecost, we pray for the souls of all Christians of times past who have departed this life. On this day we perform the memorial service for the deceased (see Meatfare Saturday, p. 444). The service for the saint of the day is omitted.
