Verse: They divided My garments among themselves, and for My vesture they cast lots.

(Tone 2): Why do evil and iniquitous people concern themselves with what is in vain?* Why have they condemned to death the Life of all?* O what a great wonder!* The Creator of the world is handed over to the lawless ones,* and He, Who loves mankind, is raised upon the cross,* that He might free the enslaved of the Abyss who are crying out:* O long-suffering Lord, glory to You.

Verse: For food they gave Me gall; in My thirst they gave Me vinegar to drink.

The all-pure Virgin seeing You, O Word,* lifted upon the cross today, lamented as a mother.* Her heart bursting with sorrow and moaning from the depths of her soul;* her countenance deeply scarred with grief,* she cried out so mournfully:* O divine Child, how great is my sorrow.* O Light of the world, O Lamb of God,* why have You passed from my sight?* Beholding all this, the heavenly hosts were struck with fear, and they cried out:* O incomprehensible Lord, glory to You.

Verse: God is our King from time past, the Giver of help through all the land.

As she beheld You hanging upon the tree, O Christ our God,* she, who gave virgin birth to You, the Creator and God of all,* cried out in such great sorrow:* Where has the beauty of Your countenance gone, O my Son?* I cannot endure this sight of unjust crucifixion.* Hasten and arise* so that I may also see Your resurrection from the dead on the third day.

Glory be: (Tone 8): O Lord, when You ascended the cross,* fear and trembling seized everyone.* Yet, You forbade the earth to swallow those who crucified You;* and to restore the order of mankind,* You commanded the Abyss to release its captives.* For You came to give life and not death,* O Judge of the living and the dead.* O Lover of Mankind, glory to You.

Now and for ever: The sentence of the unjust judges has already been pronounced;* the verdict has been given,* and Jesus is condemned to the cross.* Creation shudders in seeing the Lord crucified.* In Your body, You suffered for my sins;* O Lord of mercy, glory to You.

That we may be deemed worthy of hearing the holy Gospel, let us pray to the Lord.

Twelfth Gospel (Matthew 27: 62-66)

Then immediately:
It is good to give thanks to the Lord..., (p. 147).
Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the following troparion:

(Tone 4): You have redeemed us from the curse of the law with Your precious blood;* nailed to the cross, and pierced with the lance,* You have gushed forth immortality to all.* O our Savior, glory to You.

Then, the litany Have mercy on us, O God..., (p. 142), and the daily dismissal, (p. 37).

GREAT (ROYAL) HOURS
THE FIRST HOUR

Priest: Blessed is our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God..., (the usual beginning to Come, let us adore..., p. 10-11).

Psalm 21
My God, my God,* why have You forsaken me?
You are far from my plea* and the cry of my distress.
O my God, I call by day* and You give no reply;
I call by night* and I find no peace.
Yet You, O God, are holy,* enthroned on the praises of Israel.
In You our forebears put their trust;* they trusted and You set them free.
When they cried to You, they escaped.* In You they trusted and never in vain
But I am a worm and no man,* the butt of all, laughingstock of the people.
All who see me deride me.* They curl their lips, they toss their heads.
He trusted in the Lord, let Him save him,* and release him if this is His friend.
Yes, it was You Who took me from the womb,* entrusted me to my mother's breast.
To You I was committed from my birth,* from my mother's womb You have been my God.
Do not leave me alone in my distress;* Come close, there is none else to help.
Many bulls have surrounded me,* fierce bulls of Bashan close me in.
Against me they open wide their jaws,* like lions, rending and roaring.
Like water I am poured out,* disjointed are all my bones.
My heart has become like wax,* it is melted within my breast.
Parched as burnt clay is my throat,* my tongue cleaves to my jaws: You have brought me down into the dust of death.
Many dogs have surrounded me,* a band of the wicked beset me.
They tear holes in my hands and my feet, I can count every one of my bones.* These people stare at me and gloat.
They divide my clothing among them.* They cast lots for my robe.
O Lord, do not leave me alone,* my strength, make haste to help me!
Rescue my soul from the sword,* my life from the grip of these dogs.
Save my life from the jaws of these lions, my poor soul from the horns of these oxen.
I will tell of Your name to my people* and praise You where they are assembled.
You who fear the Lord* give Him praise:
All children of Jacob, give Him glory.* Revere Him, children of Israel.
For He has never despised* nor scorned the poverty of the poor.
From them He has not hidden His face,* but He heard the poor when they cried.
You are my praise* in the great assembly.
My vows I will pay* before those who fear Him.
The poor shall eat* and shall have their fill.
They shall praise the Lord,* those who seek Him.
May their hearts live* for ever and ever!
All the earth shall remember* and return to the Lord,
All families of the nations* worship before Him;
For the kingdom is the Lord’s,* He is ruler of the nations.
They shall worship Him,* all the mighty of the earth;
Before Him shall bow all* who go down to the dust.
My soul shall live for God,* and my children too shall serve Him.
They shall tell of the Lord* to generations yet to come.
Declare His faithfulness to peoples yet unborn* these things the Lord has done.

Psalm 5 (p. 150) and Psalm 2 (p. 1125) may also be taken.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: (Tone 1): When You ascended Your cross, O Christ,* You crushed the tyranny and power of the enemy;* it is neither an angel nor a human,* but God Himself Who saves us:* O Lord, glory to You.

Now and for ever: What shall we call you, O Full of Grace? A heaven, for you have borne the Sun of justice?* A paradise, for you have brought forth the Flower of immortality?* A virgin, for you have remained undefiled?* A mother, holding in her holy arms the Son Who is the God of all?* Intercede with Him for the salvation of our souls.

Then the following stichera:

(Tone 8, Samohlasen): Today the veil of the temple is torn in two,* that it may confound the ungodly:* the sun hides its rays* when it sees the Lord upon the cross.

Verse: They divided My garments among themselves, and for My vesture they cast lots.

You are led as a sheep to the slaughter,* O Christ our God;* O spotless Lamb, You are nailed to the cross by the lawless ones,* O Lord and Lover of Mankind, to wipe away our sins.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Lord, You said to the transgressors who laid hands on You:* You have struck the Shepherd and scattered the sheep;* instead of My twelve disciples,* I can call upon twelve legions of angels to help Me;* but I bear this patiently* so that the mysteries proclaimed by My prophets may be fulfilled.* O Lord, glory to You!

Having opened the holy doors, the priest (vested in the phelonion) and deacon intone:

Deacon: Let us be attentive!
Priest: Peace be with all.
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us be attentive!

Prokimenon: Ps 40 (Tone 4)
Their hearts are full of malice;* they spread it abroad.
Verse: Happy are those who consider the poor and the weak.

Deacon: Wisdom!
Lector: A reading from the Book of Zechariah.
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

Lector: Thus says the Lord: I took my staff “Favor” and snapped it asunder, breaking off the covenant which I had made with all peoples; that day it was broken off. The sheep merchants who were watching me understood that this was the word of the LORD. I said to them, “If it seems good to you, give me my wages; but if not, let it go.” And they counted out my wages, thirty pieces of silver. But the LORD said to me, “Throw it in the treasury, the handsome price at which they valued me.” So I took the thirty pieces of silver and threw them into the treasury in the house of the LORD. Then I snapped asunder my other staff, “Bonds,” breaking off the brotherhood between Judah and Israel. On that day there shall no longer be cold or frost. There shall be one continuous day, known to the LORD, not day and night, for in the evening time there shall be light. On that day living waters shall flow from Jerusalem, half to the eastern sea, and half to the western sea, and it shall be so in summer and in winter. The LORD shall become king over the whole earth; on that day the LORD shall be the only one, and His name the only one (11: 10-14; 14: 6-9).

Deacon: Wisdom!
Lector: A reading from the epistle of St. Paul to the Galatians.
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

Lector: Brethren: May I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world. For neither does circumcision mean anything, nor does uncircumcision, but only a new creation. Peace and mercy be to all who follow this rule and to the Israel of God. From now on, let no one make troubles for me; for I bear the marks of Jesus on my body. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. Amen (6: 14-18).

Having incensed the altar and the people, the deacon intones:

Deacon: Wisdom! let us stand, and listen to the holy Gospel.
Priest: Peace be with all.
Choir: And with your spirit.
Lector: A reading from the Gospel according to Matthew.
Choir: Glory be to Your passion, O Lord!

Gospel: Mt 27: 1-56. The priest alone reads it.

Choir: Glory be to Your long-suffering, O Lord!

The holy doors are closed, and the choir reads:

Let my way be straight according to Your word; let no sin overcome me. Save me from the wickedness of evildoers, and I will keep Your commandments. Let Your face shine upon Your servants, and teach me Your laws.
Let my mouth be filled with Your praise, O Lord, and let me sing Your glory and magnificence all the day long.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the following kontakion:

(Tone 8): O come, and let us all praise Him crucified for our sake,* just as did Mary when she beheld Him on the cross and said:* Even though You have suffered crucifixion,* You are still my Son and still my God.

Lord, have mercy (40x).

Priest: O Christ our God, in all times..., (p. 155).

Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: Now and for ever: More honorable than the cherubim and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word, O true Mother of God, we magnify you.

Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!

Priest: May God be merciful to us and bless us; may His countenance shine upon us, and may He have mercy on us.

Choir: Amen.

Prayer of the First Hour

O Christ, the true Light Who enlightens and sanctifies everyone in the world, mark us with the light of Your countenance so that we may see the unapproachable radiance. Let our life be straight along the path of Your commandments, through the prayers of Your most pure Mother and of all Your saints. Amen.

If the other Hours are to follow immediately, then begin: Come, let us adore..., and then continue with the following Hour; if not, then conclude with the dismissal:

Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope, glory be to You!
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.

Priest: Christ our true God, Who for the salvation of the world, endured dreadful sufferings, the life-giving cross and voluntary burial, for our sake and our salvation, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, of the holy glorious and praiseworthy apostles, of our God-bearing fathers, and all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

Choir: Amen.
