MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1260).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 8, Podoben – Vozleh na persy): Desiring to be baptized for us with the baptism of blood on the cross, Jesus,* You expressed a great thirst of Your Heart, – that this be accomplished without delay, saying:* “How great is My anguish until it is accomplished!”* and again: “When I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw everyone to Myself.”* Grant us also the desire to love You with our whole heart,* and to drink with You the chalice of suffering!

Glory be: Now and for ever: O all-good Lady!* Beseech your Jesus for us, that we also may be partakers of the heavenly Pasch* and the new wine, which you implored for the guests* at the wedding feast in Cana of Galilee.

(Tone 3, Podoben – Khrystos ot mertvyxh): Before going to Your passion,* You desired to raise Lazarus, who was laid in the tomb.* You wept over Your beloved friend so that the Jews remarked:* “See how much He loved him!”* In the person of Lazarus You saw the whole human race* which You loved and which was dead through sin;* for this reason, You wept,* showing mankind the love of Your Heart.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O most gracious Mother!* May the tears of Jesus not fall on my sinful soul, but may His and your love guard me against the coming wrath!

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung:
We extol You,* O Christ, Giver of life,* and we worship Your most Sacred Heart,* which burns with love for us.
Verse: Set me as a seal on Your heart, as a seal on Your arm.
Verse: For love is strong as death, passion fierce as the grave.
Verse: Its flashes are flashes of fire, a raging flame.
Verse: Deep waters cannot quench love, nor floods sweep it away.
Verse: Were one to offer all he owns to purchase love, he would be roundly mocked.
Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn: (Tone 4, Podoben – Skoro predvary): When You departed to Your heavenly Father,* You did not wish to separate Yourself from us,* but remained with us under the appearance of bread and wine.* You unite Yourself with us, making us one with You,* and, in addition to that, at the departure of our soul,* You give Yourself to us as food in our journey to the kingdom of heaven.* We extol the love of Your Heart for us, Jesus:* and gratefully praise You above all things.

Gradual Hymn: Antiphon (Tone 4), (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 115 (Tone 4)
What return can I make to the Lord* for all His goodness to me?
Verse: I will take the chalice of salvation; and I will call upon the name of the Lord.

Gospel: Jn 10:9-16.
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: I am the gate. Whoever enters through Me will be saved, and will come in and go out and find pasture. A thief comes only to steal and slaughter and destroy; I came so that they might have life and have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd. A good shepherd lays down His life for the sheep. A hired man, who is not a shepherd and whose sheep are not his own, sees a wolf coming and leaves the sheep and runs away, and the wolf catches and scatters them. This is because he works for pay and has no concern for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and I know mine and mine know Me, just as the Father knows Me and I know the Father; and I will lay down My life for the sheep. I have other sheep that do not belong to this fold. These also I must lead, and they will hear My voice, and there will be one flock, one shepherd.

After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: the verse as on Sunday; and the following stichera:

(Tone 8): You loved Your own in the world, Jesus; You loved them to the end. For rising from supper, O Lord and Teacher, You condescended to wash the feet of Your disciples. O what unheard-of humility! What ineffable love of Your heart for them and for all, that You desired to wash them the following day with Your most sacred Blood!

Canon: Come, let us the faithful..., (p. 756), and the following:

Ode 9: Omit the Magnificat; after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings:

Verse: O my soul, extol the Heart of the Savior, which burns with love for us.

Hirmos (Tone 2): You are our only desire, our only sweetness, O Word of God, Son of the Virgin, the only God, Lord, most Holy of Holies. For this reason, we extol You together with Your Mother.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!
The gall and the vinegar, the blasphemy, and the abandonment by the Father, the tearing of wounds by the nails because of the weight of the body, and the ever fresh pains from all sides – all were a manifestation of Your love for us, Jesus.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!
How great is the love of Your Heart, Jesus! You implored forgiveness for those who crucified and insulted You, saying: Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they do.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Indeed, sweet were Your words to the penitent thief, who was crucified with You: Today you shall be with Me in paradise! O Jesus, grant me, also, the hope of being with You in heaven.

Verse: O my soul, extol the Heart of the Savior, which burns with love for you.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 4): Let everyone on earth dance for joy in spirit. Let the heavenly ranks celebrate in honor of the sacred feast. O Mother of God, let them cry: Rejoice, ever-blessed Theotokos and ever-Virgin.

Exapostilarion: O Savior, You endured an unbearable thirst in Your body, which had become dehydrated because of the loss of blood and sweat. Your soul was also filled with an infinite thirst for our salvation. Grant that we may not add to this thirst the vinegar of sin, but the sweet wine of virtues.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Queen of martyrs! Willingly did Jesus give up His spirit to the heavenly Father after having consummated all that the Father had sent Him to do for the salvation of the human race. Would that I could, through your intercession, fulfill all that He had commissioned me to do, that I may willingly give up my spirit into His hands.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 8, Podoben – O preslavnoho chudese): Behold the wounds of the Lord Jesus as He hangs on the cross;* behold His blood, the price He paid for our salvation,* and the wounds, which were glorified after the resurrection:* His head was bowed to impart a kiss,* His heart was opened to love, His arms were outstretched to embrace;* His whole body was disposed to save us.* Let us meditate upon this sight and impress it upon our hearts,* so that it may be fastened there,* as He was fastened to the cross for us.

When Jesus wept over Lazarus as he lay in the tomb, the Jews remarked:* behold how much He loved him!* Seeing Jesus wounded, dead, and laid in the tomb,* let us too, weep with His most pure Mother* and with those who were with her,* and let us say: Behold how much He loved us!

Glory be: (Tone 5): Having awakened, O Savior, from the sleep of death on the cross,* and having seen before You Your holy Bride – the Church,* which came forth from Your pierced side, You cried out:* “This is bone of My bone, flesh of My flesh.”* Having loved in her Your own image,* You united Yourself with her forever.

Now and for ever: (Tone 6): O Savior, You showed Your most pure Mother* the first-fruits of the love of Your Heart.* You loved her above all else,* and filled her with every grace in keeping with her incomprehensible dignity.* Therefore, in thanking You, we extol together with her* the love of Your heart towards her and towards all people;* glory be to You!

After the great doxology, the troparion of the feast; litanies: and the great dismissal.
