NINTH HOUR

Come, let us adore...

Psalm 58
Rescue me from my enemies, my God;* lift me out of reach of my foes.
Deliver me from evildoers;* from the bloodthirsty save me.
They have set an ambush for my life;* the powerful conspire against me.
For no offense or misdeed of mine, Lord,* for no fault they hurry to take up arms.
Come near and see my plight!* You, Lord of hosts, are the God of Israel!
Awake! Punish all the nations.* Have no mercy on these worthless traitors.
Each evening they return,* growling like dogs, prowling the city.
Their mouths pour out insult;* sharp words are on their lips.
They say: “Who is there to hear?”* You, Lord, laugh at them; You deride all the nations.
My strength, for You I watch;* You, God, are my fortress, my loving God.
May God go before me,* and show me my fallen foes.
Slay them, God,* lest they deceive my people.
Shake them by Your power;* Lord, our shield, bring them down.
For the sinful words of their mouths and lips* let them be caught in their pride.
For the lies they have told under oath* destroy them in anger, destroy till they are no more.
Then the people will know God rules over Jacob,* yes, even to the ends of the earth.
Each evening they return,* growling like dogs, prowling the city.
They roam about as scavengers;* if they are not filled, they howl.
But I shall sing of Your strength,* extol Your love at dawn,
For You are my fortress,* my refuge in time of trouble.
My strength, Your praise I will sing;* You, God, are my fortress, my loving God.

Psalm 85 (p. 174) and Psalm 139 may be taken.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: (Tone 8): Seeing the Author of life hanging on the cross,* the good thief cried out with his act of faith:* If the One crucified with us were not God in the flesh,* the sun would not have hidden its rays,* nor would the earth have trembled with fear.* And You patiently bear all this;* remember me, O Lord, in Your kingdom.

Now and for ever: O gracious Lord, for the sake of all You were born of a virgin:* through Your death on the cross You conquered Death;* and through Your resurrection You revealed Yourself as God.* O merciful Lord, do not disdain those whom You have created with Your own hands,* but show forth Your love for us.* Accept the intercession which the Mother who bore You makes in our behalf.* O Savior, save Your despairing people!

Then the following stichera are taken:

(Tone 7, Samohlasen): When they saw their Creator hanging on the cross,* heaven and earth were seized with amazement:* the sun was darkened and day was changed into night;* the earth gave up the bodies of the dead from their tombs.* With all creation, we also bow before You;* O Lord, save us.

Verse: They divided My garments among themselves, and for My vesture they cast lots.

(Tone 2): When the lawless ones nailed You to the cross,* You said to them, O Lord of glory:* How have I grieved you to arouse such anger?* Who has saved you from affliction more than I?* And now, what do you give Me in return?* For the good I have done, you now do evil;* for the pillar of fire, you nail Me to the cross;* for the cloud, you dig Me a grave; for the manna, you offer Me gall;* and for the water from the rock, you give Me vinegar to drink?* Henceforth, I shall call the Gentiles* that they may glorify Me, together with the Father and the Holy Spirit.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): Today, the Lord Who raised the dry land from the waters* is raised upon the cross.* A crown of thorns is placed upon the head of the King of angels.* He clothed the sky with clouds:* now today He is clothed with a purple robe.* In the Jordan He freed Adam;* now today He is slapped in the face.* The Bridegroom of the Church is fastened with nails;* the Son of the Virgin is pierced with a spear.* We worship Your passion, O Christ;* we worship Your passion, O Christ;* we worship Your passion, O Christ;* let us now behold Your glorious resurrection.

The rest according to the rubrics prescribed in the First Hour.

Prokimenon: Ps 13 (Tone 6)
Fools have said in their hearts: There is no God above.
Verse: Their deeds are corrupt, depraved; there is no good person left.

Lector: A reading from the Book of Jeremiah.
I knew it because the LORD informed me; at that time You, O LORD, showed me their doings. Yet, I, like a trusting lamb led to slaughter, had not realized that they were hatching plots against me: “Let us destroy the tree in its vigor; let us cut him off from the land of the living, so that his name will be spoken no more.” / But You, O LORD of hosts, O just Judge, / searcher of mind and heart, / Let me witness the vengeance You take on them, / for to You I have entrusted my cause! / Therefore, thus says the LORD concerning the men of Anathoth who seek your life, saying, “Do not prophesy in the name of the LORD; else you shall die by our hand.” Therefore, thus says the LORD of hosts: I am going to punish them. The young men shall die by the sword; their sons and daughters shall die by famine. None shall be spared among them, for I will bring misfortune upon the men of Anathoth, the year of their punishment (11: 18-23).

Lector: A reading from the epistle of St. Paul to the Hebrews.
Brethren: Since through the blood of Jesus we have confidence of entrance into the sanctuary by the new and living way He opened for us through the veil, that is, His flesh, and since we have “a great priest over the house of God,” let us approach with a sincere heart and in absolute trust, with our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil conscience and our bodies washed in pure water. Let us hold unwaveringly to our confession that gives us hope, for He who made the promise is trustworthy. We must consider how to rouse one another to love and good works. We should not stay away from our assembly, as is the custom of some, but encourage one another, and this all the more as you see the day drawing near. If we sin deliberately after receiving knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains sacrifice for sins but a fearful prospect of judgment and a flaming fire that is going to consume the adversaries. Anyone who rejects the law of Moses is put to death without pity on the testimony of two or three witnesses. Do you not think that a much worse punishment is due the one who has contempt for the Son of God, considers unclean the covenant-blood by which he was consecrated, and insults the spirit of grace? We know the one who said: “Vengeance is mine; I will repay,” and again: “The Lord will judge His people.” It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God (10:19-31).

Gospel: (Jn 18:28 - 19:1-37). The priest alone reads it.

The holy doors are closed; and the choir reads:

For the sake of Your holy name, do not abandon us forever; do not forget Your covenant. For the sake of Abraham the trustful one, Isaac Your servant, and Israel Your holy one, do not take Your mercies away from us.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; kontakion: O come, and let us...; the rest as in the First Hour, except for the Concluding prayer of the Ninth Hour, (p. 177).
