Song of Symeon - Alternate Translation
Now, O Master, You have kept Your promise;* let Your servant go in peace.* With my own eyes I have seen the salvation* which You have prepared in the sight of every people;* a light to reveal You to the Gentiles,* and the glory of Your people Israel!

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the troparion according to the typicon. If there is litiya, then the loaves are blessed. At Great Vespers, then the great dismissal is taken, while on ordinary days the litany Have mercy on us, O God..., (p. 27), and the daily dismissal, are taken. During the Great Fast, see p. 39.

If there is litiya: As the troparion is being sung, the deacon, or the priest if there is no deacon, incenses the tetrapod on all four sides; then he intones:
Let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Then priest says the prayer of the blessing of the loaves:
O Lord Jesus Christ our God, You blessed the five loaves and fed the five thousand. Bless these loaves +, this wheat +, wine +, and oil +, and multiply them in this city (village, monastery) and in the whole world; and sanctify all the faithful who shall partake of them; for it is You, O Christ our God, Who bless and sanctify all things. And we glorify You with Your eternal Father and Your all-holy, gracious, and life-giving Spirit, now and forever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Blessed be the name of the Lord, now and for ever (3x).

Psalm 33

I will bless the Lord at all times;* His praise shall be constantly in my mouth.
My soul shall glory in the Lord;* let the meek hear and rejoice.
Magnify the Lord with me,* and let us exalt His name together.
I sought the Lord and He heard me,* and delivered me from all my fears.
Approach the Lord and be enlightened,* and your face shall never be shamed.
The poor cried out, and the Lord heard them* and delivered them from all their afflictions.
The angel of the Lord will set up camp around those who fear the Lord* and save them.
Taste and see how good the Lord is;* blessed is the one who hopes in Him.
Fear the Lord, all you His saints,* for there is no privation for those who fear Him.
The rich have become poor and hungry* but those who seek the Lord shall not be deprived of any good.

Priest: The blessing of the Lord be upon you through His grace and loving kindness, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Then the Great Dismissal. If Matins is to follow immediately then the priest intones: Glory to the holy....

The Great Dismissal

The Great Dismissal is taken when the litany: Let us all say... follows the prokimena, and on Friday evening.

Deacon: Wisdom!
Choir: Give the blessing.
Priest: Blessed be Christ our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. O God, strengthen the holy orthodox, (catholic or true) faith, for ever and ever.
Priest: O most holy Mother of God, save us.
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim* and by far more glorious than the seraphim;* ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word,* O true Mother of God, we magnify you.
Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope, glory be to You.
Choir: Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen. Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.

On Saturday evening and Sunday morning the priest says:
Christ our true God, risen from the dead, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles; of Saint, N. (whose church it is), and of Saint, N. (whose day it is) and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

Daily Dismissal

The dismissal is taken when the litany Have mercy on us... follows the troparia (except on Friday evening).

Deacon: Wisdom!
Choir: More honorable than the Cherubim....
Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You.
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever; Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God....

Other Dismissals

On Sunday evening and Monday morning: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; the protection of honorable, heavenly incorporeal powers; of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles; of Saint, N. (whose church it is), and of Saint, N. (whose day it is) and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

On Monday evening and on Tuesday morning: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of the honorable and glorious prophet, forerunner and baptizer, John; of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles ...

On Tuesday and Thursday evening and Wednesday and Friday morning: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; by the power of the precious and life-giving cross; of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles ...

On Wednesday evening and Thursday morning: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles; of our father among the saints, Nicholas, archbishop, wonderworker of Myra in Lycia; and the Saint ...

On Friday evening and Saturday morning: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; by the power of the precious and life-giving cross; through the protection of the honorable, heavenly incorporeal powers; of the honorable and glorious prophet, forerunner and baptizer, John; of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles; of our father among the saints, Nicholas, archbishop, wonderworker of Myra in Lycia; of the holy, glorious and triumphant martyrs; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers; of the holy and righteous ancestors of God, Joachim and Anna; of Saint, N. (whose church it is), and of Saint, N. (whose day it is) and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

On the feasts of the Theotokos: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, the glorious feast of whose (Nativity, or Patronage, or Entrance into the Temple, or Immaculate Conception, or Annunciation, or Dormition), we solemnly celebrate today; and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

On the days of the other saints with vigil and of those with polyeleos but without vigil, one says:
Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles; and of Saint N., whose memorial we solemnly celebrate today; and all the saints; will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The festal dismissals are given after the festal troparia.

During the Great Fast

After the Canticle of Simeon and Trisagion, the following troparia are sung:

(Tone 1) Hail, Mother of God, Virgin Mary full of grace!* The Lord is with you.* Blessed are you among women,* and blessed is the fruit of your womb.* For you have borne Christ, the Savior and Deliverer of our souls.
(Prostration).

Glory be: O Baptizer of Christ, remember us all,* that we may be delivered from our iniquities;* for you have been given the grace to pray for us.
(Prostration).

Now and for ever: Pray for us, O holy apostles and all you saints,* that we may be delivered from peril and afflictions;* for you are our fervent intercessors before the Savior.
(Prostration).

We flee to your mercy, O Virgin Mother of God.* Despise not our prayers in our necessities,* but you, who alone are pure and blessed, deliver us from all danger. (No prostration).

Lord, have mercy (40x). Lord, give the blessing.
Priest: Blessed is Christ, our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Priest: O heavenly King, strengthen Your church, affirm our faith, calm the nations, give peace to the world, and preserve this city (or this village, or this monastery). Grant the faithful departed a share in the dwelling of the just, and receive us after repentance and confession, for You are good and love mankind.
Choir: Amen. Lord, have mercy (3x).
Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the Cherubim....
In the name of the Lord, Father, give the blessing.
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ, our God, have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

Prayer of St. Ephrem

O Lord and Master of my life, drive from me the spirit of indifference, despair, lust for power and idle chatter.
(Prostration)
Instead, bestow on me, Your servant, the spirit of integrity, humility, patience and love. (Prostration)
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins and not judge my brothers and sisters; for You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen. (Prostration)

At Sunday Vespers, after these prayers, the priest intones the dismissal beginning with Glory be to You, O Christ our God, glory be to You; but on other days:
O God, be merciful to me, a sinner.
O God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me.
I have sinned without number, forgive me, O Lord!
(12 small bows).

Once again, the entire prayer of St. Ephrem is recited, and one prostration made at the conclusion.

Prayer: O all-holy Trinity, Consubstantial Might, Undivided Kingship, Source and Origin of all goodness, deal kindly with me, a sinner; strengthen my innermost spirit, cleanse me of all evil, and enlighten my mind that I may ever glorify You with this prayer: One is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen.

(Where the custom prevails, the priest intones: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope, glory be to You; then the dismissal, pp. 37-38).

Choir: Blessed be the name of the Lord, now and for ever. (3x)

Psalm 33

I will bless the Lord at all times;* His praise shall be constantly in my mouth.
My soul shall glory in the Lord;* let the meek hear and rejoice.
Magnify the Lord with me,* and let us exalt His name together.
I sought the Lord and He heard me,* and delivered me from all my fears.
Approach the Lord and be enlightened,* and your face shall never be shamed.
The poor cried out, and the Lord heard them* and delivered them from all their afflictions.
The angel of the Lord will set up camp around those who fear the Lord* and save them.
Taste and see how good the Lord is;* blessed is the one who hopes in Him.
Fear the Lord, all you His saints,* for there is no privation for those who fear Him.
The rich have become poor and hungry* but those who seek the Lord shall not want any good.
Come, children, hear me;* I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
Who is the one who desires life,* who loves to see good days?
Keep your mouth from evil* and your lips from deceitful speech;
Turn away from evil and do good,* seek peace and pursue it.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the just,* and His ears are open to their pleas;
The face of the Lord is against evildoers* to erase their memory from the earth.
The just cried out, and the Lord heard them,* and He delivered them from all their trials.
The Lord is close to those of contrite heart,* and He will save the humble in spirit.
Many are the trials of the just,* but out of them all, the Lord will save them.
He keeps watch over all their bones;* not a single one of them shall be broken.
The death of the sinners is wretched;* those who hate what is right will be condemned.
The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants,* and none of those who hope in Him will go astray.

Then immediately: It is truly right to bless you, O God-bearing One, as the ever-blessed and immaculate Mother of our God. More honorable than the cherubim and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word, O true Mother of God, we magnify you.
Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God..., (pp. 37-38).

Hymns Sung After Vespers

On Weekdays: O Lady, receive the prayers of your servants,* and deliver us from all sorrows and tribulations.

On Saturday evening (Tone 6): O Christ our Savior,* the angels in heaven sing the praises of Your resurrection;* on earth, make us, also worthy* to glorify You with a pure heart.

On Sunday evening: We flee to your mercy, O holy Mother of God,* despise not our petitions in our necessities,* but deliver us from all dangers, O ever glorious and blessed Virgin.

On the feasts of our Lord, the Theotokos and the saints, the kontakion of the feast is sung. When, however, the feasts of the Theotokos and of the saints fall on Sunday, then, O Christ our Savior... is sung.
