THE FIRST HOUR

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God...; (the usual beginning, p. 10; then):

Come, let us adore the King, our God.
Come, let us adore Christ, the King and our God.
Come, let us adore and bow down to the only Lord Jesus Christ, the King and our God.

Psalm 5
(Monday and Thursday)

To my words give ear, O Lord,* give heed to my groaning,
Attend to the sound of my cries, my King and my God.* It is You Whom I invoke, O Lord.
In the morning You hear me;* in the morning I offer You my prayer, watching and waiting.
You are no God Who loves evil;* no sinner is Your guest.
The boastful shall not stand their ground before Your face.* You hate all who do evil;
You destroy all who lie.* Deceitful and bloodthirsty people are hateful to You, O Lord.
But I through the greatness of Your love* have access to Your house.
I bow down before Your holy temple,* filled with awe.
Lead me, Lord, in Your justice, because of those who lie in wait;* make clear Your way before me.
No truth can be found in their mouths,* their heart is all mischief,
Their throat a wide-open grave,* all honey their speech.
Declare them guilty, O God.* Let them fall in their designs.
Drive them out for their many offenses,* for they have defied You.
All those You protect shall be glad* and ring out their joy.
You shelter them;* in You they rejoice, those who love Your name.
Lord, it is You Who bless the upright;* You surround them with favor as with a shield.

Psalm 89
(Tuesday and Friday)

O Lord, You have been our refuge* from one generation to the next.
Before the mountains were born or the earth or the world brought forth,* You are God, without beginning or end.
You turn us back into dust and say:* Go back, children of the earth.
To Your eyes a thousand years are like yesterday, come and gone,* no more than a watch in the night.
You sweep us away like a dream,* like grass which springs up in the morning.
In the morning it springs up and flowers;* by evening it withers and fades.
So we are destroyed in Your anger,* struck with terror in Your fury.
Our guilt lies open before You,* our secrets in the light of Your face.
All our days pass away in Your anger.* Our life is over like a sigh.
Our span is seventy years,* or eighty for those who are strong.
And most of these are emptiness and pain.* They pass swiftly and we are gone.
Who understands the power of Your anger* and fears the strength of Your fury?
Make us know the shortness of our life* that we may gain wisdom of heart.
Lord, relent! Is Your anger for ever?* Show pity to Your servants.
In the morning, fill us with Your love;* we shall exult and rejoice all our days.
Give us joy to balance our affliction* for the years when we knew misfortune.
Show forth Your work to Your servants;* let Your glory shine on their children.
Let the favor of the Lord be upon us:* give success to the work of our hands; give success to the work of our hands.

Psalm 100
(Wednesday, Saturday, and Sunday)

My song is of mercy and justice;* I sing to You, O Lord.
I will walk in the way of perfection.* O when, Lord, will You come?
I will walk with blameless heart within my house;* I will not set before my eyes whatever is base.
I will hate the ways of the crooked;* they shall not be my friends.
The false-hearted must keep far away;* the wicked I disown.
Those who secretly slander their neighbors* I will bring to silence.
Those of proud look and haughty heart* I will never endure.
I look to the faithful in the land* that they may dwell with me.
Those who walk in the way of perfection* shall be my friends.
No one who practices deceit* shall live within my house.
No one who utters lies* shall stand before my eyes.
Morning by morning I will silence all the wicked in the land,* uprooting from the city of the Lord all who do evil.

The choir concludes the psalms in the following manner:
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
Now and ever and forever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x)
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Then Glory be: troparion of the day, or of the saint; during the Great Fast, see below.

Now and for ever: What shall we call you, O Full of Grace?* A heaven, for you have borne the Sun of Justice?* A paradise, for you have brought forth the Flower of Immortality?* A virgin, for you have remained undefiled?* A mother, holding in her holy arms the Son Who is the God of all?* Intercede with Him for the salvation of our souls.

During the Great Fast, the following troparion is taken:

(Tone 6) In the morning You hear me,* O my King and my God.
Verse: To my words give ear, O Lord, give heed to my groaning.
Verse: It is You Whom I invoke, O Lord.

Glory be: Now and for ever: What shall we call you... (see above).

Let my way be straight according to Your word;* let no sin overcome me.
Save me from the wickedness of evildoers,* and I will keep Your commandments.
Let Your face shine upon Your servants,* and teach me Your laws.
Let my mouth be filled with Your praise, O Lord, and let me sing Your glory and magnificence all the day long.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; on Sunday: the Hypakoe; (see pp. 1233-1235), on other days: the kontakion of the day or of the saint.

During the Great Fast, instead of the kontakion, the following troparia are taken:

(Tone 4, samopodoben): Come to us in haste, O Christ our God,* before we become slaves of those who blaspheme You and threaten our lives.* With Your cross cut down those who make war against us;* let them know how strong is the orthodox faith.* Grant this through the prayers of the Mother of God,* for You alone are the Lover of mankind.

Glory be: O Teacher of wisdom, O Bestower of understanding,* O Instructor of the ignorant and Protector of the poor,* strengthen and teach my heart, O Master.* O Word of the Father, give me words,* and do not prevent my mouth from calling out to You:* I have fallen, have mercy on me, O merciful One.

Now and for ever: Let us with our hearts and lips continually extol* the most glorious Mother of God, holier than the heavenly angels,* and proclaim that she is truly the Theotokos,* for she has truly given birth to God in the flesh* and never ceases to intercede for our souls.

Lord, have mercy. (40x)

O Christ our God, in all times and places You are worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You are long-suffering and generous in Your mercy and compassion. You love the just and show mercy to the sinner, calling all people to repentance through the promise of blessings to come. Deem, O Lord, at this very hour, to receive our supplications and to direct our lives in the path of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies; set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all affliction, trouble, and distress; surround us with Your holy angels so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unspeakable glory. For You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

Lord, have mercy. (3x)
Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim and by far more glorious than the seraphim;* ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word,* O true Mother of God, we magnify you.

During the Paschal Season instead of "More honorable"
Shine in splendor, O New Jerusalem!* For the glory of the Lord is risen upon you.* O Zion, sing with joy and rejoice!* And you, pure Mother of God,* rejoice in the resurrection of your Son.

Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!
Priest: May God be merciful to us and bless us; may His countenance shine upon us, and may He have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

During the Great Fast the following prayer of St. Ephrem is recited:

O Lord and Master of my life, drive from me the spirit of indifference, despair, lust for power, and idle chatter. (Prostration)
Instead, bestow on me, Your servant, the spirit of integrity, humility, patience, and love. (Prostration)
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins and not judge my brothers and sisters; for You are blessed, now and for ever and ever. Amen. (Prostration)

God, be merciful to me a sinner. God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me. I have sinned without number; forgive me, O Lord. (12 small bows)

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father.
Lord, have mercy (12x); and the prayer of the First Hour:

Prayer of the First Hour

O Christ, the true Light Who enlightens and sanctifies everyone in the world, mark us with the light of Your countenance so that we may see the unapproachable radiance. Let our life be straight along the path of Your commandments, through the prayers of Your most pure Mother and of all Your saints. Amen.

If the next Hour is to follow, then begin: Come let us adore....; otherwise, the following dismissal is taken:

Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You!
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers; and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.
