>>>SMALL COMPLINE<<<

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God...
(the usual beginning, until: Come, let us adore..., p. 10-11).

Psalm 50
(Sunday and Wednesday)

Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness.* In Your compassion blot out my offense.
O wash me more and more from my guilt* and cleanse me from my sin.
My offenses truly I know them;* my sin is always before me.
Against You, You alone, have I sinned;* what is evil in Your sight I have done.
That You may be justified when You give sentence* and be without reproach when You judge.
O see, in guilt I was born,* a sinner was I conceived.
Indeed, You love truth in the heart;* then in the secret of my heart teach me wisdom.
O purify me, then I shall be clean;* O wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me hear rejoicing and gladness,* that the bones You have crushed may thrill.
From my sins turn away Your face* and blot out all my guilt.
A pure heart create for me, O God,* put a steadfast spirit within me.
Do not cast me away from Your presence,* nor deprive me of Your Holy Spirit.
Give me again the joy of Your help;* with a spirit of fervor sustain me.
That I may teach transgressors Your ways* and sinners may return to You.
O rescue me, God, my helper,* and my tongue shall ring out Your goodness.
O Lord, open my lips* and my mouth shall declare Your praise.
For in sacrifice You take no delight,* burnt offering from me You would refuse.
My sacrifice, a contrite spirit.* A humbled, contrite heart You will not spurn.
In Your goodness, show favor to Zion:* rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will be pleased with lawful sacrifice, burnt offerings wholly consumed,* Then You will be offered young bulls on Your altar.

Psalm 69
(Monday and Thursday)

O God, make haste to my rescue,* Lord, come to my aid!
Let there be shame and confusion* on those who seek my life.
O let them turn back in confusion,* who delight in my harm,
Let them retreat, covered with shame,* who jeer at my lot.
Let there be rejoicing and gladness* for all who seek You.
Let them say for ever: “God is great,”* who love Your saving help.
As for me, wretched and poor,* come to me, O God.
You are my rescuer, my help,* O Lord, do not delay.

Psalm 142
(Tuesday and Friday)

Lord, listen to my prayer;* turn Your ear to my appeal.
You are faithful, You are just;* give answer.
Do not call Your servant to judgment* for no one is just in Your sight.
The enemy pursues my soul;* he has crushed my life to the ground;
He has made me dwell in darkness* like the dead, long forgotten.
Therefore, my spirit fails;* my heart is numb within me.
I remember the days that are past:* I ponder all Your works.
I muse on what Your hand has wrought* and to You I stretch out my hands.
Like a parched land my soul thirsts for You;* Lord, make haste and answer; for my spirit fails within me.
Do not hide Your face* lest I become like those in the grave.
In the morning let me know Your love* for I put my trust in You.
Make me know the way I should walk;* to You I lift up my soul.
Rescue me, Lord, from my enemies;* I have fled to You for refuge.
Teach me to do Your will,* for You, O Lord, are my God.
Let Your good Spirit guide me* in ways that are level and smooth.
For Your name’s sake, Lord, save my life;* in Your justice save my soul from distress.
In Your love make an end of my foes;* destroy all those who oppress me for I am Your servant, O Lord.

Lesser Doxology (Saturday)

Glory to God in the highest,* and to His people on earth, peace and good will.
We praise You, we bless You, we worship You,* we glorify You, we thank You for Your great glory.
Lord God, heavenly King, almighty God and Father,* with the Lord Jesus Christ, only Son of the Father, and the Holy Spirit.
Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father,* You take away the sins of the world, have mercy on us.
You take away the sins of the world,* hear our prayer.
You are seated at the right hand of the Father,* have mercy on us.
For You alone are holy, You alone are the Lord, Jesus Christ,* for the glory of God the Father. Amen.
I will bless You every night,* and praise Your name forever.
Lord, You have been our refuge* from one generation to the next.
I said: Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul,* for I have sinned against You.
O Lord, I have fled to You, teach me to do Your will,* for You, O Lord, are my God.
In You is the source of life* and in Your light we see light.
Keep on loving those who know You,* count us worthy, O Lord, of passing this day without sin.
Blessed are You, O Lord, God of our Fathers,* and praised and glorified is Your name forever. Amen.
Let Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us* because we have set our hope in You.
Blessed are You, O Lord,* teach me Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Master,* make me understand Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Holy One,* enlighten me with Your laws.
O Lord, Your mercy endures forever;* do not despise the work of Your hands.
It is proper to praise You,* and hymns belong to You.
Glory belongs to You,* Father, Son, and Holy Spirit;
Now and for ever* and ever. Amen.

The Symbol of Faith

I believe in one God, the Father, the Almighty,* Maker of heaven and earth, of all that is seen and unseen.
I believe in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only Son of God,* eternally begotten of the Father.
Light from Light, true God from true God,* begotten, not made, one in being with the Father. Through Him all things were made.
For us men and for our salvation He came down from heaven;* by the power of the Holy Spirit He was born of the Virgin Mary, and became man.
For our sake He was crucified under Pontius Pilate;* He suffered, died, and was buried.
On the third day He rose again in fulfillment of the Scriptures;* He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the Father.
He will come again in glory to judge the living and the dead,* and His kingdom will have no end.
I believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of life,* Who proceeds from the Father [and the Son].
With the Father and the Son He is worshipped and glorified.* He has spoken through the prophets.
I believe in one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church.
I acknowledge one baptism for the forgiveness of sins.
I look for the resurrection of the dead,* and the life of the world to come. Amen.

Canon from the Octoechos, or the following:

Canon of Supplication to the Mother of God

Ode 1, Hirmos (Tone 8): When Israel passed through the waters as upon dry land and escaped the malice of the Egyptians, they cried out: Let us sing to our Redeemer and our God.

Verse for the entire Canon: O most holy Mother of God, save us.

Many temptations have surrounded me, O Virgin. To you I come for shelter and salvation. O Mother of God, deliver me from all trouble and affliction.
The assaults of my passions disturb me; they fill my soul with great discouragement. O Maiden, preserved from all stain, restore the balance of my soul through the peace of your Son and God.

Glory be: O Virgin, I beseech you who have given birth to God the Savior, deliver me from my afflictions. It is to you I now come for shelter, to you I lift my heart and thoughts.

Now and for ever: you alone are the Mother of God: you are good and the Mother of Goodness. Take away the disease of my body and soul and make me worthy of your good care and of the coming of God.

There is no Katabasia.

Ode 3, Hirmos (Tone 8): O Lord and supreme Creator of the heavenly firmament, Founder of the Church, confirm me in Your love, O Summit of Desire, for You are the Stronghold of the faithful and the only One Who truly loves mankind.

O virgin Mother of God, I choose you to be my protection and the shelter of my life. Direct me towards your haven, for you are the channel of all good things and the support of the faithful, and you alone are worthy of every praise.

I beseech you, O Virgin, dispel the troubles of my soul, quiet the surge of my despair, for you, O bride of God, have carried the Prince of Peace, and you alone are perfectly pure.

Glory be: you gave birth to the Doer of Good, to the Cause of All Delight: let the wealth of His generation abound within all souls, for since you have borne the almighty Christ, you have power to act as you please, O you who are blessed of God.

Now and for ever: O Virgin, help me who am pressed by incurable ills and distressing passions, for I know that you, all-blameless one, are a perfect and abundant treasury of healing.

Sessional (Tone 8): Bride of the Creator,* most pure Mother of the Savior,* dwelling of the Comforter,* ever-glorious One, hasten to us,* who have become a defiled abode of evil and the plaything of the demons. Free us from their malice and make us a radiant,* light-giving, and incorrupt abode of virtue.* Drive away from us the darkness of passions,* and grant that through your prayers* we may become worthy of heavenly glory and of the light that knows no evening.

Ode 4, Hirmos (Tone 8): O Lord, I have heard of the mystery of Your plan of redemption, and I have understood Your works; that is why I give glory to Your divinity.

Quiet the seething of my passions and calm the storm of my sins, for you are the bride of God who gave birth to the good Lord.

O Virgin who gave birth to the compassionate Lord, the Savior of those who praise you, grant that I who cling to you may enjoy the depth of your compassion.

Glory be: We who rejoice on account of your gift are aware that you are the Mother of God, and so we sing a hymn of gratitude to you who are perfectly pure.

Now and for ever: you whom we possess as our hope, our supporting strength, our indestructible wall of salvation, are worthy of all praise. Grant that we may be worthy to be delivered from all affliction.

Ode 5, Hirmos (Tone 8): Enlighten our hearts with Your commands, O Lord; with Your outstretched hand, grant us Your peace; O Lover of mankind!

O immaculate Lady, give me your pure happiness. You gave birth to the Cause of joy; fill my heart with joy!

Deliver us from dangers, O immaculate Mother of God, for you gave birth to Eternal Salvation and to Peace beyond our understanding.

Glory be: With the brightness of your light, dispel the darkness of my sins, O bride of God who gave birth to the divine and eternal Light!

Now and for ever: Heal the misery of my passions, make me worthy of your assistance, and through your intercession, grant me health.

Ode 6, Hirmos (Tone 8): Before the Lord, I pour out my supplication; to Him I complain about my sorrow, for my soul is filled with iniquity and my life is close to the abyss. Therefore, like Jonah, I cry out: Raise me from corruption, O my God!

O Virgin, beseech your Lord and your Son Who delivered Himself to death and saved my nature from death and corruption to which it had been bound, that He may deliver me from the hands of the enemy.

I believe, O Virgin, that through your intercession you save and protect my life, dispelling many temptations and casting out the cunning snares of the devil. Now I implore you without ceasing: deliver me from my corrupting passions.

Glory be: O Maiden, you have been given to us as a wall behind which we may seek refuge, as a perfect means of salvation for our souls, as a joy in our tribulations, for we always find delight in your light. O Lady, save us always from every danger and evil desire.

Now and for ever: Behold how sick I am! I lie upon my bed, and there is no healing for me. I come to you in your goodness, for you have given birth to the Savior of the world. Deliver me from my disease and raise me from the pain of my affliction.

Kontakion (Tone 6): Gentle protectress of Christians,* unfailing advocate before the Creator,* do not despise the prayerful voice of sinners,* but in your goodness, hasten to assist us who trustfully cry out to you:* Inspire us to prayer and hasten to hear our supplications.* Intercede always, O Mother of God,* in behalf of those who honor you.

Another Kontakion (Tone 6): We have no other help;* we have no other hope besides you, O immaculate Virgin!* you are our hope; you are our glory.* Therefore, help us for we are your servants.* May we not be put to shame.

Ikos: Stretch forth your hands which have received as a child the Lord of all, O Mother of God. Because of the greatness of your goodness, do not forsake us who always hope in you. Through your all-powerful prayers and unfailing forgiveness have mercy on us and grant to our souls your mercy which is inexhaustible; for we sinners have in you a protectress against every misfortune and evil. Therefore, as one who has the graces of mercy, hasten to hear our prayers and supplications and intercede always in behalf of those who honor you.

Ode 7, Hirmos (Tone 8): The youths of Judea who came to Babel had the power to overcome the flames of the furnace, for they believed in the Holy Trinity and cried out: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers!

In Your desire to save our souls, You dwelt in the womb of the Virgin and established her as the intercessor of creation. Blessed are You, O God of our fathers!

O most pure Mother, may your prayer go up to the Source of mercy to Whom you have given birth, so that we may be preserved from weakness and impurity, who cry out with faith: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers!

Glory be: You have taken the one who gave You birth, and have established her as a treasury of salvation, a source of immortality, an indestructible fortress, a door open for repentance to those who cry out: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers!

Now and for ever: O Mother of God who gave us Christ, grant to those who anxiously seek your divine shelter that they deserve to be healed of the illness of body and soul.

Ode 8, Hirmos (Tone 8): Let us praise the King of heaven Whom the hosts of angels praise; let us exalt His name forever.

O Virgin, do not turn away from those who seek your help, who praise and exalt your maidenhood forever.

O Virgin, abundant healing flows from you upon all those who sing your wondrous birth with faith and praise.

Glory be: O Virgin, you shall heal the sorrows of my soul, you shall cure the illness of my body, and I shall sing your praise, O Woman Full of Grace!

Now and for ever: O Virgin, you drive away the dangers of temptation, you restrain the fire of passion, and so we sing your praise forever.

Ode 9, Hirmos (Tone 8): Virgin without stain through whom we have been saved, we proclaim that you are the true Mother of God, and with hosts of angels, we extol your name.

O Virgin, despise not the flow of my tears, for you have given birth to the Lord Who wipes away all tears.

O Virgin, fill my heart with joy, you who have received the fullness of joy, destroying the gloom of sin.

O Virgin, be a haven and a help, an indestructible fortress and a harbor, a shelter and a joy to those who come to you.

Glory be: O Virgin, cast away the darkness of unknowing; enlighten with your rays of light those who proclaim that you are truly the Mother of God.

Now and for ever: O Virgin, come to me in this time of pain; raise me from my sickness and restore my health.

It is truly right to bless you, O God-bearing One,* as the ever-blessed and immaculate Mother of our God.* More honorable than the cherubim* and by far more glorious than the seraphim;* ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word,* O true Mother of God, we magnify you.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father.
Priest: For the kingdom....

Then the kontakion of the feast, according to the typicon. On Saturday evening: the hypakoe of the tone of the week; from Sunday evening to Thursday evening: the troparia of the patron saint of the church and of the day, then:

(Tone 4): God of our Fathers* Who always deal with us according to Your everlasting compassion,* do not withdraw Your mercy from us,* but through the prayers of our Fathers,* guide our lives along the ways of peace.
