O Christ God, Your Church,* crimsoned with the blood of Your martyrs all over the world* as with a cloak of purple and porphyry, cries out to You:* Send Your mercy upon Your people, grant peace to Your fold, and extend Your great compassion upon our souls.

Glory be (Tone 8, kontakion): To the souls of Your servants, O Christ,* grant rest among the saints,* where there is no pain, no sorrow, no mourning,* but only life without end.

Now and for ever: Through the prayers of all the saints, and of the Mother of God,* grant us Your peace, O Lord, and have mercy on us,* for You alone are merciful.

On Friday evening instead of "O God of our Fathers ...”
(Tone 2): O apostles, prophets, martyrs, hierarchs, saints and righteous ones,* who fought the good fight and kept the faith,* since you have acquired favor with the Savior,* intercede with Him that, in His goodness,* He may save our souls.

Glory be (Tone 8, kontakion): To the souls ... (see above).

Now and for ever: To You, O Lord, Ordainer and Creator of the world,* the universe offers the God-bearing martyrs as the first-fruits of nature:* wherefore, through their prayers, and through the intercession of the Mother of God,* preserve Your church and our country in perfect safety and peace,* O You who alone are most merciful.

Lord, have mercy (40x)

O Christ our God, in all times and places You are worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You are long-suffering and generous in Your mercy and compassion. You love the just and show mercy to the sinner, calling all people to repentance through the promise of blessings to come. Deem, O Lord, at this very hour, to receive our supplications and to direct our lives in the path of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies; set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all affliction, trouble and distress; surround us with Your holy angels so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unspeakable glory. For You are blessed forever and ever. Amen.

Lord, have mercy (3x).
Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim and by far more glorious than the seraphim;* ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word,* O true Mother of God, we magnify you.
Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!

Priest: May God be merciful to us and bless us; may His countenance shine upon us, and may He have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

Prayer to the Mother of God

O Lady, bride of God, virginal, pure, immaculate, blameless, without stain or disgrace, who through your birthgiving brought together our fallen state and the things of heaven; O you, only hope of the hopeless, help of the oppressed, ready protection of those who flee to you and refuge of all Christians: despise us not who are wretched sinners, who have defiled ourselves with unclean thoughts, words and deeds, and in our slothfulness have become slaves to the passions of life. Since you are the Mother of God, Who is the Lover of mankind, have mercy, have compassion on us sinners and prodigal sons; accept this prayer from our impure lips, and, with the power of your maternity, beg your Son, our Lord and our God, to open for us the depths of His loving kindness, forgive our countless sins, convert us to true repentance, and make us faithful to His commands: O you who are compassionate, be our constant companion. In this present life, be with us as an intercessor, as a powerful help to turn away the assaults of our enemies and to guide us to salvation. At the hour of our death, be with us to embrace our poor souls and to keep away the dreadful sight of the wicked devils. On the terrible day of judgment, deliver us from eternal punishment and make us heirs of your Son’s glory, through the grace and the love for mankind of your Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To Him and to His eternal Father, and to His all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit, we render glory, honor, and adoration, now and always and for ever and ever. Amen.

Prayer to Jesus Christ

Now that we are about to lie down to sleep, grant us, O Master, the repose of our soul and body. Preserve us against the dark slumber of sin and against any impure sensuality that roams around in the darkness of night; quiet the assaults of our passions, arrest the darts that the Evil One insidiously throws at us, still the rebellions of our flesh, and still all earthly and worldly feelings within us. Grant us, O Lord, a watchful mind, innocent thoughts, a sober heart, a gentle sleep free from evil dreams; at the hour of prayer, arouse us, strong in the practice of Your precepts and ever-mindful of Your desires; give us the grace to sing Your glory throughout the night; to praise, bless and glorify Your all-honorable and magnificent name, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, always, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O you most glorious, ever-virginal and blessed Mother of God, commend our prayers to your Son, our God, and entreat Him to save our souls through your intercession.

The Father is my hope, the Son my refuge, the Holy Spirit my protection. O Trinity, one God, glory to You!

Then the following troparia:

(Tone 6) Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us!* Since we have no defense,* we sinners offer this supplication to You our Master:* have mercy on us!

Glory be: O Lord, have mercy on us,* for in You we place our hope.* Be not exceedingly angry with us nor mindful of our transgressions,* but look upon us even now with mercy and deliver us from our enemies,* for You are our God and we are Your people;* we are all the work of Your hands,* and we call upon Your name.

Now and for ever: Open to us the doors of mercy, O blessed Mother of God,* that we, who place our trust in you, may not perish,* but that through you we may be delivered from misfortune,* for you are the salvation of all Christians.

The priest says the litany:
Have mercy on us, O God, in the greatness of Your compassion, we pray You, hear us and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).

Again, let us pray that He may preserve this city and this holy church and every city, town, and country from famine, plague, earthquake, flood, hail, fire, civil war, riot, and foreign invasion; and that our God Who is kindly and the Lover of mankind may forgive our sins and hold back His just wrath, and that He may have mercy on us.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (12x).

Hear us, O God our Savior, Hope of all those who live at the far ends of the earth, and of those traveling by sea, air or land; be kind to us, O Master, forgive us our sins and have mercy on us, for You are a gracious Lord Who loves mankind, and we glorify You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope, glory be to You.
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.

Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers; and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.

Then the priest bows to all the brethren, and begs forgiveness:
Bless me, reverend fathers and brothers, and forgive me, a sinner, whatever offenses I may have committed this day (this night) and all the days of my life by word, deed and thought as well as by all my senses.
Choir: May God forgive you, reverend Father. Bless us also and forgive our offenses voluntary and involuntary (and the brethren bow to the priest).

May the Lord God by His grace forgive you all your sins and have mercy on you.

Then the priest says: Let us pray for our most holy universal Pontiff, N., Pope of Rome.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For our civil authorities.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For our most blessed Patriarch, N.; for our most reverend Metropolitan, N.; for our God-loving Bishop, N.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For all Catholic bishops.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For the noble benefactors of this holy church (this holy monastery).
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For our very reverend fathers, Protoarchimandrite N., Archimandrite N., Protohegumen N., and Hegumen N.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For our spiritual fathers and for all our brethren in Christ.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For those who are absent and for those who are traveling.
Choir: May God protect and have mercy.

For those who are kind to us.
Choir: May God reward and have mercy.

For those who serve and who have served in this holy church (this holy monastery).
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For those who hate us and for those who love us.
Choir: May God forgive and have mercy.

For the release of captives.
Choir: May God grant freedom and have mercy.

For the sick and suffering.
Choir: May God heal and have mercy.

For those living in anxiety and poverty.
Choir: May God visit them and have mercy.

For all orthodox Christians.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For an abundance of the fruits of the earth.
Choir: May God grant an increase of the fruits of the earth.

If it is a Sunday or a Feastday, the priest says: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

If it is an ordinary day, we commemorate the deceased:
For the benefactors of this holy church (or holy monastery).
Choir: May God grant them remembrance and rest.

For our parents and relatives.
Choir: May God grant them remembrance and rest.

For our departed fathers and brothers.
Choir: May God grant them remembrance and rest.

For those who have given up their lives for the Christian faith.
Choir: May God grant them remembrance and rest.

For those who lie buried here, those listed, and all Christians who have departed from this life.
Choir: Everlasting be their memory.

Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.
