Psalm 141

With my voice I cried to the Lord;* with all my voice I implored the Lord.
Before Him I pour out my supplications;* before Him I declare my distress.
When my breath was escaping me,* then You knew my paths;
On the road upon which I was walking,* they set up snares for me.
I looked to my right and observed* there was no one friendly to me;
Even flight was denied me;* there was no one to take care of my life.
I cried out to You, O Lord, and said:* You are my hope, my share in the land of the living.
Listen to my supplication,* for I am laid very low.
Deliver me from my oppressors;* for they have overwhelmed me.

(If 10 stichera are taken) Lead my soul forth from prison* that I may give thanks to Your name.
The just shall gather around me* when You have been good to me.

Psalm 129

(For 8 stichera) Out of the depths I cry to You, O Lord;* O Lord, hear my voice!
Let Your ears be attentive* to the voice of my prayer.
(For 6 stichera) If You mark iniquities, O Lord, who can stand?* But with You forgiveness is that You may be revered.
I have waited for You as You have commanded;* my soul patiently relies on Your promise, for it has trusted in the Lord.
(For 4 stichera) From the morning watch until night* let Israel trust in the Lord.
For with the Lord there is mercy and with Him there is plentiful redemption;* and He shall redeem Israel from all its iniquities.

Psalm 116

(For 2 stichera) Praise the Lord, all the nations;* proclaim His glory, all you people.
Strong is the love of the Lord for us;* eternally will His truth endure.

The Entrance

On Saturday evening and on those days when there are readings or great prokimena, an entrance is made. At the Glory be..., the holy doors are opened. The priest, vested in the phelonion, and the deacon, holding the censer, proceed around the altar and exit through the northern door and stand before the holy doors.

Deacon (quietly): Let us pray to the Lord.
Priest (quietly): O gracious King, You love mankind and bless all things. With contrite heart and humble spirit we pray to You, O Christ our true God: Bless our comings and our goings. For Your coming and ascension and dwelling among us are blessed, always, now and for ever and ever. Amen.
Deacon: Master, bless the holy entrance.
Priest (blessing towards the East): Blessed be the entrance of Your saints, always, now and for ever and ever.

The deacon, or the priest if there is no deacon, stands within the holy doors, makes a sign of the cross with the censer and intones:
Wisdom! Stand aright.

Joyful Light

Choir: O joyful Light!* Light and holy Glory* of the Father immortal,* the heavenly, holy, the blessed One,* O Jesus Christ!* Now that we have reached the setting of the sun,* and see the evening light,* we sing to God,* Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
It is fitting at all times* to raise a song of praise in measured melody to You,* O Son of God, the Giver of life.* Behold, the universe sings Your glory.

Alternate translation of Joyful Light:
Tranquil Light

Choir: Tranquil Light,* of the holy glory of the immortal* heavenly, holy blessed Father,* O Jesus Christ:* as we come upon the sunset,* as we see the evening light,* we sing to God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
At all times You are worthy* of being hymned by joyful voices;* O Son of God, You are the giver of life.* For this the whole world glorifies You.

The deacon, (after the incensing) goes to the holy doors and intones: Let us be attentive!
Priest: Peace + be with all.
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us be attentive!
The choir sings the prokimenon.

The Daily Prokimena

On Saturday Evening: Ps. 92 (Tone 6)
The Lord reigns,* He is clothed in majesty.
Verse: Robed is the Lord and girt about with strength.
Verse: For He has made the world firm, which shall not be moved.
Verse: Holiness befits Your house, O Lord, for length of days.

On Sunday Evening: Ps. 133 (Tone 8)
And now bless the Lord,* all you servants of the Lord.
Verse: Who stand in the temple of the Lord, in the courtyards of the house of our God.

On Monday Evening: Ps. 4 (Tone 4)
The Lord hears me* when I cry out to Him.
Verse: Whenever I called, the God of my justice heard me.

On Tuesday Evening: Ps. 22 (Tone 1)
Your mercy, O Lord, shall follow me* all the days of my life.
Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. In green pastures He gives me repose.

On Wednesday Evening: Ps. 53 (Tone 5)
O Lord, save me by Your name,* and in Your power be a judge for me.
Verse: O God, hear my prayer; listen to the words of my mouth.

On Thursday Evening: Ps. 120 (Tone 6)
My help is from the Lord,* Who made heaven and earth.
Verse: I lifted up my eyes to the mountains, from where my help shall come.

On Friday Evening: Ps. 58 (Tone 7)
O God, You are my defender* and Your mercy goes before me.
Verse: Deliver me from my enemies, O God; save me from those who rise up against me.

During the Great Fast (Tone 6): Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!

On Monday Evening: Ps. 37
Verse: O Lord, rebuke me not in Your anger, chastise me not in Your wrath. Alleluia.
Verse: Praise the Lord forever. Alleluia.

On Tuesday and Thursday Evening: Ps. 98
Verse: Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at His holy mountain; for the Lord our God is holy. Alleluia.
Verse: Praise the Lord forever. Alleluia.

On Wednesday Evening: Ps. 18
Verse: Through all the world their voice resounds; their message reaches to the ends of the earth. Alleluia.
Verse: Praise the Lord forever. Alleluia.

The Great Prokimena

Psalm 76 (Tone 7)
What God is great as our God?* You are the God Who works wonders!
Verse: You showed Your power among the peoples. Your strong arm redeemed Your people.
Verse: I said: Now I begin, and this is the will of the Most High.
Verse: I remember the deeds of the Lord. I remember Your wonders of old.

Psalm 113 (Tone 7)
But our God is in the heavens and on earth;* He does whatever He wills.
Verse: When Israel came forth from Egypt; Jacob’s sons from an alien people.
Verse: The sea fled at the sight; the Jordan turned back on its course.
Verse: Why was it, sea, that you fled; that you turned back, Jordan, on your course?

Psalm 76 (Tone 8)
I cry aloud to God, cry aloud to God* that He may hear me.
Verse: In the day of my distress I sought the Lord.
Verse: My soul refused to be consoled.
Verse: Your ways, O God, are holy.

Psalm 54 (Tone 7)
O God, listen to my prayer,* do not hide from my pleading.
Verse: Attend to me and reply.
Verse: For they bring down evil upon me.
Verse: As for me, I will cry to God, and the Lord will save me, evening, morning and at noon.

Psalm 17 (Tone 7)
I love You, Lord, my strength,* my rock, my fortress, my Savior.
Verse: My God is the rock where I take refuge, my shield, my mighty help, my stronghold.
Verse: The Lord is worthy of all praise; when I call I am saved from my foes.
Verse: From His temple He heard my voice; my cry came to His ears.

Psalm 60 (Tone 8)
You have granted me the heritage, O God,* of those who fear Your name.
Verse: From the end of the earth I call; my heart is faint.
Verse: I will hide in the shelter of Your wings.
Verse: I will always praise Your name.

Psalm 68 (Tone 8)
Hide not Your face from Your servant; for I am in distress;* answer quickly, come close to my soul and redeem me.
Verse: Let Your saving help, O God, protect me.
Verse: See you lowly ones, and be glad.
Verse: you who seek God, may your hearts be merry.

If there are readings, the priest goes behind the altar immediately after the exclamation: Wisdom! Let us be attentive!, or near the end of the prokimenon. Before the title of each reading, the deacon, standing at the holy doors and facing the people, exclaims: Wisdom!, then after intoning the title: Let us be attentive!

After the prokimenon (and readings) the deacon says the litany before the open holy doors, while the priest stands at the altar. If there is no deacon, the priest says the litany at the altar.

At Daily Vespers, after the prokimenon, the choir immediately sings: Deign, O Lord.... (see p 28).

Litany

Let us all say with our whole soul and our whole mind, let us say.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Almighty Lord, God of our Fathers, we pray You, hear us and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Have mercy on us, O God, in the greatness of Your compassion, we pray You, hear us and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).

We also pray for our most holy universal Pontiff, N., Pope of Rome; for our most blessed Patriarch, N.; our most reverend Metropolitan, N.; our God-loving Bishop, N., for those who serve and have served in this holy church, for our spiritual fathers, and for all our brethren in Christ.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).

We also pray for our nation under God, for our government, and for all the military.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).

We also pray for the people here present who await Your great and bountiful mercies, for those who have been kind to us, and for all orthodox Christians.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).

Priest: For You are a merciful and loving God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Deign, O Lord

Deign, O Lord, * to keep us this evening without sin.
Blessed are You, O Lord God of our Fathers,* and praised and glorified is Your name forever. Amen.
Let Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us* because we have set our hope in You.
Blessed are You, O Lord,* teach me Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Master,* make me understand Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Holy One,* enlighten me with Your laws.
O Lord, Your mercy endures forever;* do not despise the work of Your hands.
It is proper to praise You,* and hymns belong to You.
Glory belongs to You,* Father, Son and Holy Spirit,
Now and for ever* and ever. Amen.

Litany

Let us complete our evening prayer to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Help and save, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
That this whole evening may be perfect, holy, peaceful, and sinless, let us ask the Lord.
Choir: Grant this, O Lord (after each petition).
For an angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies, let us ask the Lord.
For the forgiveness and remission of our sins and offenses, let us ask the Lord.
For all that is good and beneficial for our souls, and for peace for the world, let us ask the Lord.
That we may spend the rest of our lives in peace and repentance, let us ask the Lord.
For a Christian end to our lives, one that is painless, unashamed, and peaceful; and for a good defense at the awesome tribunal of Christ, let us ask the Lord.
Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life, to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest: For You are a merciful, gracious and loving God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Peace + be with all.
Choir: And with your spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest (quietly): O Lord our God, You lowered the heavens when You came down for the salvation of the human race. Now look upon Your servants and upon Your inheritance; for they have bowed their heads to You, the Judge, both awesome and loving. They do not await human help, but look for Your mercy and are ready to receive Your salvation. Guard them at all times, this evening and tonight, against all enemies, against the devil’s assaults, against vain thoughts and evil dreams.

Priest: May the might of Your kingdom be blessed and exalted, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

After the litany, the choir sings the stichera of the aposticha; if there is litiya – the stichera of litiya.

Prayers of Litiya

The choir begins singing the stichera of litiya; the incensing is performed as usual; the priest, with hand-cross, and the deacon with censer proceed to the narthex. When the choir has finished singing the stichera, the deacon sings in a raised voice:

Save Your people, O God, and bless Your inheritance. Visit Your world with Your mercy and generosities. Exalt the Christian peoples and send down upon us Your abundant mercy. Through the prayers of the most pure Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary;* by the power of the precious and life-giving Cross;* through the protection of the honorable, heavenly incorporeal powers;* of the honorable and glorious prophet, forerunner and baptizer, John;* of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles;* and of our fathers among the saints, the great ecumenical teachers and hierarchs: Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom; Athanasius and Cyril;* of our father among the saints, Nicholas, archbishop, wonderworker of Myra in Lycia;* of the holy Cyril and Methodius, teachers of the Slavs;* of the holy and equal-to-the-apostles, Great Prince Volodymyr;* of the holy hieromartyr Josaphat;* of the holy, glorious and triumphant martyrs;* of our venerable and God-bearing fathers Anthony and Theodosius of the Monastery of the Caves and other venerable and godly fathers;* of the holy and righteous ancestors of God, Joachim and Anna;* of Saint, N. (whose church it is) and of Saint, N. (whose day it is), and of all the saints;* we beseech You, O all-merciful Lord, hear us sinners praying to You, and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (12x).

We also pray for our most holy universal Pontiff, N., Pope of Rome; and for our most blessed Patriarch, N.; for our most reverend Metropolitan, N.; for our God-loving Bishop, N.; [for our very reverend fathers: Protoarchimandrite N., Archimandrite N., Protohegumen N., and Hegumen N.], for our spiritual fathers, and for all our brethren in Christ,* and for every Christian soul that is afflicted and maltreated and in need of God’s mercies and help;* for the protection of this city (or: village) and for those who live here (or: for the protection of this holy monastery and for those who live in it);* for the peace and serenity of the whole world;* for the welfare of God’s holy churches;* for the salvation and the assistance of our fathers and brothers who, with diligence and in the fear of the Lord, labor and serve;* for the absent and those who journey;* for the healing of those who are infirm;* for the repose, alleviation, blessed memory, and remission of sins of all our orthodox fathers and brothers, who have departed from us and are buried here and in every place;* for the deliverance of captives, for all brothers, who offer their services* and for all who serve and have served in this holy church; let us say.
Choir: Kyrie, eleison (12x).

Priest: Hear us, O God our Savior, hope of all the ends of the earth and those far away at sea. In Your graciousness be merciful to us sinners, O Master. For You are a merciful and loving God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Peace + be with all.
Choir: And with your spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest: O most merciful Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God, through the prayers of our most pure Lady, the Mother of God, and ever-virgin Mary (whose feast... we solemnly celebrate), and of Saint (whose church it is); and of Saint (whose day it is), and of all the saints, make our prayer acceptable; grant us remission of our transgressions, cover us with the shadow of Your wings; drive far from us every foe and adversary. Make our life peaceful, O Lord; have mercy on us and on Your world, and save our souls for You are gracious and love mankind.
Choir: Amen.

The priest goes to the tetrapod, and the choir sings the aposticha.

Aposticha

At daily vespers we sing these verses with the aposticha (Ps. 122):

I have lifted up my eyes to You enthroned in heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants are on the hands of their masters, as the eyes of a maid are on the hands of her mistress,* so are our eyes on the Lord our God until He has mercy on us.

Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us; for we have been filled with shame;* our soul is all too full of the mockery of the rich, of the contempt of the proud.

Canticle of Simeon

Now You dismiss Your servant, O Lord,* according to Your word, in peace;
Because my eyes* have seen Your salvation
Which You prepared* before the face of all peoples,
A light to the revelation of the Gentiles,* and the glory of Your people, Israel.
