NINTH HOUR

Come, let us adore... (3x) – see page 150.

Psalm 83
(Monday and Thursday)

How lovely is Your dwelling-place,* Lord, God of hosts.
My soul is longing and yearning,* is yearning for the courts of the Lord.
My heart and my soul ring out their joy to God,* the living God.
The sparrow herself finds a home and the swallow a nest for her brood;* she lays her young by Your altars,
Lord of hosts,* my king and my God.
They are happy, who dwell in Your house,* forever singing Your praise.
They are happy, whose strength is in You,* in whose hearts are the roads to Zion.
As they go through the Bitter Valley they make it a place of springs,* the autumn rain covers it with blessings.
They walk with ever-growing strength,* they will see the God of gods in Zion.
O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer,* give ear, O God of Jacob.
Turn Your eyes, O God, our shield,* look on the face of Your anointed.
One day within Your courts* is better than a thousand elsewhere.
The threshold of the house of God* I prefer to the dwellings of the wicked.
For the Lord God is a rampart, a shield;* He will give us His favor and glory.
The Lord will not refuse any good* to those who walk without blame.
Lord, God of hosts,* happy are those who trust in You!

Psalm 84
(Tuesday and Friday)

O Lord, You once favored Your land* and revived the fortunes of Jacob,
You forgave the guilt of Your people* and covered all their sins.
You averted all Your rage, You calmed the heat of Your anger.* Revive us now, God, our helper!
Put an end to Your grievance against us.* Will You be angry with us forever, will Your anger never cease?
Will You not restore again our life* that Your people may rejoice in You?
Let us see, O Lord, Your mercy* and give us Your saving help.
I will hear what the Lord God has to say,* a voice that speaks of peace,
Peace for His people and His friends* and those who turn to Him in their hearts.
His help is near for those who fear Him* and His glory will dwell in our land.
Mercy and faithfulness have met;* justice and peace have embraced.
Faithfulness shall spring from the earth* and justice look down from heaven.
The Lord will make us prosper* and our earth shall yield its fruit.
Justice shall march before Him* and peace shall follow His steps.

Psalm 85
(Wednesday, Saturday, and Sunday)

Turn Your ear, O Lord, and give answer* for I am poor and needy.
Preserve my life, for I am faithful;* save the servant who trusts in You.
You are my God, have mercy on me, Lord,* for I cry to You all the day long.
Give joy to Your servant, O Lord,* for to You I lift up my soul.
O Lord You are good and forgiving,* full of love to all who call.
Give heed, O Lord, to my prayer* and attend to the sound of my voice.
In the day of distress I will call* and surely You will reply.
Among the gods there is none like You, O Lord,* nor work to compare with Yours.
All the nations shall come to adore You* and glorify Your name, O Lord,
For You are great and do marvelous deeds,* You Who alone are God.
Show me, Lord, Your way so that I may walk in Your truth.* Guide my heart to fear Your name.
I will praise You, Lord my God, with all my heart* and glorify Your name forever;
For Your love to me has been great,* You have saved me from the depths of the grave.
The proud have risen against me;* ruthless enemies seek my life; to You, they pay no heed.
But You, God of mercy and compassion,* slow to anger, O Lord,
Abounding in love and truth* turn and take pity on me.
O give Your strength to Your servant* and save Your handmaid’s child.
Show me a sign of Your favor that my foes may see to their shame* that You console me and give me Your help.

The choir concludes the psalms in the following manner:
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
Now and for ever, and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory to You, O God! (3x)
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Then Glory be: the troparion, according to the typicon, usually Patron of the Church; during the Great Fast, see below.

Now and for ever: O gracious Lord, for our sake You were born of the Virgin and were crucified.* You crushed Death by Your death,* and, being God, brought forth the resurrection.* Do not turn away from those You have made with Your own hands;* but reveal instead Your love to us, O Lord of mercy.* Accept as intercessor the Virgin Mother of God who gave You birth.* O our Savior, save a desperate people.

If it is the Great Fast, the following troparion is taken:

(Tone 8) O Lord, Who, for our sake, endured bodily death at the ninth hour, subdue the passions of our flesh, O Christ our God, and save us.
Verse: Lord, let my cry come before You; teach me by Your word.
Verse: Let my pleading come before You: save me by Your promise.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O gracious Lord... (see above).

For the sake of Your holy name, do not abandon us forever;* do not forget Your covenant.* For the sake of Abraham the trustful one,* Isaac Your servant, and Israel Your holy one,* do not take Your mercies away from us.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the kontakion.

During the Great Fast, instead of the kontakion, the following troparia are taken:

(Tone 8) Seeing the Prince of life hanging on the cross,* the good thief cried out in faith:* If the One crucified with us were not God incarnate,* the sun would not have hid its rays, nor would the earth have shaken with terror.* O Lord, You endure all this patiently,* remember me in Your kingdom.

Glory be: Your cross was set up on Calvary,* the balance of justice between two thieves;* the one was carried down to Hades by the weight of his blasphemy;* the other was lightened from his sins and ascended to the knowledge of God.* O Christ our God, glory to You.

Now and for ever: Seeing upon the cross, the Lamb, the Shepherd and the Savior of the world,* she who gave You birth, said amidst her tears:* The world rejoices to see its redemption,* and my heart is spent at the sight of the crucifixion, which You endured for us,* O my Son and my God.

Lord, have mercy (40x); Prayer: “O Christ our God ...” the rest as in the First Hour to the concluding prayer; then, during the Great Fast, and if the Typica is to follow, then immediately begin: Remember us, O Lord..., (p. 179); if not, then the priest says following prayer of the Ninth Hour:

Prayer of the Ninth Hour

O Master, Lord Jesus Christ, You patiently endured our sins and led us to this very hour at which You were hung upon the life-giving wood. You opened a way to paradise for the penitent thief, and crushed Death by Your death. Now forgive the trespasses that we Your servants have committed, unworthy sinners that we are. We have sinned indeed and transgressed Your law. We are unworthy even to lift up our eyes to heaven, for we have abandoned the path of Your holiness and pursued the desires of our hearts. But now we implore Your immense goodness: Spare us, O Lord, in the multitude of Your mercies; save us for the sake of Your most holy name: Our days were spent in vanity; wrest us from the hands of our enemy, and forgive our sins. Subdue in us the cravings of our flesh, so that, after putting off the old, we may put on the new and live for You, our Lord and Benefactor; and that, obeying Your commandments, we may reach eternal repose in the place where all the blessed abide; for You are truly joy and delight to those who love You, O Christ our God. We send up glory to You, and to Your eternal Father, and to Your all-holy, gracious, and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You.
Choir: Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.
Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers; and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.
