Then the troparion: Have mercy on us...; all the rest as in Small Compline, (p. 59), to the end.

SATURDAY NOCTURN

(Friday Evening)

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You...; the usual beginning, until: Come, let us adore..., (pp. 10-11).

Psalm 50 (p. 44)

Psalm 64

To You our praise is due in Zion, O God.* To You we pay our vows, You Who hear our prayer.
To You all flesh will come* with its burden of sin,
Too heavy for us, our offenses,* but You wipe them away.
Blessed is he whom You choose* and call to dwell in Your courts.
We are filled with the blessings of Your house,* of Your holy temple.
You keep Your pledge with wonders, O God our Savior,* the hope of all the earth and of far distant isles.
You uphold the mountains with Your strength,* You are girded with power.
You still the roaring of the seas,* the roaring of their waves and the tumult of the peoples.
The ends of the earth stand in awe* at the sight of Your wonders.
The lands of sunrise and sunset* You fill with Your joy.
You care for the earth, give it water,* You fill it with riches.
Your river in heaven brims over* to provide its grain.
And thus You provide for the earth;* You drench its furrows,
You level it, soften it with showers,* You bless its growth.
You crown the year with Your goodness.* Abundance flows in Your steppes, in the pastures of the wilderness it flows.
The hills are girded with joy,* the meadows covered with flocks,
The valleys are decked with wheat.* They shout for joy, yes, they sing.

Then: Psalm 68 (p. 579), and Psalm 69 (p. 45).

Glory be: Now and for ever: (without the Alleluia). Then immediately:
I believe in one God.... (p. 48).

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the following troparia:

(Tone 2) Uncreated Being, Creator of all,* open our lips that we may proclaim and praise You crying out:* Holy, holy, holy are You, our God.* Through the intercession of Your apostles, prophets and martyrs, have mercy on us.

Glory be: Imitating the powers above,* we on earth, good Lord, offer You the hymn of praise:* Holy, holy, holy are You, our God.* Through the intercession of all Your saints have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: From my bed and my sleep You raised me, Lord.* Enlighten my mind and heart and open my lips, Holy Trinity,* that I may sing to You:* “Holy, holy, holy are You our God.”

Lord, have mercy (40x); then the prayer: O Christ our God..., (p. 56).

Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x); More honorable than the cherubim...; Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!

Priest: May God be merciful to us and bless us; may His countenance shine upon us, and may He have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

Then the priest says the following prayer:
O God our Master, almighty Father; only-begotten Son, Lord Jesus Christ; and You, O Holy Spirit, one God and one Might, have mercy on me a sinner, and save me, Your unworthy servant, according to the ways of Your wisdom. For You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

Prayer of St. Eustratius

With all my heart I extol You, Lord, for You looked with favor upon my lowliness and did not leave me in the hands of my enemies. You saved my soul from distress. Now, Master, let Your hand shelter me. May Your mercy come upon me, for my soul is troubled and in anguish as it leaves my wretched body. Do not let the evil adversary ever lie in wait to attack it and to cast it into darkness because of my sins committed in this life knowingly and unknowingly. Be merciful to me, Master. Let my soul not see the dark and gloomy vision of the evil demons. Rather, let Your bright and shining angels receive it. Give glory to Your holy name and by Your power bring me to Your divine tribunal. At my judgment may not the hand of the prince of this world lay hold of me, to drag me, though a sinner, down to the depths of the infernal abyss. Rather, stand by me and be my savior and my protector. Lord, have mercy on my soul stained by the passions of this life. Receive it purified by repentance and confession, for blessed are You for ever. Amen.

SUNDAY NOCTURN

(Saturday Evening)

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God...; (the usual beginning: until: Come, let us adore..., (pp. 10-11).

Psalm 50 (see p. 44)

Canon of the Holy Trinity:

Ode 9: Hirmos (Tone 8): Heaven was astonished and the ends of the earth were amazed that God appeared to man in bodily form. your womb became vaster than the heavens. And so, choirs of angels and men extol you as God-bearer.

Verse: Most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to You!

As we now praise You, the Nature Which rules all things, effects all things, is beyond all beginning, a Single Trinity, above time, life-giving, merciful, loving and good, we beg forgiveness of sins, peace to the world and harmony to the churches.

Glory be: Lordship with Three Radiances, Deity, One with Three Rays, graciously receive those who sing Your praises. Rescue them from sin and from difficult temptations. In Your love quickly grant peace and unity to Your churches.

Now and for ever: By dwelling in a Virgin’s womb, Christ my Savior, You appeared to Your world as God-man, truly unchanged and unconfused. You clearly promised to be always with Your servants. And so, through the intercession of her who bore You, grant peace to all Your flock.

Then the following troparia are taken:

It is proper to give You divine glory, Holy Trinity,* indivisible and beyond all being, our all-good God,* Whom all earth sings and powers of heaven praise.* You are worshiped in faith by all,* in essence the Oneness of Three Persons.* Dominion beyond the cherubim and Divinity without compare beyond the seraphim,* indivisible Trinity in Oneness,* Godhead indeed, we exalt You.

I adore the Father, without beginning, and God,* together with the Son, without beginning,* and the Spirit, the indivisible One uniting Being.* In song let us worship the Oneness, Three in number.

Piously in song and with sacred refrains,* let us all sing the praises of the Father, and of the Son, and of the divine Spirit,* Power in three Persons, the one kingdom and dominion.

Illuminate me by Your lightning flashes, my God,* Cause of All in Three Persons;* show me the bright, luminous,* unchanging abode of Your inaccessible glory.

In fear, let us glorify Christ the Life-giver,* ineffably enfleshed of the Virgin;* hosts of angels praise Him* and before Him the cherubim shiver and tremble.

It is proper to implore You with tears in all reverence,* the all-merciful,* the all-kind Lord and Savior of our souls.

My King, receive my tears, groans and weeping, wretch though I am.* Rescue me from the flames and outer darkness,* and make me a participant of the heavenly kingdom.

Glory be: All-sovereign Father, Word of God, all-holy Spirit,* one power and image, one kingship, divinity and authority,* have mercy on those who worship You and save them.

Now and for ever: On beholding your Son divine and risen from the dead,* most pure Virgin, all creation was filled with ineffable joy.* In glorifying Him we extol you.

It is truly proper...; Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and Hypakoe of the tone of the week: (see pp. 1231-1235).

Lord, have mercy (40x).
Glory be: now and ever:
Lord, have mercy. (3x). Give the blessing.

Priest: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.

Then the priest bows to all the brethren, and begs forgiveness:
Bless me, reverend fathers and brothers, and forgive me, a sinner, whatever offenses I may have committed this day (this night) and all the days of my life by word, deed and thought as well as by all my senses.
Choir: May God forgive you, reverend Father. Bless us also and forgive our offenses voluntary and involuntary (and the brethren bow to the priest).

Priest: May the Lord God by His grace forgive you all your sins and have mercy on you.
