ABRIDGED HOROLOGION

VESPERS

Vespers with Nocturnal Vigil (Litiya): The priest, vested in the epitrachelion and phelonion (monks vest in the mantle), opens the holy doors. The deacon performs the incensing as usual, while the priest, during that time, stands before the altar. After the incensing, the deacon says in a low voice: Master, give the blessing! Then he leaves the sanctuary and stands before the holy doors, and exclaims: Master, proceed! [However, where it is customary, the holy doors are opened, the deacon exits through the northern door, stands before the holy doors, and exclaims: Master, proceed! Then he returns to the sanctuary, takes a candle and goes before the priest, who performs the incensing as prescribed. After the incensing, the deacon, returning to his place before the holy doors, says in a low voice: Master, give the blessing!]

Then the priest at the altar intones:
Glory be to the holy, consubstantial, life-giving and undivided Trinity, always, now and for ever and ever.

Choir: Amen. Come let us adore.... Then Ps. 103

The priest closes the holy doors, takes off the phelonion, and, vested only in the epitrachelion (and mantle), departs through the northern door and stands before the holy doors, where he reads the Prayers of Light. The deacon remains in the sanctuary.

Vespers without Nocturnal Vigil (Litiya): At Daily Vespers or at Great Vespers without Litiya, the priest, vested in the epitrachelion (and mantle, at Great Vespers), exits via the northern door and, standing before the closed holy doors, makes a small bow and intones:

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!
Heavenly King, Advocate, Spirit of Truth,* Who are everywhere present and fill all things,* Treasury of Blessings, Bestower of Life, come and dwell within us;* cleanse us of all that defiles us,* and, O Good One, save our souls.

Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have mercy on us. (3x)

Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit,* now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Trinity most holy, have mercy on us.* Cleanse us of our sins, O Lord;* pardon our transgressions, O Master;* look upon our weaknesses and heal them, O Holy One;* for the sake of Your name.

Lord, have mercy. (3x)

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,* now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Our Father, Who art in heaven,* hallowed be Thy name.* Thy kingdom come.* Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.* Give us this day our daily bread,* and forgive us our trespasses* as we forgive those who trespass against us.* And lead us not into temptation,* but deliver us from evil.

Priest: For the kingdom, the power and the glory are Yours, Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.

Choir: Amen. Lord, have mercy. (12x)
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Come, let us adore the King, our God.
Come, let us adore Christ, the King and our God.
Come, let us adore and bow down to the only Lord Jesus Christ, the King and our God.

Psalm 103

Bless the Lord, O my soul!* You are very great, O Lord, my God,
Clothed in pomp and brilliance;* arrayed with light as with a cloak.
Stretching out the sky as a tent-cloth,* covering Your lofty halls with water,
You make the clouds Your conveyance;* You surge on the wings of the wind.
You make spirits Your messengers,* and flaming fires Your attendants.
You settle the earth on its firm foundation;* it shall stand unmoved from age to age.
The abyss covers it like a garment;* waters stand over the mountains.
At Your rebuke they will take flight;* at the peal of Your thunder they will fear.
They hurdle the hills and run down the dales,* to the place You have chosen for them.
You have set up a boundary not to be passed;* they shall never return to cover the earth.
Down in the gullies You make springs to rise;* water shall go down between the mountains.
They shall give drink to the beasts of the field;* wild asses will seek them to quench their thirst.
The birds of the sky will abide by them;* from among the rocks they will raise their song.
From Your lofty halls You refresh the mountains;* the earth shall be fed with the fruit of Your works.
You make green pastures for the cattle,* and food-plants for the service of all,
So that bread may be brought forth from the earth,* and wine that gladdens the heart of all;
So that oil may put a gleam upon his face;* and that bread may strengthen the heart of all.
The trees of the plain will be satisfied,* the cedars of Lebanon that He planted.
The sparrows will build their nests in them;* and the herons will call them their home.
To the deer belong high mountains,* to rodents, the shelter of the rocks.
You have made the moon to mark the seasons;* the sun knows the time of its setting.
You establish darkness, and it is night,* wherein all the forest creatures prowl around.
Young lions roar for their prey,* and call out to God for their meat.
As the sun rises, they will come together,* and lay themselves down in their dens.
Man will go out to his labor,* and work until eventide.
How great are Your works, O Lord!* In wisdom You have wrought them all.
The earth is filled with Your creatures.* Even the wide and open sea itself,
Within it there are countless creeping things,* living beings small and large.
Upon it there are ships a-sailing,* and that great beast You made to have fun therein.
All of them look up to You,* to give them their food in due time.
You provide and they gather up;* You open Your hand and they are full.
You hide Your face and they cringe;* You suspend their breath, and they die and return to their dust.
You send forth Your breath and they live;* You renew the face of the earth.
May the Lord’s glory endure forever;* may the Lord rejoice in His works;
He looks upon the earth and makes it quake;* He touches the mountains and they smoke.
I will sing to the Lord as long as I live;* I will praise my God as long as I last.
Would that my thoughts be pleasing to Him:* and I will rejoice in the Lord.
May sinners vanish from the earth, and may the wicked be no more.* Bless the Lord, O my soul!
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God (3x).

As Psalm 103 is being recited, the priest quietly reads the Prayers of Light in front of the holy doors. Only one of the prayers may be read throughout the entire week according to the tone of the week.

The Prayers of Light

O Lord, compassionate and loving, long-suffering and most merciful, hear our prayer and listen to the voice of our supplication. Make a favorable covenant with us, guide us along Your ways that we may live in Your truth, gladden our hearts that we may fear Your holy name; for You are great and You perform wondrous deeds. You are the only God and none other is like You, O Lord. You are great in mercy and able, in Your power, to assist, support, and save all those who place their hope in Your holy name; and to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is due all glory, honor, and adoration, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, in Your indignation do not rebuke us; in Your wrath do not chastise us; but deal with us according to Your loving-kindness. O Physician and Healer of our souls, guide us to the harbor of Your will; enlighten the eyes of our mind that we may know Your truth. Grant that the remainder of this day and all the days of our life may be peaceful and without sin, through the prayers of the holy Mother of God and through the prayers of all the saints; for Yours is the might, and Yours is the kingdom and the power and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord our God, be mindful of us sinners, Your unworthy servants, as we call upon Your holy name, and put us not to shame for having placed our hope in Your mercy. Graciously grant us, O Lord, all the means of salvation; make us worthy to love and fear You with all our heart and to accomplish Your will in all things. For You are a gracious Lord and You love mankind; and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, You are praised by the holy powers in hymns which are never silent, and in doxologies which never cease. Fill our mouths with Your praise that we may exalt Your holy name. Through the prayers of the holy Mother of God and the intercession of all Your saints, give us a part and an inheritance with those who fear You in truth and who keep Your commandments. For to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is due all glory, honor, and adoration, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Blessed are You, O Lord, almighty God. You know the mind of each person; You know what each needs even before they ask or are aware of it. Now, O King Who loves mankind and Who is gracious in everything, in Your great mercy allow us to call upon Your holy name with an unashamed conscience. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the Evil One; and in Your providence grant all that is beneficial to us. For to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is due all glory, honor, and adoration, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, O Lord, You hold all things together in Your spotless hands; You are long-suffering toward us all; You grieve at our wickedness. Remember Your compassion and mercy, and visit us in Your goodness. Grant that for the rest of this day we may escape from the manifold deceits of the Evil One; and keep our life free from every assault of the enemy, through the grace of Your all-holy Spirit. Grant this through the mercies and love for mankind of Your only-begotten Son with Whom You are blessed, together with Your all-holy, gracious, and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O great and wonderful God, You govern all things with Your indescribable goodness and rich providence. You have provided us with the goodness of this world and have assured us, through Your kindness, of attaining the promised kingdom. O Lord, through all the blessings already received this day, You have kept us away from evil; grant that we spend its remaining hours without blame before Your holy glory, and that we may sing Your praise, O You, the only gracious One Who loves mankind. For You are our God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O great and most high God, You alone are immortal and You dwell in a light which is unapproachable. You created all things in Your wisdom, dividing light from darkness, establishing the sun to govern the day and the moon and stars to rule the night. You have deemed us, poor sinners, worthy to reach this hour, to come into Your presence with our thanks, and to offer You our evening praise. O Lord Who loves mankind, let our prayers ascend to You as incense, and accept them as a sweet fragrance. Grant that this evening and the coming night may be spent in peace; clothe us with the armor of light; save us from the fears of the night and from things that lurk in darkness. Grant that the sleep You have given to refresh us from our fatigue may be free from every evil. Yes, O Lord and Giver of all good things, grant that, having found favor in Your sight, we may lie down to rest, remembering Your name throughout the night; and enlightened by the practice of Your commandments, may we rise in gladness of soul to praise Your goodness, offering prayers and supplications for our sins and those of Your people. Look down upon us with mercy, through the intercession of the Mother of God; for You are gracious Lord Who loves mankind, and we glorify You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

After the recitation of the Psalm 103, the priest returns to the sanctuary and stands before the altar; the deacon departs through the northern door, stands before the holy doors, and intones the litany. If there is no deacon, the priest intones the litany before the holy doors.

Litany of Peace

In peace let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (and after each petition).

For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.

For peace throughout the whole world, for the well-being of God's holy churches and for the unity of all, let us pray to the Lord.

For this holy church and for all who enter it with faith, reverence, and fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.

For our most holy universal Pontiff, N., Pope of Rome, let us pray to the Lord.

For our most blessed Patriarch, N., our most reverend Metropolitan, N., our God-loving Bishop, N., the reverend priesthood, the diaconate in Christ, and all the clergy and the people, let us pray to the Lord.

For our nation under God, for our government, and for all the military, let us pray to the Lord.

For this city (or For this village, or For this holy monastery), for every city and country and for the faithful who live in them, let us pray to the Lord.

For favorable weather, for an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and for peaceful times, let us pray to the Lord.

For seafarers and travelers, for the sick and the suffering, for those held captive, and for their salvation, let us pray to the Lord.

That we may be delivered from all tribulation, wrath, and misfortune, let us pray to the Lord.

Help us, save us, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.

Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest: For all glory, honor, and worship befit You, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

After the litany, the priest returns to the sanctuary and stands before the altar with the deacon at his right.

Blessed Is the Man

This hymn is sung at every Saturday Vespers and on all the feasts of the Most Holy Theotokos and the saints; on the feasts of our Lord, but only if they occur on Sunday or Monday.

Blessed is the man Alleluia* – who has not walked in the counsel of the wicked. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
For the Lord knows the way of the just,* but the way of the wicked shall be lost. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Serve the Lord with fear,* exalt in Him with trembling. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Blessed are those* who trust in Him! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Arise, O Lord,* save me, my God. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Salvation is of the Lord!* Upon Your people Your blessing. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Now and for ever and ever. Amen. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

After the hymn: Blessed is the man ... the deacon says the small litany before the holy doors, and after the doxology he returns to the sanctuary.

Small Litany

Again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord.
Help us, save us, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.
Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

Priest: For the kingdom and the power and the glory, are Yours, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.

Psalm 140

On Saturday evening and on all the feast days, the deacon, or the priest if there is no deacon, performs the incensing as prescribed by the typikon. The choir sings the first two verses of Psalm 140 according to the tone of the first sticherion.

O Lord, I have cried to You,* hear me; hear me, O Lord!* O Lord, I have cried to You, hear me;* receive the voice of my prayer* when I call upon You.* Hear me, O Lord!
Let my prayer rise like incense before You;* and the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice.* Hear me, O Lord!
Set a guard, O Lord, before my mouth* and a portal around my lips.
Incline my heart away from evil dealings,* from finding excuses for sinful deeds.
In company with those who work iniquity,* let me not partake of what they choose.
May the just chasten me with justice and reprove me;* may the oil of the wicked never touch my head.
Yet even then shall I pray for their welfare.* Their rulers were swallowed near the rock.
My words will be heard,* for they were sweet.
As a lump of clay broken on the ground,* so their bones were strewn near the grave.
To You, Lord, O Lord, my eyes are lifted up.* In You have I hoped; let not my soul be lost.
Keep me from the snare that was set for me,* and from the stumbling-blocks of the wicked.
The wicked shall fall into their own nets,* while I remain alone until I can escape.

Psalm 141

With my voice I cried to the Lord;* with all my voice I implored the Lord.
Before Him I pour out my supplications;* before Him I declare my distress.
When my breath was escaping me,* then you knew my paths;
On the road upon which I was walking,* they set up snares for me.
I looked to my right and observed* there was no one friendly to me;
Even flight was denied me;* there was no one to take care of my life.
I cried out to You, O Lord, and said:* You are my hope, my share in the land of the living.
Listen to my supplication,* for I am laid very low.
Deliver me from my oppressors;* for they have overwhelmed me.

(If 10 stichera are taken) Lead my soul forth from prison* that I may give thanks to Your name.
The just shall gather around me* when You have been good to me.

Psalm 129

(For 8 stichera) Out of the depths I cry to You, O Lord;* O Lord, hear my voice!
Let Your ears be attentive* to the voice of my prayer.
(For 6 stichera) If You mark iniquities, O Lord, who can stand?* But with You forgiveness is that You may be revered.
I have waited for You as You have commanded;* my soul patiently relies on Your promise, for it has trusted in the Lord.
(For 4 stichera) From the morning watch until night* let Israel trust in the Lord.
For with the Lord there is mercy and with Him there is plentiful redemption;* and He shall redeem Israel from all its iniquities.

Psalm 116

(For 2 stichera) Praise the Lord, all the nations;* proclaim His glory, all you people.
Strong is the love of the Lord for us;* eternally will His truth endure.

The Entrance

On Saturday evening and on those days when there are readings or great prokimena, an entrance is made. At the Glory be..., the holy doors are opened. The priest, vested in the phelonion, and the deacon, holding the censer, proceed around the altar and exit through the northern door and stand before the holy doors.

Deacon (quietly): Let us pray to the Lord.
Priest (quietly): O gracious King, You love mankind and bless all things. With contrite heart and humble spirit we pray to You, O Christ our true God: Bless our comings and our goings. For Your coming and ascension and dwelling among us are blessed, always, now and for ever and ever. Amen.
Deacon: Master, bless the holy entrance.
Priest (blessing towards the East): Blessed be the entrance of Your saints, always, now and for ever and ever.

The deacon, or the priest if there is no deacon, stands within the holy doors, makes a sign of the cross with the censer and intones:
Wisdom! Stand aright.

Joyful Light

Choir: O joyful Light!* Light and holy Glory* of the Father immortal,* the heavenly, holy, the blessed One,* O Jesus Christ!* Now that we have reached the setting of the sun,* and see the evening light,* we sing to God,* Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
It is fitting at all times* to raise a song of praise in measured melody to You,* O Son of God, the Giver of life.* Behold, the universe sings Your glory.

Alternate translation of Joyful Light:
Tranquil Light

Choir: Tranquil Light,* of the holy glory of the immortal* heavenly, holy blessed Father,* O Jesus Christ:* as we come upon the sunset,* as we see the evening light,* we sing to God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
At all times You are worthy* of being hymned by joyful voices;* O Son of God, You are the giver of life.* For this the whole world glorifies You.

The deacon, (after the incensing) goes to the holy doors and intones: Let us be attentive!
Priest: Peace + be with all.
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us be attentive!
The choir sings the prokimenon.

The Daily Prokimena

On Saturday Evening: Ps. 92 (Tone 6)
The Lord reigns,* He is clothed in majesty.
Verse: Robed is the Lord and girt about with strength.
Verse: For He has made the world firm, which shall not be moved.
Verse: Holiness befits Your house, O Lord, for length of days.

On Sunday Evening: Ps. 133 (Tone 8)
And now bless the Lord,* all you servants of the Lord.
Verse: Who stand in the temple of the Lord, in the courtyards of the house of our God.

On Monday Evening: Ps. 4 (Tone 4)
The Lord hears me* when I cry out to Him.
Verse: Whenever I called, the God of my justice heard me.

On Tuesday Evening: Ps. 22 (Tone 1)
Your mercy, O Lord, shall follow me* all the days of my life.
Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. In green pastures He gives me repose.

On Wednesday Evening: Ps. 53 (Tone 5)
O Lord, save me by Your name,* and in Your power be a judge for me.
Verse: O God, hear my prayer; listen to the words of my mouth.

On Thursday Evening: Ps. 120 (Tone 6)
My help is from the Lord,* Who made heaven and earth.
Verse: I lifted up my eyes to the mountains, from where my help shall come.

On Friday Evening: Ps. 58 (Tone 7)
O God, You are my defender* and Your mercy goes before me.
Verse: Deliver me from my enemies, O God; save me from those who rise up against me.

During the Great Fast (Tone 6): Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!

On Monday Evening: Ps. 37
Verse: O Lord, rebuke me not in Your anger, chastise me not in Your wrath. Alleluia.
Verse: Praise the Lord forever. Alleluia.

On Tuesday and Thursday Evening: Ps. 98
Verse: Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at His holy mountain; for the Lord our God is holy. Alleluia.
Verse: Praise the Lord forever. Alleluia.

On Wednesday Evening: Ps. 18
Verse: Through all the world their voice resounds; their message reaches to the ends of the earth. Alleluia.
Verse: Praise the Lord forever. Alleluia.

The Great Prokimena

Psalm 76 (Tone 7)
What God is great as our God?* You are the God Who works wonders!
Verse: You showed Your power among the peoples. Your strong arm redeemed Your people.
Verse: I said: Now I begin, and this is the will of the Most High.
Verse: I remember the deeds of the Lord. I remember Your wonders of old.

Psalm 113 (Tone 7)
But our God is in the heavens and on earth;* He does whatever He wills.
Verse: When Israel came forth from Egypt; Jacob’s sons from an alien people.
Verse: The sea fled at the sight; the Jordan turned back on its course.
Verse: Why was it, sea, that you fled; that you turned back, Jordan, on your course?

Psalm 76 (Tone 8)
I cry aloud to God, cry aloud to God* that He may hear me.
Verse: In the day of my distress I sought the Lord.
Verse: My soul refused to be consoled.
Verse: Your ways, O God, are holy.

Psalm 54 (Tone 7)
O God, listen to my prayer,* do not hide from my pleading.
Verse: Attend to me and reply.
Verse: For they bring down evil upon me.
Verse: As for me, I will cry to God, and the Lord will save me, evening, morning and at noon.

Psalm 17 (Tone 7)
I love You, Lord, my strength,* my rock, my fortress, my Savior.
Verse: My God is the rock where I take refuge, my shield, my mighty help, my stronghold.
Verse: The Lord is worthy of all praise; when I call I am saved from my foes.
Verse: From His temple He heard my voice; my cry came to His ears.

Psalm 60 (Tone 8)
You have granted me the heritage, O God,* of those who fear Your name.
Verse: From the end of the earth I call; my heart is faint.
Verse: I will hide in the shelter of Your wings.
Verse: I will always praise Your name.

Psalm 68 (Tone 8)
Hide not Your face from Your servant; for I am in distress;* answer quickly, come close to my soul and redeem me.
Verse: Let Your saving help, O God, protect me.
Verse: See you lowly ones, and be glad.
Verse: You who seek God, may your hearts be merry.

If there are readings, the priest goes behind the altar immediately after the exclamation: Wisdom! Let us be attentive!, or near the end of the prokimenon. Before the title of each reading, the deacon, standing at the holy doors and facing the people, exclaims: Wisdom!, then after intoning the title: Let us be attentive!

After the prokimenon (and readings) the deacon says the litany before the open holy doors, while the priest stands at the altar. If there is no deacon, the priest says the litany at the altar.

At Daily Vespers, after the prokimenon, the choir immediately sings: Deign, O Lord.... (see p 28).

Litany

Let us all say with our whole soul and our whole mind, let us say.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Almighty Lord, God of our Fathers, we pray You, hear us and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Have mercy on us, O God, in the greatness of Your compassion, we pray You, hear us and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).

We also pray for our most holy universal Pontiff, N., Pope of Rome; for our most blessed Patriarch, N.; our most reverend Metropolitan, N.; our God-loving Bishop, N., for those who serve and have served in this holy church, for our spiritual fathers, and for all our brethren in Christ.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).

We also pray for our nation under God, for our government, and for all the military.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).

We also pray for the people here present who await Your great and bountiful mercies, for those who have been kind to us, and for all orthodox Christians.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).

Priest: For You are a merciful and loving God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Deign, O Lord

Deign, O Lord, * to keep us this evening without sin.
Blessed are You, O Lord God of our Fathers,* and praised and glorified is Your name forever. Amen.
Let Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us* because we have set our hope in You.
Blessed are You, O Lord,* teach me Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Master,* make me understand Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Holy One,* enlighten me with Your laws.
O Lord, Your mercy endures forever;* do not despise the work of Your hands.
It is proper to praise You,* and hymns belong to You.
Glory belongs to You,* Father, Son and Holy Spirit,
Now and for ever* and ever. Amen.

Litany

Let us complete our evening prayer to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Help and save, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
That this whole evening may be perfect, holy, peaceful, and sinless, let us ask the Lord.
Choir: Grant this, O Lord (after each petition).
For an angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies, let us ask the Lord.
For the forgiveness and remission of our sins and offenses, let us ask the Lord.
For all that is good and beneficial for our souls, and for peace for the world, let us ask the Lord.
That we may spend the rest of our lives in peace and repentance, let us ask the Lord.
For a Christian end to our lives, one that is painless, unashamed, and peaceful; and for a good defense at the awesome tribunal of Christ, let us ask the Lord.
Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life, to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest: For You are a merciful, gracious and loving God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Peace + be with all.
Choir: And with Your spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest (quietly): O Lord our God, You lowered the heavens when You came down for the salvation of the human race. Now look upon Your servants and upon Your inheritance; for they have bowed their heads to You, the Judge, both awesome and loving. They do not await human help, but look for Your mercy and are ready to receive Your salvation. Guard them at all times, this evening and tonight, against all enemies, against the devil’s assaults, against vain thoughts and evil dreams.

Priest: May the might of Your kingdom be blessed and exalted, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

After the litany, the choir sings the stichera of the aposticha; if there is litiya – the stichera of litiya.

Prayers of Litiya

The choir begins singing the stichera of litiya; the incensing is performed as usual; the priest, with hand-cross, and the deacon with censer proceed to the narthex. When the choir has finished singing the stichera, the deacon sings in a raised voice:

Save Your people, O God, and bless Your inheritance. Visit Your world with Your mercy and generosities. Exalt the Christian peoples and send down upon us Your abundant mercy. Through the prayers of the most pure Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary;* by the power of the precious and life-giving Cross;* through the protection of the honorable, heavenly incorporeal powers;* of the honorable and glorious prophet, forerunner and baptizer, John;* of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles;* and of our fathers among the saints, the great ecumenical teachers and hierarchs: Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom; Athanasius and Cyril;* of our father among the saints, Nicholas, archbishop, wonderworker of Myra in Lycia;* of the holy Cyril and Methodius, teachers of the Slavs;* of the holy and equal-to-the-apostles, Great Prince Volodymyr;* of the holy hieromartyr Josaphat;* of the holy, glorious and triumphant martyrs;* of our venerable and God-bearing fathers Anthony and Theodosius of the Monastery of the Caves and other venerable and godly fathers;* of the holy and righteous ancestors of God, Joachim and Anna;* of Saint, N. (whose church it is) and of Saint, N. (whose day it is), and of all the saints;* we beseech You, O all-merciful Lord, hear us sinners praying to You, and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (12x).

We also pray for our most holy universal Pontiff, N., Pope of Rome; and for our most blessed Patriarch, N.; for our most reverend Metropolitan, N.; for our God-loving Bishop, N.; [for our very reverend fathers: Protoarchimandrite N., Archimandrite N., Protohegumen N., and Hegumen N.], for our spiritual fathers, and for all our brethren in Christ,* and for every Christian soul that is afflicted and maltreated and in need of God’s mercies and help;* for the protection of this city (or: village) and for those who live here (or: for the protection of this holy monastery and for those who live in it);* for the peace and serenity of the whole world;* for the welfare of God’s holy churches;* for the salvation and the assistance of our fathers and brothers who, with diligence and in the fear of the Lord, labor and serve;* for the absent and those who journey;* for the healing of those who are infirm;* for the repose, alleviation, blessed memory, and remission of sins of all our orthodox fathers and brothers, who have departed from us and are buried here and in every place;* for the deliverance of captives, for all brothers, who offer their services* and for all who serve and have served in this holy church; let us say.
Choir: Kyrie, eleison (12x).

Priest: Hear us, O God our Savior, hope of all the ends of the earth and those far away at sea. In Your graciousness be merciful to us sinners, O Master. For You are a merciful and loving God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Peace + be with all.
Choir: And with your spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest: O most merciful Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God, through the prayers of our most pure Lady, the Mother of God, and ever-virgin Mary (whose feast... we solemnly celebrate), and of Saint (whose church it is); and of Saint (whose day it is), and of all the saints, make our prayer acceptable; grant us remission of our transgressions, cover us with the shadow of Your wings; drive far from us every foe and adversary. Make our life peaceful, O Lord; have mercy on us and on Your world, and save our souls for You are gracious and love mankind.
Choir: Amen.

The priest goes to the tetrapod, and the choir sings the aposticha.

Aposticha

At daily vespers we sing these verses with the aposticha (Ps. 122):

I have lifted up my eyes to You enthroned in heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants are on the hands of their masters, as the eyes of a maid are on the hands of her mistress,* so are our eyes on the Lord our God until He has mercy on us.

Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us; for we have been filled with shame;* our soul is all too full of the mockery of the rich, of the contempt of the proud.

Canticle of Simeon

Now You dismiss Your servant, O Lord,* according to Your word, in peace;
Because my eyes* have seen Your salvation
Which You prepared* before the face of all peoples,
A light to the revelation of the Gentiles,* and the glory of Your people, Israel.

Song of Symeon - Alternate Translation
Now, O Master, You have kept Your promise;* let Your servant go in peace.* With my own eyes I have seen the salvation* which you have prepared in the sight of every people;* a light to reveal You to the Gentiles,* and the glory of Your people Israel!

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the troparion according to the typicon. If there is litiya, then the loaves are blessed. At Great Vespers, then the great dismissal is taken, while on ordinary days the litany Have mercy on us, O God..., (p. 27), and the daily dismissal, are taken. During the Great Fast, see p. 39.

If there is litiya: As the troparion is being sung, the deacon, or the priest if there is no deacon, incenses the tetrapod on all four sides; then he intones:
Let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Then priest says the prayer of the blessing of the loaves:
O Lord Jesus Christ our God, You blessed the five loaves and fed the five thousand. Bless these loaves +, this wheat +, wine +, and oil +, and multiply them in this city (village, monastery) and in the whole world; and sanctify all the faithful who shall partake of them; for it is You, O Christ our God, Who bless and sanctify all things. And we glorify You with Your eternal Father and Your all-holy, gracious, and life-giving Spirit, now and forever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Blessed be the name of the Lord, now and for ever (3x).

Psalm 33

I will bless the Lord at all times;* His praise shall be constantly in my mouth.
My soul shall glory in the Lord;* let the meek hear and rejoice.
Magnify the Lord with me,* and let us exalt His name together.
I sought the Lord and He heard me,* and delivered me from all my fears.
Approach the Lord and be enlightened,* and your face shall never be shamed.
The poor cried out, and the Lord heard them* and delivered them from all their afflictions.
The angel of the Lord will set up camp around those who fear the Lord* and save them.
Taste and see how good the Lord is;* blessed is the one who hopes in Him.
Fear the Lord, all you His saints,* for there is no privation for those who fear Him.
The rich have become poor and hungry* but those who seek the Lord shall not be deprived of any good.

Priest: The blessing of the Lord be upon you through His grace and loving kindness, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Then the Great Dismissal. If Matins is to follow immediately then the priest intones: Glory to the holy....

The Great Dismissal

The Great Dismissal is taken when the litany: Let us all say... follows the prokimena, and on Friday evening.

Deacon: Wisdom!
Choir: Give the blessing.
Priest: Blessed be Christ our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. O God, strengthen the holy orthodox, (catholic or true) faith, for ever and ever.
Priest: O most holy Mother of God, save us.
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim* and by far more glorious than the seraphim;* ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word,* O true Mother of God, we magnify you.
Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope, glory be to You.
Choir: Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen. Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.

On Saturday evening and Sunday morning the priest says:
Christ our true God, risen from the dead, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles; of Saint, N. (whose church it is), and of Saint, N. (whose day it is) and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

Daily Dismissal

The dismissal is taken when the litany Have mercy on us... follows the troparia (except on Friday evening).

Deacon: Wisdom!
Choir: More honorable than the Cherubim....
Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You.
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever; Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God....

Other Dismissals

On Sunday evening and Monday morning: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; the protection of honorable, heavenly incorporeal powers; of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles; of Saint, N. (whose church it is), and of Saint, N. (whose day it is) and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

On Monday evening and on Tuesday morning: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of the honorable and glorious prophet, forerunner and baptizer, John; of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles ...

On Tuesday and Thursday evening and Wednesday and Friday morning: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; by the power of the precious and life-giving cross; of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles ...

On Wednesday evening and Thursday morning: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles; of our father among the saints, Nicholas, archbishop, wonderworker of Myra in Lycia; and the Saint ...

On Friday evening and Saturday morning: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; by the power of the precious and lifegiving cross; through the protection of the honorable, heavenly incorporeal powers; of the honorable and glorious prophet, forerunner and baptizer, John; of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles; of our father among the saints, Nicholas, archbishop, wonderworker of Myra in Lycia; of the holy, glorious and triumphant martyrs; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers; of the holy and righteous ancestors of God, Joachim and Anna; of Saint, N. (whose church it is), and of Saint, N. (whose day it is) and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

On the feasts of the Theotokos: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, the glorious feast of whose (Nativity, or Patronage, or Entrance into the Temple, or Immaculate Conception, or Annunciation, or Dormition), we solemnly celebrate today; and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

On the days of the other saints with vigil and of those with polyeleos but without vigil, one says:
Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of the holy, glorious, and all-praiseworthy apostles; and of Saint N., whose memorial we solemnly celebrate today; and all the saints; will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The festal dismissals are given after the festal troparia.

During the Great Fast

After the Canticle of Simeon and Trisagion, the following troparia are sung:

(Tone 1) Hail, Mother of God, Virgin Mary full of grace!* The Lord is with you.* Blessed are you among women,* and blessed is the fruit of your womb.* For you have borne Christ, the Savior and Deliverer of our souls.
(Prostration).

Glory be: O Baptizer of Christ, remember us all,* that we may be delivered from our iniquities;* for you have been given the grace to pray for us.
(Prostration).

Now and for ever: Pray for us, O holy apostles and all you saints,* that we may be delivered from peril and afflictions;* for you are our fervent intercessors before the Savior.
(Prostration).

We flee to your mercy, O Virgin Mother of God.* Despise not our prayers in our necessities,* but you, who alone are pure and blessed, deliver us from all danger. (No prostration).

Lord, have mercy (40x). Lord, give the blessing.
Priest: Blessed is Christ, our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Priest: O heavenly King, strengthen Your church, affirm our faith, calm the nations, give peace to the world, and preserve this city (or this village, or this monastery). Grant the faithful departed a share in the dwelling of the just, and receive us after repentance and confession, for You are good and love mankind.
Choir: Amen. Lord, have mercy (3x).
Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the Cherubim....
In the name of the Lord, Father, give the blessing.
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ, our God, have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

Prayer of St. Ephrem

O Lord and Master of my life, drive from me the spirit of indifference, despair, lust for power and idle chatter.
(Prostration)
Instead, bestow on me, Your servant, the spirit of integrity, humility, patience and love. (Prostration)
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins and not judge my brothers and sisters; for You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen. (Prostration)

At Sunday Vespers, after these prayers, the priest intones the dismissal beginning with Glory be to You, O Christ our God, glory be to You; but on other days:
O God, be merciful to me, a sinner.
O God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me.
I have sinned without number, forgive me, O Lord!
(12 small bows).

Once again, the entire prayer of St. Ephrem is recited, and one prostration made at the conclusion.

Prayer: O all-holy Trinity, Consubstantial Might, Undivided Kingship, Source and Origin of all goodness, deal kindly with me, a sinner; strengthen my innermost spirit, cleanse me of all evil, and enlighten my mind that I may ever glorify You with this prayer: One is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen.

(Where the custom prevails, the priest intones: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope, glory be to You; then the dismissal, pp. 37-38).

Choir: Blessed be the name of the Lord, now and for ever. (3x)

Psalm 33

I will bless the Lord at all times;* His praise shall be constantly in my mouth.
My soul shall glory in the Lord;* let the meek hear and rejoice.
Magnify the Lord with me,* and let us exalt His name together.
I sought the Lord and He heard me,* and delivered me from all my fears.
Approach the Lord and be enlightened,* and your face shall never be shamed.
The poor cried out, and the Lord heard them* and delivered them from all their afflictions.
The angel of the Lord will set up camp around those who fear the Lord* and save them.
Taste and see how good the Lord is;* blessed is the one who hopes in Him.
Fear the Lord, all you His saints,* for there is no privation for those who fear Him.
The rich have become poor and hungry* but those who seek the Lord shall not want any good.
Come, children, hear me;* I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
Who is the one who desires life,* who loves to see good days?
Keep your mouth from evil* and your lips from deceitful speech;
Turn away from evil and do good,* seek peace and pursue it.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the just,* and His ears are open to their pleas;
The face of the Lord is against evildoers* to erase their memory from the earth.
The just cried out, and the Lord heard them,* and He delivered them from all their trials.
The Lord is close to those of contrite heart,* and He will save the humble in spirit.
Many are the trials of the just,* but out of them all, the Lord will save them.
He keeps watch over all their bones;* not a single one of them shall be broken.
The death of the sinners is wretched;* those who hate what is right will be condemned.
The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants,* and none of those who hope in Him will go astray.

Then immediately: It is truly right to bless you, O God-bearing One, as the ever-blessed and immaculate Mother of our God. More honorable than the cherubim and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word, O true Mother of God, we magnify you.
Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God..., (pp. 37-38).

Hymns Sung After Vespers

On Weekdays: O Lady, receive the prayers of your servants,* and deliver us from all sorrows and tribulations.

On Saturday evening (Tone 6): O Christ our Savior,* the angels in heaven sing the praises of Your resurrection;* on earth, make us, also worthy* to glorify You with a pure heart.

On Sunday evening: We flee to your mercy, O holy Mother of God,* despise not our petitions in our necessities,* but deliver us from all dangers, O ever glorious and blessed Virgin.

On the feasts of our Lord, the Theotokos and the saints, the kontakion of the feast is sung. When, however, the feasts of the Theotokos and of the saints fall on Sunday, then, O Christ our Savior... is sung.

>>>SMALL COMPLINE<<<

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God...
(the usual beginning, until: Come, let us adore..., p. 10-11).

Psalm 50
(Sunday and Wednesday)

Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness.* In Your compassion blot out my offense.
O wash me more and more from my guilt* and cleanse me from my sin.
My offenses truly I know them;* my sin is always before me.
Against You, You alone, have I sinned;* what is evil in Your sight I have done.
That You may be justified when You give sentence* and be without reproach when You judge.
O see, in guilt I was born,* a sinner was I conceived.
Indeed, You love truth in the heart;* then in the secret of my heart teach me wisdom.
O purify me, then I shall be clean;* O wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me hear rejoicing and gladness,* that the bones You have crushed may thrill.
From my sins turn away Your face* and blot out all my guilt.
A pure heart create for me, O God,* put a steadfast spirit within me.
Do not cast me away from Your presence,* nor deprive me of Your Holy Spirit.
Give me again the joy of Your help;* with a spirit of fervor sustain me.
That I may teach transgressors Your ways* and sinners may return to You.
O rescue me, God, my helper,* and my tongue shall ring out Your goodness.
O Lord, open my lips* and my mouth shall declare Your praise.
For in sacrifice You take no delight,* burnt offering from me You would refuse.
My sacrifice, a contrite spirit.* A humbled, contrite heart You will not spurn.
In Your goodness, show favor to Zion:* rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will be pleased with lawful sacrifice, burnt offerings wholly consumed,* Then You will be offered young bulls on Your altar.

Psalm 69
(Monday and Thursday)

O God, make haste to my rescue,* Lord, come to my aid!
Let there be shame and confusion* on those who seek my life.
O let them turn back in confusion,* who delight in my harm,
Let them retreat, covered with shame,* who jeer at my lot.
Let there be rejoicing and gladness* for all who seek You.
Let them say for ever: “God is great,”* who love Your saving help.
As for me, wretched and poor,* come to me, O God.
You are my rescuer, my help,* O Lord, do not delay.

Psalm 142
(Tuesday and Friday)

Lord, listen to my prayer;* turn Your ear to my appeal.
You are faithful, You are just;* give answer.
Do not call Your servant to judgment* for no one is just in Your sight.
The enemy pursues my soul;* he has crushed my life to the ground;
He has made me dwell in darkness* like the dead, long forgotten.
Therefore, my spirit fails;* my heart is numb within me.
I remember the days that are past:* I ponder all Your works.
I muse on what Your hand has wrought* and to You I stretch out my hands.
Like a parched land my soul thirsts for You;* Lord, make haste and answer; for my spirit fails within me.
Do not hide Your face* lest I become like those in the grave.
In the morning let me know Your love* for I put my trust in You.
Make me know the way I should walk;* to You I lift up my soul.
Rescue me, Lord, from my enemies;* I have fled to You for refuge.
Teach me to do Your will,* for You, O Lord, are my God.
Let Your good Spirit guide me* in ways that are level and smooth.
For Your name’s sake, Lord, save my life;* in Your justice save my soul from distress.
In Your love make an end of my foes;* destroy all those who oppress me for I am Your servant, O Lord.

Lesser Doxology (Saturday)

Glory to God in the highest,* and to His people on earth, peace and good will.
We praise You, we bless You, we worship You,* we glorify You, we thank You for Your great glory.
Lord God, heavenly King, almighty God and Father,* with the Lord Jesus Christ, only Son of the Father, and the Holy Spirit.
Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father,* You take away the sins of the world, have mercy on us.
You take away the sins of the world,* hear our prayer.
You are seated at the right hand of the Father,* have mercy on us.
For You alone are holy, You alone are the Lord, Jesus Christ,* for the glory of God the Father. Amen.
I will bless You every night,* and praise Your name forever.
Lord, You have been our refuge* from one generation to the next.
I said: Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul,* for I have sinned against You.
O Lord, I have fled to You, teach me to do Your will,* for You, O Lord, are my God.
In You is the source of life* and in Your light we see light.
Keep on loving those who know You,* count us worthy, O Lord, of passing this day without sin.
Blessed are You, O Lord, God of our Fathers,* and praised and glorified is Your name forever. Amen.
Let Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us* because we have set our hope in You.
Blessed are You, O Lord,* teach me Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Master,* make me understand Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Holy One,* enlighten me with Your laws.
O Lord, Your mercy endures forever;* do not despise the work of Your hands.
It is proper to praise You,* and hymns belong to You.
Glory belongs to You,* Father, Son, and Holy Spirit;
Now and for ever* and ever. Amen.

The Symbol of Faith

I believe in one God, the Father, the Almighty,* Maker of heaven and earth, of all that is seen and unseen.
I believe in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only Son of God,* eternally begotten of the Father.
Light from Light, true God from true God,* begotten, not made, one in being with the Father. Through Him all things were made.
For us men and for our salvation He came down from heaven;* by the power of the Holy Spirit He was born of the Virgin Mary, and became man.
For our sake He was crucified under Pontius Pilate;* He suffered, died, and was buried.
On the third day He rose again in fulfillment of the Scriptures;* He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the Father.
He will come again in glory to judge the living and the dead,* and His kingdom will have no end.
I believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of life,* Who proceeds from the Father [and the Son].
With the Father and the Son He is worshipped and glorified.* He has spoken through the prophets.
I believe in one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church.
I acknowledge one baptism for the forgiveness of sins.
I look for the resurrection of the dead,* and the life of the world to come. Amen.

Canon from the Octoechos, or the following:

Canon of Supplication to the Mother of God

Ode 1, Hirmos (Tone 8): When Israel passed through the waters as upon dry land and escaped the malice of the Egyptians, they cried out: Let us sing to our Redeemer and our God.

Verse for the entire Canon: O most holy Mother of God, save us.

Many temptations have surrounded me, O Virgin. To you I come for shelter and salvation. O Mother of God, deliver me from all trouble and affliction.
The assaults of my passions disturb me; they fill my soul with great discouragement. O Maiden, preserved from all stain, restore the balance of my soul through the peace of your Son and God.

Glory be: O Virgin, I beseech you who have given birth to God the Savior, deliver me from my afflictions. It is to you I now come for shelter, to you I lift my heart and thoughts.

Now and for ever: You alone are the Mother of God: you are good and the Mother of Goodness. Take away the disease of my body and soul and make me worthy of Your good care and of the coming of God.

There is no Katabasia.

Ode 3, Hirmos (Tone 8): O Lord and supreme Creator of the heavenly firmament, Founder of the Church, confirm me in Your love, O Summit of Desire, for You are the Stronghold of the faithful and the only One Who truly loves mankind.

O virgin Mother of God, I choose you to be my protection and the shelter of my life. Direct me towards your haven, for you are the channel of all good things and the support of the faithful, and you alone are worthy of every praise.

I beseech you, O Virgin, dispel the troubles of my soul, quiet the surge of my despair, for you, O bride of God, have carried the Prince of Peace, and you alone are perfectly pure.

Glory be: You gave birth to the Doer of Good, to the Cause of All Delight: let the wealth of his generation abound within all souls, for since you have borne the almighty Christ, you have power to act as you please, O you who are blessed of God.

Now and for ever: O Virgin, help me who am pressed by incurable ills and distressing passions, for I know that you, all-blameless one, are a perfect and abundant treasury of healing.

Sessional (Tone 8): Bride of the Creator,* most pure Mother of the Savior,* dwelling of the Comforter,* ever-glorious One, hasten to us,* who have become a defiled abode of evil and the plaything of the demons. Free us from their malice and make us a radiant,* light-giving, and incorrupt abode of virtue.* Drive away from us the darkness of passions,* and grant that through your prayers* we may become worthy of heavenly glory and of the light that knows no evening.

Ode 4, Hirmos (Tone 8): O Lord, I have heard of the mystery of Your plan of redemption, and I have understood your works; that is why I give glory to Your divinity.

Quiet the seething of my passions and calm the storm of my sins, for you are the bride of God who gave birth to the good Lord.

O Virgin who gave birth to the compassionate Lord, the Savior of those who praise you, grant that I who cling to you may enjoy the depth of your compassion.

Glory be: We who rejoice on account of your gift are aware that you are the Mother of God, and so we sing a hymn of gratitude to you who are perfectly pure.

Now and for ever: You whom we possess as our hope, our supporting strength, our indestructible wall of salvation, are worthy of all praise. Grant that we may be worthy to be delivered from all affliction.

Ode 5, Hirmos (Tone 8): Enlighten our hearts with Your commands, O Lord; with Your outstretched hand, grant us Your peace; O Lover of mankind!

O immaculate Lady, give me your pure happiness. You gave birth to the Cause of joy; fill my heart with joy!

Deliver us from dangers, O immaculate Mother of God, for you gave birth to Eternal Salvation and to Peace beyond our understanding.

Glory be: With the brightness of your light, dispel the darkness of my sins, O bride of God Who gave birth to the divine and eternal Light!

Now and for ever: Heal the misery of my passions, make me worthy of your assistance, and through your intercession, grant me health.

Ode 6, Hirmos (Tone 8): Before the Lord, I pour out my supplication; to Him I complain about my sorrow, for my soul is filled with iniquity and my life is close to the abyss. Therefore, like Jonah, I cry out: Raise me from corruption, O my God!

O Virgin, beseech your Lord and your Son Who delivered himself to death and saved my nature from death and corruption to which it had been bound, that He may deliver me from the hands of the enemy.

I believe, O Virgin, that through your intercession you save and protect my life, dispelling many temptations and casting out the cunning snares of the devil. Now I implore you without ceasing: deliver me from my corrupting passions.

Glory be: O Maiden, you have been given to us as a wall behind which we may seek refuge, as a perfect means of salvation for our souls, as a joy in our tribulations, for we always find delight in your light. O Lady, save us always from every danger and evil desire.

Now and for ever: Behold how sick I am! I lie upon my bed, and there is no healing for me. I come to you in your goodness, for you have given birth to the Savior of the world. Deliver me from my disease and raise me from the pain of my affliction.

Kontakion (Tone 6): Gentle protectress of Christians,* unfailing advocate before the Creator,* do not despise the prayerful voice of sinners,* but in your goodness, hasten to assist us who trustfully cry out to you:* Inspire us to prayer and hasten to hear our supplications.* Intercede always, O Mother of God,* in behalf of those who honor you.

Another Kontakion (Tone 6): We have no other help;* we have no other hope besides you, O immaculate Virgin!* You are our hope; you are our glory.* Therefore, help us for we are your servants.* May we not be put to shame.

Ikos: Stretch forth your hands which have received as a child the Lord of all, O Mother of God. Because of the greatness of your goodness, do not forsake us who always hope in you. Through your all-powerful prayers and unfailing forgiveness have mercy on us and grant to our souls your mercy which is inexhaustible; for we sinners have in you a protectress against every misfortune and evil. Therefore, as one who has the graces of mercy, hasten to hear our prayers and supplications and intercede always in behalf of those who honor you.

Ode 7, Hirmos (Tone 8): The youths of Judea who came to Babel had the power to overcome the flames of the furnace, for they believed in the Holy Trinity and cried out: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers!

In your desire to save our souls, You dwelt in the womb of the Virgin and established her as the intercessor of creation. Blessed are You, O God of our fathers!

O most pure Mother, may your prayer go up to the Source of mercy to Whom you have given birth, so that we may be preserved from weakness and impurity, who cry out with faith: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers!

Glory be: You have taken the one who gave You birth, and have established her as a treasury of salvation, a source of immortality, an indestructible fortress, a door open for repentance to those who cry out: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers!

Now and for ever: O Mother of God who gave us Christ, grant to those who anxiously seek your divine shelter that they deserve to be healed of the illness of body and soul.

Ode 8, Hirmos (Tone 8): Let us praise the King of heaven Whom the hosts of angels praise; let us exalt His name forever.

O Virgin, do not turn away from those who seek your help, who praise and exalt your maidenhood forever.

O Virgin, abundant healing flows from you upon all those who sing your wondrous birth with faith and praise.

Glory be: O Virgin, you shall heal the sorrows of my soul, you shall cure the illness of my body, and I shall sing your praise, O Woman Full of Grace!

Now and for ever: O Virgin, you drive away the dangers of temptation, you restrain the fire of passion, and so we sing your praise forever.

Ode 9, Hirmos (Tone 8): Virgin without stain through whom we have been saved, we proclaim that you are the true Mother of God, and with hosts of angels, we extol your name.

O Virgin, despise not the flow of my tears, for you have given birth to the Lord Who wipes away all tears.

O Virgin, fill my heart with joy, you who have received the fullness of joy, destroying the gloom of sin.

O Virgin, be a haven and a help, an indestructible fortress and a harbor, a shelter and a joy to those who come to you.

Glory be: O Virgin, cast away the darkness of unknowing; enlighten with your rays of light those who proclaim that you are truly the Mother of God.

Now and for ever: O Virgin, come to me in this time of pain; raise me from my sickness and restore my health.

It is truly right to bless you, O God-bearing One,* as the ever-blessed and immaculate Mother of our God.* More honorable than the cherubim* and by far more glorious than the seraphim;* ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word,* O true Mother of God, we magnify you.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father.
Priest: For the kingdom....

Then the kontakion of the feast, according to the typicon. On Saturday evening: the hypakoe of the tone of the week; from Sunday evening to Thursday evening: the troparia of the patron saint of the church and of the day, then:

(Tone 4): God of our Fathers* Who always deal with us according to Your everlasting compassion,* do not withdraw Your mercy from us,* but through the prayers of our Fathers,* guide our lives along the ways of peace.

O Christ God, Your Church,* crimsoned with the blood of Your martyrs all over the world* as with a cloak of purple and porphyry, cries out to You:* Send Your mercy upon Your people, grant peace to Your fold, and extend Your great compassion upon our souls.

Glory be (Tone 8, kontakion): To the souls of Your servants, O Christ,* grant rest among the saints,* where there is no pain, no sorrow, no mourning,* but only life without end.

Now and for ever: Through the prayers of all the saints, and of the Mother of God,* grant us Your peace, O Lord, and have mercy on us,* for You alone are merciful.

On Friday evening instead of "O God of our Fathers ...”
(Tone 2): O apostles, prophets, martyrs, hierarchs, saints and righteous ones,* who fought the good fight and kept the faith,* since you have acquired favor with the Savior,* intercede with Him that, in His goodness,* He may save our souls.

Glory be (Tone 8, kontakion): To the souls ... (see above).

Now and for ever: To You, O Lord, Ordainer and Creator of the world,* the universe offers the God-bearing martyrs as the first-fruits of nature:* wherefore, through their prayers, and through the intercession of the Mother of God,* preserve Your church and our country in perfect safety and peace,* O You who alone are most merciful.

Lord, have mercy (40x)

O Christ our God, in all times and places You are worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You are long-suffering and generous in Your mercy and compassion. You love the just and show mercy to the sinner, calling all people to repentance through the promise of blessings to come. Deem, O Lord, at this very hour, to receive our supplications and to direct our lives in the path of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies; set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all affliction, trouble and distress; surround us with Your holy angels so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unspeakable glory. For You are blessed forever and ever. Amen.

Lord, have mercy (3x).
Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim and by far more glorious than the seraphim;* ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word,* O true Mother of God, we magnify you.
Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!

Priest: May God be merciful to us and bless us; may His countenance shine upon us, and may He have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

Prayer to the Mother of God

O Lady, bride of God, virginal, pure, immaculate, blameless, without stain or disgrace, who through your birthgiving brought together our fallen state and the things of heaven; O you, only hope of the hopeless, help of the oppressed, ready protection of those who flee to you and refuge of all Christians: despise us not who are wretched sinners, who have defiled ourselves with unclean thoughts, words and deeds, and in our slothfulness have become slaves to the passions of life. Since you are the Mother of God, Who is the Lover of mankind, have mercy, have compassion on us sinners and prodigal sons; accept this prayer from our impure lips, and, with the power of your maternity, beg your Son, our Lord and our God, to open for us the depths of His loving kindness, forgive our countless sins, convert us to true repentance, and make us faithful to His commands: O you who are compassionate, be our constant companion. In this present life, be with us as an intercessor, as a powerful help to turn away the assaults of our enemies and to guide us to salvation. At the hour of our death, be with us to embrace our poor souls and to keep away the dreadful sight of the wicked devils. On the terrible day of judgment, deliver us from eternal punishment and make us heirs of your Son’s glory, through the grace and the love for mankind of your Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To Him and to His eternal Father, and to His all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit, we render glory, honor, and adoration, now and always and for ever and ever. Amen.

Prayer to Jesus Christ

Now that we are about to lie down to sleep, grant us, O Master, the repose of our soul and body. Preserve us against the dark slumber of sin and against any impure sensuality that roams around in the darkness of night; quiet the assaults of our passions, arrest the darts that the Evil One insidiously throws at us, still the rebellions of our flesh, and still all earthly and worldly feelings within us. Grant us, O Lord, a watchful mind, innocent thoughts, a sober heart, a gentle sleep free from evil dreams; at the hour of prayer, arouse us, strong in the practice of Your precepts and ever-mindful of Your desires; give us the grace to sing Your glory throughout the night; to praise, bless and glorify Your all-honorable and magnificent name, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, always, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O you most glorious, ever-virginal and blessed Mother of God, commend our prayers to your Son, our God, and entreat Him to save our souls through Your intercession.

The Father is my hope, the Son my refuge, the Holy Spirit my protection. O Trinity, one God, glory to You!

Then the following troparia:

(Tone 6) Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us!* Since we have no defense,* we sinners offer this supplication to You our Master:* have mercy on us!

Glory be: O Lord, have mercy on us,* for in You we place our hope.* Be not exceedingly angry with us nor mindful of our transgressions,* but look upon us even now with mercy and deliver us from our enemies,* for You are our God and we are Your people;* we are all the work of Your hands,* and we call upon Your name.

Now and for ever: Open to us the doors of mercy, O blessed Mother of God,* that we, who place our trust in you, may not perish,* but that through you we may be delivered from misfortune,* for you are the salvation of all Christians.

The priest says the litany:
Have mercy on us, O God, in the greatness of Your compassion, we pray You, hear us and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x).

Again, let us pray that He may preserve this city and this holy church and every city, town, and country from famine, plague, earthquake, flood, hail, fire, civil war, riot, and foreign invasion; and that our God Who is kindly and the Lover of mankind may forgive our sins and hold back His just wrath, and that He may have mercy on us.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (12x).

Hear us, O God our Savior, Hope of all those who live at the far ends of the earth, and of those traveling by sea, air or land; be kind to us, O Master, forgive us our sins and have mercy on us, for You are a gracious Lord Who loves mankind, and we glorify You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope, glory be to You.
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.

Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers; and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.

Then the priest bows to all the brethren, and begs forgiveness:
Bless me, reverend fathers and brothers, and forgive me, a sinner, whatever offenses I may have committed this day (this night) and all the days of my life by word, deed and thought as well as by all my senses.
Choir: May God forgive you, reverend Father. Bless us also and forgive our offenses voluntary and involuntary (and the brethren bow to the priest).

May the Lord God by His grace forgive you all your sins and have mercy on you.

Then the priest says: Let us pray for our most holy universal Pontiff, N., Pope of Rome.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For our civil authorities.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For our most blessed Patriarch, N.; for our most reverend Metropolitan, N.; for our God-loving Bishop, N.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For all Catholic bishops.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For the noble benefactors of this holy church (this holy monastery).
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For our very reverend fathers, Protoarchimandrite N, Archimandrite, N, Protohegumen, N, and Hegumen N.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For our spiritual fathers and for all our brethren in Christ.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For those who are absent and for those who are traveling.
Choir: May God protect and have mercy.

For those who are kind to us.
Choir: May God reward and have mercy.

For those who serve and who have served in this holy church (this holy monastery).
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For those who hate us and for those who love us.
Choir: May God forgive and have mercy.

For the release of captives.
Choir: May God grant freedom and have mercy.

For the sick and suffering.
Choir: May God heal and have mercy.

For those living in anxiety and poverty.
Choir: May God visit them and have mercy.

For all orthodox Christians.
Choir: May God save and have mercy.

For an abundance of the fruits of the earth.
Choir: May God grant an increase of the fruits of the earth.

If it is a Sunday or a Feastday, the priest says: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

If it is an ordinary day, we commemorate the deceased:
For the benefactors of this holy church (or holy monastery).
Choir: May God grant them remembrance and rest.

For our parents and relatives.
Choir: May God grant them remembrance and rest.

For our departed fathers and brothers.
Choir: May God grant them remembrance and rest.

For those who have given up their lives for the Christian faith.
Choir: May God grant them remembrance and rest.

For those who lie buried here, those listed, and all Christians who have departed from this life.
Choir: Everlasting be their memory.

Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

>>>GREAT COMPLINE<<<

Great Compline with litiya is celebrated on the eves of the Nativity of our Lord, the Theophany, and the Annunciation, as prescribed by the typikon. In these instances, there is incensing at the beginning as at Vespers with Litiya (p. 9); the priest is vested only in the epitrachelion. After the incensing, the deacon says: Master, give the blessing!, and the priest intones: Blessed be our God...; the choir responds: Amen. Glory be to You, our God; Heavenly King, etc. (p. 10). The holy doors remain closed from Come, let us adore... to the Stichera of Litiya.

During the Great Fast, Great Compline is celebrated Monday evening to Thursday evening. If it is the first week of the Great Fast, then after the usual beginning we take Psalm 69 (p. 45), and part of the Great Canon of Andrew of Crete, (p. 488-506), according to the typicon. The holy doors remain closed during the entire service.

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God... (the usual beginning, until Come, let us adore..., p. 10-11).

Psalm 4
(Monday Evening)

When I call, answer me,* O God of justice;
From anguish You released me;* have mercy and hear me!
O men, how long will your hearts be closed,* will you love what is futile and seek what is false?
It is the Lord who grants favors to those whom he loves;* the Lord hears me whenever I call Him.
Fear Him; do not sin:* ponder on your bed and be still.
Make justice your sacrifice* and trust in the Lord.
“What can bring us happiness?” many say.* Let the light of Your face shine on us, O Lord.
You have put into my heart a greater joy* than they have from abundance of corn and new wine.
I will lie down in peace and sleep comes at once* for You alone, Lord, make me dwell in safety.

Psalm 6
(Tuesday Evening)

Lord, do not reprove me in Your anger:* punish me not in Your rage.
Have mercy on me, Lord, I have no strength;* Lord, heal me, my body is racked;
My soul is racked with pain.* But You, O Lord ... how long?
Return, Lord, rescue my soul.* Save me in Your merciful love,
For in death no one remembers You;* from the grave, who can give You praise?
I am exhausted with my groaning;* every night I drench my pillow with tears;* I bedew my bed with weeping.
My eye wastes away with grief;* I have grown old surrounded by my foes.
Leave me, all you who do evil;* for the Lord has heard my weeping.
The Lord has heard my plea;* the Lord will accept my prayer.
All my foes will retire in confusion,* foiled and suddenly confounded.

Psalm 12
(Wednesday Evening)

How long, O Lord; will You forget me?* How long will You hide Your face?
How long must I bear grief in my soul,* this sorrow in my heart day and night?
How long shall my enemy prevail?* Look at me, answer me, Lord my God!
Give light to my eyes* lest I fall asleep in death,
Lest my enemy say:* I have overcome him;
Lest my foes rejoice* to see my fall.
As for me, I trust in Your merciful love.* Let my heart rejoice in Your saving help:
Let me sing to the Lord for His goodness to me* singing psalms to the name of the Lord, the Most High.

Psalm 24
(Thursday Evening)

To You, O Lord, I lift up my soul;* I trust You.
Let me not be disappointed;* do not let my enemies triumph.
Those who hope in You shall not be disappointed,* but only those who wantonly break faith.
Lord, make me know Your ways* Lord, teach me Your paths.
Make me walk in Your truth, and teach me,* for You are God my Savior.
In You I hope all day long* because of Your goodness, O Lord.
Remember Your mercy, Lord,* and the love You have shown from of old.
Do not remember the sins of my youth.* In Your love remember me.
The Lord is good and upright.* He shows the path to those who stray,
He guides the humble in the right path,* He teaches His way to the poor.
His ways are faithfulness and love* for those who keep His covenant and will.
Lord, for the sake of Your name forgive my guilt,* for it is great.
To those who revere the Lord* He will show the path they should choose.
Their souls will live in happiness* and their children shall possess the land.
The Lord’s friendship is for those who revere Him;* to them He reveals His covenant.
My eyes are always on the Lord,* for He rescues my feet from the snare.
Turn to me and have mercy* for I am lonely and poor.
Relieve the anguish of my heart* and set me free from my distress.
See my affliction and my toil* and take all my sins away.
See how many are my foes,* how violent their hatred for me.
Preserve my life and rescue me.* Do not disappoint me, You are my refuge.
May innocence and uprightness protect me,* for my hope is in You, O Lord.
Redeem Israel, O God,* from all its distress.

Psalm 30
(Friday Evening)

In You, O Lord, I take refuge.* Let me never be put to shame.
In Your justice, set me free,* hear me and speedily rescue me.
Be a rock of refuge for me, a mighty stronghold to save me,* for You are my rock, my stronghold.
For Your name’s sake, lead me and guide me.* Release me from the snares they have hidden* for You are my refuge, Lord.
Into Your hands I commend my spirit.* It is You Who will redeem me, Lord.
O God of truth, You detest those who worship false and empty gods.* As for me, I trust in the Lord:
Let me be glad and rejoice in Your love.* You who have seen my affliction
And taken heed of my soul’s distress,* have not handed me over to the enemy, but set my feet at large.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am in distress.* Tears have wasted my eyes, my throat and my heart.
For my life is spent with sorrow* and my years with sighs.
Affliction has broken down my strength,* and my bones waste away.
In the face of all my foes I am a reproach,* an object of scorn to my neighbors and of fear to my friends.
Those who see me in the street* run far away from me.
I am like a dead man, forgotten,* like a thing thrown away.
I have heard the slander of the crowd,* fear is all around me.
As they plot together against me,* as they plan to take my life.
But as for me, I trust in You, Lord,* I say: You are my God.
My life is in Your hands,* deliver me from the hands of those who hate me.
Let Your face shine on Your servant.* Save me in Your love.
How great is the goodness, Lord, that You keep for those who fear You,* that You show to those who trust You in the sight of men.
You hide them in the shelter of Your presence from the plotting of men:* You keep them safe within Your tent from disputing tongues.
Blessed be the Lord* Who has shown me the wonders of His love in a fortified city.
“I am far removed from Your sight,”* I said in my alarm.
Yet You heard the voice of my plea* when I cried for help.
Love the Lord, all you saints.* He guards His faithful.
But the Lord will repay you to the full* those who act with pride.
Be strong, let your heart take courage,* all who hope in the Lord.

Psalm 90
(Saturday and Sunday Evening)

Those who dwell in the shelter of the Most High* and abide in the shade of the Almighty
Say to the Lord: My refuge, my stronghold,* my God in whom I trust!
It is He who will free you from the snare of the fowler* who seeks to destroy you;
He will conceal you with His pinions,* and under His wings you will find refuge.
You will not fear the terror of the night* nor the arrow that flies by day,
Nor the plague that prowls in the darkness* nor the scourge that lays waste at noon.
A thousand may fall at your side, ten thousand fall at your right,* you, it will never approach,* His faithfulness is buckler and shield.
Your eyes have only to look to see* how the wicked are repaid,
You who have said: Lord, my refuge!* and have made the Most High your dwelling
Upon you no evil shall fall,* no plague approach where you dwell.
For you He has commanded His angels* to keep you in all your ways.
They shall bear you upon their hands* lest you strike your foot against a stone.
On the lion and the viper you will tread,* and trample the young lion and the dragon.
You set your love on Me so I will save you,* protect you for you know My name.
When you call I shall answer: I am with you,* I will save you in distress and give you glory.
With length of days I will content you;* I shall let you see my saving power.

Ending the psalm, the choir says:
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit:*
Now and for ever and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x)
Lord, have mercy. (3x)
Glory be: Now and for ever:

God is with us... (Is. 8:9)

On the feasts of the Nativity and the Theophany of our Lord, the priest himself intones the verses, while after each verse the choir sings: God is with us....

I Choir: God is with us! Give ear, O you nations, and be humbled, for God is with us.
II Choir: God is with us....
I Choir: God is with us! Give ear, O you nations:
II Choir: And be humbled, for God is with us.

The two choirs read the verses alternately:
Give ear, all you lands afar off, for God is with us.
You mighty ones, be humbled, for God is with us.
And if any take counsel together, the Lord will destroy them, for God is with us.
And if you make resolutions, they will not stand, for God is with us.
It is the Lord, whom you must hold in veneration, for God is with us.
Him you must fear, him you must dread, for God is with us.
He shall be a stone of stumbling and a rock on which they shall fall, for God is with us.
I shall confide in Him, and I shall be saved by Him, for God is with us.
Behold, I come with the children whom the Lord has given me, for God is with us.
O nation, which is walking in the darkness, expect to see a great light, for God is with us.
Upon us, who dwell in the land of the shadow of death, a great light shall dawn, for God is with us.
Indeed, a Child is born to us, the Son, and He is given to us, for God is with us.
His power is upon His shoulder, for God is with us.
And His name shall be called Wonderful Counsellor, for God is with us.
Mighty God, the everlasting Father, Prince of Peace, for God is with us.
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, for God is with us.
Now and always, and for ever and ever. Amen, for God is with us.

God is with us; give ear, O you nations:
And be humbled, for God is with us.

Immediately we recite:
Now that the day has come to a close, I thank You, Lord, and I ask of You that my evening and my night be without sin: grant this to me, O Savior, and save me!
Glory be: Now that the day has come to a close, I glorify You, O Master, and I ask of You that my evening and my night be undisturbed: grant this to me, O Savior, and save me!
Now and for ever: Now that the day has come to a close, I praise You, O holy One, and I ask of You that my evening and my night be undisturbed: grant this to me, O Savior, and save me!

The incorporeal cherubim glorify You with unceasing praise. The seraphim, the six-winged angels, exalt You with tireless voices. And all the armies of angels praise You with the thrice-holy hymn. Because You are, before all else, O Father; and Your Son, like Yourself, is without beginning. By breathing forth the Spirit of life, equal in honor to You, You make manifest the indivisibility of the Trinity.

Most holy Virgin, Mother of God, and you eyewitnesses of the Lord and his servants, intercede for us! All the choirs of the prophets and martyrs who are enjoying eternal life, intercede for us! Intercede for all of us unceasingly, for we are all in distress. That escaping from the terrors of evil, we may sing the angels’ hymn: Holy, holy, holy, O thrice-holy Lord, have mercy on us and save us!

I believe in one God.... (p. 48).

Most holy Lady, Mother of God, intercede for us sinners.
All you heavenly powers, holy angels and archangels, intercede for us sinners.
Holy John, the forerunner, prophet, and baptizer of the Lord Jesus Christ, intercede for us sinners.
Glorious saints, apostles, prophets, martyrs, and all you holy ones, intercede for us sinners.
You just ones, and you God-bearing fathers Anthony and Theodosius, and other wonderworkers of the Kyivan Caves, pray to God for us sinners.
O you divine, undefeated and incomprehensible power of the precious and life-giving cross, do not forsake us sinners.
O God, have mercy on us sinners.
O God cleanse us of our sins and have mercy on us.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the troparion of the feast (of the Nativity of our Lord, (p. 1334); of the Theophany, (p. 1278); of the Annunciation, (p. 1289); or, during the Great Fast, the following:

On Mondays and Wednesdays (Tone 2): Enlighten my eyes, O Christ God, lest I sleep to death; lest my enemy say: I prevailed over him!
Verse: O God, look down upon me and have mercy on me.
O God, be the Defender of my soul, for I walk in the midst of many snares. Deliver me from them, O gracious Lord, and save me, for You are the Lover of mankind.
Glory be: Now and for ever: Since our many transgressions prevent us from finding favor before God, be our intercessor with Him Who was born of you, O Virgin Mother of God; for the prayers of mothers have much weight in obtaining the Master’s favor. O most venerable one, despise not the pleadings of us sinners, for He who willed to suffer for us is merciful, and He has power to save us.

On Tuesdays and Thursdays (Tone 8): O Lord, You know well the alertness of my invisible enemies and the weakness of my own wretched body for You Yourself have made me. Wherefore, I entrust my soul to Your hands, cover me with the wings of Your bounty, lest I sleep to death; enlighten my spirit with the delight of Your divine Word; awaken me at the time appointed for Your glory, for You alone are a gracious God and the Lover of mankind.
Verse: O God, look down upon me and have mercy on me!
How dreadful is Your judgment-seat, O Lord, where angels will be on guard, all men assembled, the book of life opened, all my works uncovered, and all my thoughts revealed! What judgment shall be mine, O Lord, for I was conceived in sin! Who shall put out for me the raging fires? Who shall bring light to my darkness, if You, O Lord, and Lover of mankind, have no mercy on me?
Glory be: Give me tears, O Lord, as You did to the sinful woman; make me worthy to wash Your feet that saved me from the ways of error. Grant that I may offer You, as a fragrant ointment, a blameless life that repentance has redeemed, so that I also may hear Your sweet words: Go in peace, your faith has saved you.
Now and for ever: O Mother of God, because of my great confidence in you, I shall obtain salvation. Because I have succeeded in having you for my intercessor, O Purest of all, I shall not fear. Imploring your most powerful help, I shall pursue my enemies and drive them away, for I wear your protection as a breastplate. O Lady, save me through your intercession, and, by the power of God who was made of your flesh, awaken me from my dark slumber that I may sing your glory.

Lord, have mercy (40x).

Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word; O true Mother of God, we magnify you.
Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us.
Choir: Amen.

Prayer of St. Basil the Great

O Lord, O Lord, Who delivered us from every arrow that flies in the light of day, protect us against any difficulty that lurks around at night, and accept our outstretched hands as an evening sacrifice. Make us worthy to spend the night blamelessly, and fully sheltered against all evil; protect us against all disturbances or fear of the devil. Grant repentance to our souls and diligence to our minds, that we may understand your dreadful and just judgment; subdue our flesh with the fear of You, let our passions die out, so that in the stillness of night we may be enlightened by the thinking of Your precepts; keep afar from us all indecent dreams and harmful cravings; awaken us in time for prayer, strengthened in the faith and able to obey Your commands through the mercy and kindness of Your only-begotten Son, with Whom You are blessed, together with Your all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit, always, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

(Part II)

Come, let us adore... (3x).

Psalm 50 (see p. 44)

Psalm 101

O Lord, listen to my prayer* and let my cry for help reach You.
Do not hide Your face from me,* in the day of my distress.
Turn Your ear towards me* and answer me quickly when I call.
For my days are vanishing like smoke,* my bones burn away like a fire.
My heart is withered like the grass.* I forget to eat my bread.
I cry with all my strength* and my skin clings to my bones.
I have become like a pelican in the wilderness,* like an owl in desolate places.
I lie awake and I moan* like some lonely bird on a roof.
All day long my foes revile me;* those who hate me use my name as a curse.
The bread I eat is ashes;* my drink is mingled with tears.
In Your anger, Lord, and Your fury,* You have lifted me up and thrown me down.
My days are like a passing shadow* and I wither away like the grass.
But You, O Lord, will endure for ever,* and Your name from age to age.
You will arise and have mercy on Zion:* for this is the time to have mercy; yes, the time appointed has come.
For Your servants love her very stones,* are moved with pity even for her dust.
The nations shall fear the name of the Lord* and all the earth’s kings, Your glory,
When the Lord shall build up Zion again* and appear in all His glory.
Then He will return to the prayers of the helpless;* He will not despise their prayers.
Let this be written for ages to come* that a people yet unborn may praise the Lord;
For the Lord leaned down from His sanctuary on high.* He looked down from heaven to the earth
That He might hear the groans of the prisoners* and free those condemned to die.
The sons of Your servants shall dwell untroubled* and their race shall endure before You
That the name of the Lord may be proclaimed in Zion* and His praise in the heart of Jerusalem,
When peoples and kingdoms are gathered together* to pay their homage to the Lord.
He has broken my strength in mid-course;* He has shortened the days of my life.
I say to God: Do not take me away before my days are complete,* You, Whose days last from age to age.
Long ago You founded the earth* and the heavens are the work of Your hands.
They will perish but you will remain.* They will all wear out like a garment.
You will change them like clothes that are changed.* But You neither change, nor have an end.
The sons of Your servants shall dwell untroubled* and their race shall endure before You.

Prayer

Lord almighty, God of our fathers Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and of their righteous descendants, Who made heaven and earth with all their adornment, Who encompassed the sea with the word of Your command, Who closed the deep and sealed it with Your fearful and glorious name, Whose presence all things revere and before Whose power they quake, because the magnificence of Your glory is unendurable, and irresistible the wrath of Your threat against sinners: the kindness of Your promise is both immeasurable and inscrutable, for You are the Lord most high, compassionate, long-suffering and most merciful, offering atonement for the evils of men.
You, O Lord, in the abundance of Your goodness, promised repentance and forgiveness to those who sinned against You; and in the abundance of Your compassion, You decreed repentance for sinners, that they may be saved. Therefore, O Lord, God of the righteous, You appointed repentance, not for the righteous, not for Abraham and Isaac and Jacob who did not sin against You, but for me a sinner, for I committed more sins than there are grains of sand in the sea. My transgressions are multiplied, O Lord, they are multiplied! I am not worthy to look up and see the height of heaven because of the multitude of my iniquities, being weighed down by many iron chains so that I cannot raise my head; and there is no release for me because I have provoked Your anger and have done what is evil in Your sight, not doing Your will nor keeping Your commandments, but setting up abominations and multiplying offenses.
Now I kneel in my heart, beseeching Your kindness: I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned, and I acknowledge my transgressions; I pray and beg You: release me, Lord, release me! Do not destroy me together with my transgressions! Do not remember forever our wrongs! Do not condemn me to the depths of the earth! For You are God, the God of those who repent, and in me You will show all Your kindness: for unworthy as I am You will save me according to the abundance of Your mercy, and I will praise You continually all the days of my life. For all the hosts of heavens sing Your praise, and Yours is the glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and kontakion of the feast (of the Nativity, (p. 1334); of the Theophany, (p. 1278); or of the Annunciation (p. 1289). During the Great Fast, the following troparia are taken: Have mercy on me...etc., (p. 59).

Lord, have mercy (40x).
Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word; O true Mother of God, we magnify you.
Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us.
Choir: Amen.

Prayer

O God, our Master, almighty Father; only-begotten Son, Lord Jesus Christ; and You, O Holy Spirit, one God and one Might, have mercy on me a sinner, and save me, your unworthy servant, according to the ways of Your wisdom. For You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

(Part III)

Come, let us adore... (3x).

Psalm 69 (p. 45)
(Monday and Wednesday Evening)

Psalm 142 (p. 46)
(Tuesday and Thursday Evening)

On the eve of the feasts of the Nativity and Theophany of our Lord, and on the eve of the feast of the Annunciation, after Psalm 142, the lesser doxology, (p. 47), is taken. Then litiya begins.

During the Great Fast, the canon to the Mother of God, (p. 49), is taken; and after the canon: It is truly right...; Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father. Then the following troparion is taken:

(Tone 6) Lord of powers, be with us, for in times of distress we have no other help but You;* Lord of powers, have mercy on us!
Verse: Praise God in His holy place, praise Him in His mighty heavens.
After each verse, we sing: Lord of powers....
Verse: Praise Him for His powerful deeds, praise His surpassing greatness.
Verse: Praise Him with sound of trumpet, praise Him with lute and harp.
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance; praise Him with strings and pipes.
Verse: Praise Him with resounding cymbals; praise Him with clashing of cymbals. May everything that lives and that breathes give praise to the Lord.
Glory be: O Lord, had we not Your saints to intercede for us and your bounty to have mercy on us, how would we dare, O Savior, to sing to You Whom the Angels endlessly praise? O You Who know the heart, spare our souls!
Now and for ever: Great is the number of my transgressions, O Mother of God. It is in you, all-chaste One, that I seek refuge in my need for salvation. Visit my diseased soul and intercede with your Son, our God, that He deign to forgive the evil I have done, O you who alone are blessed.
Most holy Mother of God, forsake me not all the time of my life, entrust me not to human protection, but take care yourself of my safety, and have mercy on me.
To you I entrust all my hope, O Mother of God; keep me under your protection.

Lord, have mercy (40x); the rest as in Small Compline, (p. 56); O Christ our God..., Lord, have mercy (3x); Glory be: Now and for ever: More honorable than the cherubim... Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!

Priest: May God be merciful to us and bless us; may His countenance shine upon us, and may He have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

The priest says the prayer of St. Ephrem: O Lord and Master..., and O God, be merciful to me..., (p. 40).

Then: Holy God; and after the Our Father: Lord, have mercy (12x); and the prayers: O Lady, Bride of God... and Now that we are.... (pp. 57-59).

Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing!

Instead of the dismissal, the priest recites the prayer: O most merciful Master.... (p. 33).

DAILY NOCTURN

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God...; (the usual beginning, until: Come, let us adore..., p. 10-11).

Psalm 50 (p. 44)

Psalm 118
(Sunday Evening)

They are happy whose life is blameless,* who follow God’s law!
They are happy who do His will,* seeking Him with all their hearts,
Who never do anything evil,* but walk in His ways.
You have laid down Your precepts* to be obeyed with care.
May my footsteps be firm* to obey Your statutes.
Then I shall not be put to shame* as I heed Your commands.
I will thank You with an upright heart* as I learn Your decrees.
I will obey Your statutes;* do not forsake me.
How shall the young remain sinless?* By obeying Your word.
I have sought You with all my heart;* let me not stray from Your commands.
I treasure Your promise in my heart* lest I sin against You.
Blessed are You, O Lord;* teach me your statutes.
With my tongue I have recounted* the decrees of Your lips.
I rejoiced to do Your will* as though all riches were mine.
I will ponder all Your precepts* and consider Your paths.
I take delight in Your statutes;* I will not forget Your word.
Bless Your servant* and I shall live and obey Your word.
Open my eyes that I may see* the wonders of Your law.
I am a pilgrim on the earth;* show me Your commands.
My soul is ever consumed* as I long for Your decrees.
You threaten the proud, the accursed,* who turn from Your commands.
Relieve me from scorn and contempt* for I do Your will.
Though the princes sit plotting against me* I ponder on Your statutes.
Your will is my delight;* Your statutes are my counselors.
My soul lies in the dust;* by Your will revive me.
I declared my ways and You answered;* teach me Your statutes.
Make me grasp the way of Your precepts* and I will muse on Your wonders.
My soul pines away with grief,* by Your word raise me up.
Keep me from the way of error* and teach me Your law.

(Monday Evening)

I have chosen the way of truth* with Your decrees before me.
I bind myself to do Your will;* Lord, do not disappoint me.
I will run the way of Your commands;* You give freedom to my heart.
Teach me the demands of Your statutes* and I will keep them to the end.
Train me to observe Your law,* to keep it with my heart.
Guide me in the path of Your commands;* for there is my delight.
Bend my heart to Your will* and not to love of gain.
Keep my eyes from what is false;* by Your word, give me life.
Keep the promise You have made* to the servant who fears You.
Keep me from the scorn I dread,* for Your decrees are good.
See, I long for your precepts;* then in Your justice, give me life.
Lord, let Your love come upon me,* the saving help of Your promise.
And I shall answer those who taunt me* for I trust in Your word.
Do not take the word of truth from my mouth* for I trust in Your decrees.
I shall always keep Your law* for ever and ever.
I shall walk in the path of freedom* for I seek Your precepts.
I will speak of Your will before kings* and not be abashed.
Your commands have been my delight;* these I have loved.
I will worship Your commands and love them* and ponder Your statutes.
Remember Your word to Your servant* by which You gave me hope.
This is my comfort in sorrow:* that Your promise gives me life.
Though the proud may utterly deride me* I keep to Your law.
I remember Your decrees of old,* and these, Lord, console me.
I am seized with indignation at the wicked* who forsake Your law.
Your statutes have become my song* in the land of exile.
I think of Your name in the nighttime,* and I keep Your law.
This has been my blessing,* the keeping of Your precepts.
My part, I have resolved, O Lord,* is to obey Your word.
With all my heart I implore Your favor;* show the mercy of Your promise.
I have pondered over many ways,* and returned to Your will.
I made haste and did not delay* to obey Your commands.
Though the nets of the wicked ensnared me,* I remembered Your law.

(Tuesday Evening)

At midnight I will rise* and thank You for Your just decrees.
I am a friend of all who revere You,* who obey Your precepts.
Lord, Your love fills the earth.* Teach me Your statutes.
Lord, You have been good to Your servant* according to Your word.
Teach me discernment and knowledge* for I trust in Your commands.
Before I was afflicted I strayed,* but now I keep Your word.
You are good and Your deeds are good;* teach me Your statutes.
Though proud men smear me with lies,* yet I keep Your precepts.
Their minds are closed to good,* but Your law is my delight.
It was good for me to be afflicted,* to learn Your statutes.
The law from Your mouth means more to me* than silver and gold.
It was Your hands that made me and shaped me;* help me to learn Your commands.
Your faithful will see me and rejoice,* for I trust in Your word.
Lord, I know that Your decrees are right,* that You afflicted me justly.
Let Your love be ready to console me* by Your promise to Your servant.
Let Your love come and I shall live,* for Your law is my delight.
Shame the proud who harm me with lies* while I ponder Your precepts.
Let Your faithful turn to me,* those who know Your will.
Let my heart be blameless in Your statutes* lest I be ashamed.
I yearn for Your saving help;* I hope in Your word.
My eyes yearn to see Your promise.* When will You console me?
Though parched and exhausted with waiting* I remember Your statutes.
How long must Your servant suffer?* When will You judge my foes?
For me the proud have dug pitfalls* against Your law.
Your commands are all true;* then help me when lies oppress me.
They almost made an end of me on earth,* but I kept Your precepts.
Because of Your love, give me life* and I will do Your will.
Your word, O Lord,* for ever stands firm in the heavens:
Your truth lasts from age to age,* like the earth You created.
By Your decree it endures to this day;* for all things serve You.
Had Your law not been my delight* I would have died in my affliction.

(Wednesday Evening)

I will never forget Your precepts* for with them You give me life.
Save me, for I am Yours* since I seek Your precepts.
Though the wicked lie in wait to destroy me,* yet I ponder Your will.
I have seen that all perfection has an end,* but Your command is boundless.
Lord, how I love Your law!* It is ever in my mind.
Your command makes me wiser than my foes;* for it is mine for ever.
I have more insight than all who teach me* for I ponder Your will.
I have more understanding than the old* for I keep Your precepts.
I turn my feet from evil paths* to obey Your word.
I have not turned from Your decrees;* You Yourself have taught me.
Your promise is sweeter to my taste* than honey in the mouth.
I gain understanding from Your precepts,* and so I hate false ways.
Your word is a lamp for my steps* and a light for my path.
I have sworn and have made up my mind* to obey Your decrees.
Lord, I am deeply afflicted;* by Your word give me life.
Accept, Lord, the homage of my lips* and teach me Your decrees.
Though I carry my life in my hands,* I remember Your law.
Though the wicked try to ensnare me,* I do not stray from Your precepts.
Your will is my heritage for ever,* the joy of my heart.
I set myself to carry out* Your statutes in fullness for ever.
I have no love for half-hearted men;* my love is for Your law.
You are my shelter, my shield;* I hope in Your word.
Leave me, you who do evil;* I will keep God’s command.
If You uphold me by Your promise I shall live;* let my hopes not be in vain.
Sustain me and I shall be saved* and ever observe Your statutes.
You spurn all who swerve from Your statutes;* their cunning is in vain.
You throw away the wicked like dross;* so I love Your will.
I tremble before You in terror;* I fear Your decrees.
I have done what is right and just:* let me not be oppressed.
Vouch for the welfare of Your servant* lest the proud oppress me.
My eyes yearn for Your saving help* and the promise of Your justice.
Treat Your servant with love* and teach me Your statutes.
I am Your servant, give me knowledge; then I shall know your will.
It is time for the Lord to act* for Your law has been broken.
That is why I love Your commands* more than finest gold,
Why I rule my life by Your precepts,* and hate false ways.
Your will is wonderful indeed;* therefore I obey it.
The unfolding of Your word* gives light and teaches the simple.
I open my mouth and I sigh* as I yearn for Your commands.

(Thursday Evening)

Turn and show me Your mercy;* show justice to Your friends.
Let my steps be guided by Your promise;* let no evil rule me.
Redeem me from man’s oppression* and I will keep Your precepts.
Let Your face shine on Your servant* and teach me Your decree.
Tears stream from my eyes* because Your law is disobeyed.
Lord, You are just indeed;* Your decrees are right.
You have imposed Your will* with justice and with absolute truth.
I am carried away by anger* for my foes forget Your word.
Your promise is tried in the fire,* the delight of Your servant.
Although I am weak and despised,* I remember Your precepts.
Your justice is eternal justice* and Your law is truth.
Though anguish and distress have seized me,* I delight in Your commands.
The justice of Your will is eternal:* if You teach me I shall live.
I call with all my heart; Lord, hear me,* I will keep Your statutes.
I call upon You,* save me and I will do Your will.
I rise before dawn and cry for help,* I hope in Your word.
My eyes watch through the night* to ponder Your promise.
In Your love hear my voice, O Lord;* give me life by Your decrees.
Those who harm me unjustly draw near;* they are far from Your law.
But You, O Lord, are close,* Your commands are truth.
Long have I known* that Your will is established for ever.
See my affliction and save me* for I remember Your law.
Uphold my cause and defend me;* by Your promise, give me life.
Salvation is far from the wicked* who are heedless of Your statutes.
Numberless, Lord, are Your mercies;* with Your decrees give me life.
Though my foes and oppressors are countless* I have not swerved from Your will.
I look at the faithless with disgust;* they ignore Your promise.
See how I love Your precepts;* in Your mercy give me life.
Your word is founded on truth,* Your decrees are eternal.
Though princes oppress me without cause* I stand in awe of Your word.
I take delight in Your promise* like one who finds a treasure.
Lies I hate and detest* but Your law is my love.
Seven times a day I praise You* for Your just decrees.
The lovers of Your law have great peace;* they never stumble.
I await Your saving help, O Lord,* I fulfill Your commands.
My soul obeys Your will* and loves it dearly.
I obey Your precepts and Your will;* all that I do is before You.
Lord, let my cry come before You:* teach me by Your word.
Let my pleading come before You:* save me by Your promise.
Let my lips proclaim Your praise* because You teach me Your statutes.
Let my tongue sing Your promise* for Your commands are just.
Let Your hand be ready to help me,* since I have chosen Your precepts,
Lord, I long for Your saving help* and Your law is my delight.
Give life to my soul that I may praise You.* Let Your decrees give me help.
I am lost like a sheep; seek your servant* for I remember Your commands.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (without the Alleluia); then immediately:
I believe in one God.... (p. 48).

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the following troparia:

(Tone 8). Behold, the Bridegroom is coming in the middle of the night.* Blessed is the servant He shall find awake.* But the one He shall find neglectful will not be worthy of Him.* Beware, therefore, O my soul! Do not fall into a deep slumber,* lest you be delivered to death and the door of the Kingdom be closed to you.* Watch instead, and cry out;* Holy, Holy, Holy are You, O God.* Through the intercession of the Mother God, have mercy on us.

Glory be: Keep in mind that dread day, my soul, and be watchful.* Light your lamp and keep it lit with oil.* For you do not know when the cry will come saying: “The Bridegroom is here!”* Take care, my soul, not to doze* and find yourself outside knocking like the five virgins.* Rather, keep on watching to meet Christ with rich oil,* and He will open the divine chamber of His glory to you.

Now and for ever: Virgin Godbearer, we beseech you, the impregnable wall, fortress of salvation:* Bring to nought the counsels of enemies.* Turn the sorrow of your people to joy.* Protect your city (village, or monastery). Help our God-protected nation in battle.* Intercede for the peace of the world.* For you, Godbearer, are our hope.

Lord, have mercy (40x); then the prayer: O Christ our God.... (p. 56).

Choir: Lord, have mercy. (3x); Glory be: Now and for ever: More honorable than the Cherubim...; Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord.

Priest: May God be merciful to us, and bless us; may His countenance shine upon us, and may He have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

During the Great Fast, the prayer of St. Ephrem is said together with God be merciful..., (p. 40).

Then the following prayer:
O God, our Master, almighty Father; only-begotten Son, Lord Jesus Christ; and You, O Holy Spirit, one God and one Might, have mercy on me a sinner, and save me, your unworthy servant, according to the ways of Your wisdom. For You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

Come, let us adore... (3x)

Psalm 120

I lift up my eyes to the mountains.* From where shall come my help?
My help shall come from the Lord* Who made heaven and earth.
May He never allow you to stumble! Let Him sleep not, your guard.
No, He sleeps not nor slumbers,* Israel’s guard.
The Lord is your guard and your shade;* at your right side He stands.
By day the sun shall not smite you* nor the moon in the night.
The Lord will guard you from evil,* He will guard your soul.
The Lord will guard your going and coming* both now and for ever.

Psalm 133

O come, bless the Lord,* all you who serve the Lord,
Who stand in the house of the Lord,* in the courts of the house of our God.
Lift up your hands to the holy place* and bless the Lord through the night.
May the Lord bless you from Zion,* He Who made both heaven and earth.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (without the Alleluia).

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the following troparia:

(Tone 2) Remember your servants, O Lord,* because of Your goodness, and forgive all the sins they committed in life,* for no one is sinless but You, Who can give rest to the departed.

(Tone 8) O Creator, in the depth of Your wisdom,* You lovingly govern all people and distribute to each what is for good.* Now give rest to the souls of Your servants,* for they have placed their hope in You,* our Creator, Maker, and our God.

Glory be; (Tone 8, kontakion): Give rest to the souls of Your servants with Your saints, O Christ,* where there is no pain, no sorrow, no grief,* but life everlasting.

Now and for ever: Virgin Godbearer, we, all generations, bless you. For in you the uncontainable Christ our God was pleased to be contained. We are blessed in having you as our advocate. You intercede for us day and night. Rulers are made strong by your intercession. And so we shout out and sing your praises: Hail, O Woman Full of Grace, the Lord is with you!

Lord, have mercy. (12x)

Then the following prayer: Lord, remember our fathers and brothers who have fallen asleep in the hope of resurrection to eternal life and all who have died in piety and faith. Forgive every sin, voluntary and involuntary, committed by them in word or deed or thought. Give them rest in a place of light, in a place of refreshment, in a place of repose from which has fled all pain, sorrow and sighing, where the light of Your countenance shines and gladdens Your saints from of old. Grant them Your kingdom and a share in Your ineffable and eternal good things and the enjoyment of Your everlasting, blessed life. For You are the Life, the Resurrection and Repose of Your servants who have fallen asleep, O Christ our God, and we give glory to You together with Your eternal Father and Your all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Then the troparion: Have mercy on us...; all the rest as in Small Compline, (p. 59), to the end.

SATURDAY NOCTURN

(Friday Evening)

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You...; the usual beginning, until: Come, let us adore..., (pp. 10-11).

Psalm 50 (p. 44)

Psalm 64

To You our praise is due in Zion, O God.* To You we pay our vows, You Who hear our prayer.
To You all flesh will come* with its burden of sin,
Too heavy for us, our offenses,* but You wipe them away.
Blessed is he whom You choose* and call to dwell in Your courts.
We are filled with the blessings of Your house,* of Your holy temple.
You keep Your pledge with wonders, O God our Savior,* the hope of all the earth and of far distant isles.
You uphold the mountains with Your strength,* You are girded with power.
You still the roaring of the seas,* the roaring of their waves and the tumult of the peoples.
The ends of the earth stand in awe* at the sight of Your wonders.
The lands of sunrise and sunset* You fill with Your joy.
You care for the earth, give it water,* You fill it with riches.
Your river in heaven brims over* to provide its grain.
And thus You provide for the earth;* You drench its furrows,
You level it, soften it with showers,* You bless its growth.
You crown the year with Your goodness.* Abundance flows in Your steppes, in the pastures of the wilderness it flows.
The hills are girded with joy,* the meadows covered with flocks,
The valleys are decked with wheat.* They shout for joy, yes, they sing.

Then: Psalm 68 (p. 579), and Psalm 69 (p. 45).

Glory be: Now and for ever: (without the Alleluia). Then immediately:
I believe in one God.... (p. 48).

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the following troparia:

(Tone 2) Uncreated Being, Creator of all,* open our lips that we may proclaim and praise You crying out:* Holy, holy, holy are You, our God.* Through the intercession of Your apostles, prophets and martyrs, have mercy on us.

Glory be: Imitating the powers above,* we on earth, good Lord, offer You the hymn of praise:* Holy, holy, holy are You, our God.* Through the intercession of all Your saints have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: From my bed and my sleep you raised me, Lord.* Enlighten my mind and heart and open my lips, Holy Trinity,* that I may sing to You:* “Holy, holy, holy are You our God.”

Lord, have mercy (40x); then the prayer: O Christ our God..., (p. 56).

Choir: Lord, have mercy (3x); More honorable than the cherubim...; Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!

Priest: May God be merciful to us and bless us; may His countenance shine upon us, and may He have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

Then the priest says the following prayer:
O God our Master, almighty Father; only-begotten Son, Lord Jesus Christ; and You, O Holy Spirit, one God and one Might, have mercy on me a sinner, and save me, your unworthy servant, according to the ways of Your wisdom. For You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

Prayer of St. Eustratius

With all my heart I extol You, Lord, for You looked with favor upon my lowliness and did not leave me in the hands of my enemies. You saved my soul from distress. Now, Master, let Your hand shelter me. May Your mercy come upon me, for my soul is troubled and in anguish as it leaves my wretched body. Do not let the evil adversary ever lie in wait to attack it and to cast it into darkness because of my sins committed in this life knowingly and unknowingly. Be merciful to me, Master. Let my soul not see the dark and gloomy vision of the evil demons. Rather, let Your bright and shining angels receive it. Give glory to Your holy name and by Your power bring me to Your divine tribunal. At my judgment may not the hand of the prince of this world lay hold of me, to drag me, though a sinner, down to the depths of the infernal abyss. Rather, stand by me and be my savior and my protector. Lord, have mercy on my soul stained by the passions of this life. Receive it purified by repentance and confession, for blessed are You for ever. Amen.

SUNDAY NOCTURN

(Saturday Evening)

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God...; (the usual beginning: until: Come, let us adore..., (pp. 10-11).

Psalm 50 (see p. 44)

Canon of the Holy Trinity:

Ode 9: Hirmos (Tone 8): Heaven was astonished and the ends of the earth were amazed that God appeared to man in bodily form. Your womb became vaster than the heavens. And so, choirs of angels and men extol you as God-bearer.

Verse: Most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to You!

As we now praise You, the Nature Which rules all things, effects all things, is beyond all beginning, a Single Trinity, above time, life-giving, merciful, loving and good, we beg forgiveness of sins, peace to the world and harmony to the churches.

Glory be: Lordship with Three Radiances, Deity, One with Three Rays, graciously receive those who sing Your praises. Rescue them from sin and from difficult temptations. In Your love quickly grant peace and unity to Your churches.

Now and for ever: By dwelling in a Virgin’s womb, Christ my Savior, You appeared to Your world as God-man, truly unchanged and unconfused. You clearly promised to be always with Your servants. And so, through the intercession of her who bore You, grant peace to all Your flock.

Then the following troparia are taken:

It is proper to give You divine glory, Holy Trinity,* indivisible and beyond all being, our all-good God,* Whom all earth sings and powers of heaven praise.* You are worshiped in faith by all,* in essence the Oneness of Three Persons.* Dominion beyond the cherubim and Divinity without compare beyond the seraphim,* indivisible Trinity in Oneness,* Godhead indeed, we exalt You.

I adore the Father, without beginning, and God,* together with the Son, without beginning,* and the Spirit, the indivisible One uniting Being.* In song let us worship the Oneness, Three in number.

Piously in song and with sacred refrains,* let us all sing the praises of the Father, and of the Son, and of the divine Spirit,* Power in three Persons, the one kingdom and dominion.

Illuminate me by Your lightning flashes, my God,* Cause of All in Three Persons;* show me the bright, luminous,* unchanging abode of Your inaccessible glory.

In fear, let us glorify Christ the Life-giver,* ineffably enfleshed of the Virgin;* hosts of angels praise Him* and before Him the cherubim shiver and tremble.

It is proper to implore You with tears in all reverence,* the all-merciful,* the all-kind Lord and Savior of our souls.

My King, receive my tears, groans and weeping, wretch though I am.* Rescue me from the flames and outer darkness,* and make me a participant of the heavenly kingdom.

Glory be: All-sovereign Father, Word of God, all-holy Spirit,* one power and image, one kingship, divinity and authority,* have mercy on those who worship You and save them.

Now and for ever: On beholding Your Son divine and risen from the dead,* most pure Virgin, all creation was filled with ineffable joy.* In glorifying Him we extol you.

It is truly proper...; Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and Hypakoe of the tone of the week: (see pp. 1231-1235).

Lord, have mercy (40x).
Glory be: now and ever:
Lord, have mercy. (3x). Give the blessing.

Priest: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.

Then the priest bows to all the brethren, and begs forgiveness:
Bless me, reverend fathers and brothers, and forgive me, a sinner, whatever offenses I may have committed this day (this night) and all the days of my life by word, deed and thought as well as by all my senses.
Choir: May God forgive you, reverend Father. Bless us also and forgive our offenses voluntary and involuntary (and the brethren bow to the priest).

Priest: May the Lord God by His grace forgive you all your sins and have mercy on you.

MATINS

On feasts with Litiya, the priest vested in the epitrachelion (and in the mantle), or, where there is the custom, also in the phelonion, opens the holy doors, incenses the altar, the sanctuary, icons, and the people, and then intones: Glory to the holy.... At the beginning of the psalm, the priest closes the holy doors, takes off the phelonion, and goes out before the holy doors, where he reads the prayers of Matins.

On other days, the priest, wearing the epitrachelion, stands before the holy doors, and intones: Glory to the holy....

Priest: Glory to the holy, consubstantial, life-giving and undivided Trinity, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen

Glory to God in the highest, and to His people on earth, His peace and good will. (3x)
O Lord, You shall open my lips, and my mouth will declare Your praise. (2x)

Psalm 3 (Monday)

How many are my foes, O Lord!* How many are rising up against me!
How many are saying about me:* there is no help for him in God.
But You, Lord, are a shield about me,* my glory, Who lift up my head.
I cry aloud to the Lord.* He answers from His holy mountain.
I lie down to rest and I sleep.* I wake, for the Lord upholds me.
I will not fear even thousands of people* who are ranged on every side against me.
Arise, Lord; save me, my God,* You Who strike all my foes on the mouth.
You who break the teeth of the wicked,* O Lord of salvation, bless Your people.
I lie down to rest and I sleep.* I wake, for the Lord upholds me.

Psalm 37 (Tuesday)

O Lord, do not rebuke me in Your anger;* do not punish me, Lord, in Your rage.
Your arrows have sunk deep in me;* Your hand has come down upon me.
Through Your anger all my body is sick:* through my sin, there is no health in my limbs.
My guilt towers higher than my head:* it is a weight too heavy to bear.
My wounds are foul and festering,* the result of my own folly.
I am bowed and brought to my knees.* I go mourning all the day long.
All my frame burns with fever;* all my body is sick.
Spent and utterly crushed,* I cry aloud in anguish of heart.
O Lord, You know all my longing:* my groans are not hidden from You.
My heart throbs, my strength is spent;* the very light has gone from my eyes.
My friends avoid me like a leper;* those closest to me stand afar off.
Those who plot against my life lay snares;* those who seek my ruin speak of harm, planning treachery all the day long.
But I am like the deaf who cannot hear;* like the dumb unable to speak.
I am like one who hears nothing* in whose mouth is no defense.
I count on You, O Lord:* it is You, Lord God, Who will answer.
I pray: Do not let them mock me,* those who triumph if my foot should slip.
For I am on the point of falling* and my pain is always before me.
I confess that I am guilty* and my sin fills me with dismay.
My wanton enemies are numberless* and my lying foes are many.
They repay me evil for good* and attack me for seeking what is right.
O Lord, do not forsake me!* My God, do not stay afar off!
Make haste and come to my help,* O Lord, my God, my Savior!

Psalm 62 (Wednesday)

O God, You are my God, for You I long;* for You my soul is thirsting.
My body pines for You* like a dry, weary land without water.
So I gaze on You in the sanctuary* to see Your strength and Your glory.
For Your love is better than life,* my lips will speak Your praise.
So I will bless You all my life;* in Your name I will lift up my hands.
My soul shall be filled as with a banquet,* my mouth shall praise You with joy.
On my bed I remember You.* On You I muse throughout the night
For You have been my help;* in the shadow of Your wings I rejoice.
My soul clings to You;* Your right hand holds me fast.
Those who seek to destroy my life* shall go down to the depths of the earth.
They shall be put into the power of the sword* and left as the prey of the jackals.
But the king shall rejoice in God;* all that swear by Him shall be blessed for the mouth of liars shall be silenced.

Psalm 87 (Thursday)

Lord my God, I call for help by day;* I cry at night before You.
Let my prayer come into Your presence.* O turn Your ear to my cry.
For my soul is filled with evils;* my life is on the brink of the grave.
I am reckoned as one in the tomb* I have reached the end of my strength.
Like one alone among the dead;* like the slain lying in their graves;
Like those You remember no more,* cut off, as they are, from Your hand.
You have laid me in the depths of the tomb,* in places that are dark, in the depths.
Your anger weighs down upon me;* I am drowned beneath Your waves.
You have taken away my friends* and made me hateful in their sight.
Imprisoned, I cannot escape;* my eyes are sunken with grief.
I call to You, Lord, all the day long;* to You I stretch out my hands.
Will You work Your wonders for the dead?* Will the shades stand and praise You?
Will Your love be told in the grave* or Your faithfulness among the dead?
Will Your wonders be known in the dark* or Your justice in the land of oblivion?
As for me, Lord, I call to You for help;* in the morning my prayer comes before You.
Lord, why do You reject me?* Why do You hide Your face?
Wretched, close to death from my youth,* I have borne Your trials; I am numb.
Your fury has swept down upon me;* Your terrors have utterly destroyed me.
They surround me all the day like a flood,* they assail me all together.
Friend and neighbor You have taken away;* my one companion is darkness.

Psalm 102 (Friday)

My soul, give thanks to the Lord,* all my being, bless His holy name.
My soul, give thanks to the Lord,* and never forget all His blessings.
It is He Who forgives all your guilt,* Who heals every one of your ills,
Who redeems your life from the grave,* Who crowns you with love and compassion,
Who fills your life with good things,* renewing your youth like an eagle’s.
The Lord does deeds of justice,* gives judgment for all who are oppressed.
He made known His ways to Moses* and His deeds to Israel’s children.
The Lord is compassion and love,* slow to anger and rich in mercy.
His wrath will come to an end;* He will not be angry for ever.
He does not treat us according to our sins* nor repay us according to our faults.
For as the heavens are high above the earth* so strong is His love for those who fear Him.
As far as the east is from the west* so far does He remove our sins.
As a father has compassion on his children,* the Lord has pity on those who fear Him;
For He knows of what we are made,* He remembers that we are dust.
As for mortals, their days are like grass;* they flower like the flower of the field;
The wind blows and they are gone* and their place never sees them again.
But the love of the Lord is everlasting* upon those who hold Him in fear;
His justice reaches out to children’s children when they keep His covenant in truth,* when they keep His will in their mind.
The Lord has set His sway in heaven* and His kingdom is ruling over all.
Give thanks to the Lord, all His angels,* mighty in power, fulfilling His word, who heed the voice of His word.
Give thanks to the Lord, all His hosts,* His servants who do His will.
Give thanks to the Lord, all His works, in every place where He rules.* My soul, give thanks to the Lord!

Psalm 142
(Saturday and Sunday)

Lord, listen to my prayer; turn Your ear to my appeal;* You are faithful; You are just; give answer.
Do not call Your servant to judgment* for no one is just in Your sight.
The enemy pursues my soul; he has crushed my life to the ground;* He has made me dwell in darkness like the dead, long forgotten.
Therefore, my spirit fails;* my heart is numb within me.
I remember the days that are past: I ponder all Your works;* I muse on what Your hand has wrought and to You I stretch out my hands.
Like a parched land my soul thirsts for You;* Lord, make haste and answer; for my spirit fails within me.
Do not hide Your face* lest I become like those in the grave.
In the morning let me know Your love for I put my trust in You;* make me know the way I should walk;* to You I lift up my soul.
Rescue me, Lord, from my enemies;* I have fled to You for refuge.
Teach me to do Your will, for You, O Lord, are my God;* let Your good Spirit guide me in ways that are level and smooth.
For Your name’s sake, Lord, save my life;* in Your justice save my soul from distress.
In Your love make an end of my foes;* destroy all those who oppress me for I am Your servant, O Lord.

After every psalm:
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit:
Now and for ever, and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x)

Prayers of Matins

During the recitation of the psalms, the priest quietly says the following Prayers of Matins before the holy doors:

We thank You, Lord our God, for You have wakened us from our sleep, and have filled our lips with praise that we might worship You and call upon Your holy name. We beg of Your compassion that You have always shown towards us, hear us now and send help to those who stand before Your holy glory awaiting Your abundant mercy. O Lord, grant that those who serve You in fear and love may praise Your ineffable goodness. For to You is due all glory, honor, and worship, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

From the depths of night our soul longs for You, our God, for Your commandments are a light upon the earth. Give us understanding that we may be perfected in righteousness and holiness in fear of You, for it is You Whom we glorify as our true God. Turn Your ear and hear us. O Lord, remember all those present and praying with us by their own name, and save them by Your might. Bless Your people and sanctify Your inheritance. Give peace to Your world, to Your churches, to the priests, and to all Your people. For blessed and glorified is Your most honored and sublime name, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

From the depths of night our soul longs for You, our God, for Your commandments are a light upon the earth. Teach us, O God, Your righteousness, Your statutes, and Your decrees. Enlighten the eyes of our minds, lest in sin we fall asleep until death. Cast out all darkness from our hearts, favor us with the Sun of Righteousness, and keep our lives from danger by the seal of Your Holy Spirit. Direct our steps along the road of peace. Grant that we may see the dawn and the whole day in joy, and that we may offer You our morning prayers. For Yours is the power, and Yours is the kingdom and the might and the glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Lord God, holy and incomprehensible, You told the light to shine out of darkness; You have given us rest in the sleep of night; and You have raised us to glorify and praise Your goodness. We beg of Your mercy, accept us who now worship You and thank You with all our strength, and grant all that we ask for our salvation. Reveal us to be children of light and of the day, and heirs of Your eternal good gifts. In the abundance of Your mercy, Lord, remember all Your people who invoke Your love for mankind and aid those here present and who pray with us and those traveling abroad in every place of Your kingdom, who are in need of Your loving kindness and help. Be greatly merciful to all, that we may persevere always in confidence, being saved in soul and body. We glorify Your magnificent and blessed name, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Treasury of all good, ever-flowing spring, holy Father, Wonder-worker, all-powerful Ruler of all: we worship You and beg of Your mercy and compassion, help and support us in our lowliness. Lord, remember those who pray to You, and let our morning prayer rise like incense before You. Grant that no one of us may be put to shame, but surround us with Your mercy. Lord, remember those who keep watch and sing of Your glory, and that of Your only-begotten Son and our God, and of Your Holy Spirit. Be their help and support and accept their prayers upon Your heavenly spiritual altar. For You are our God, and to You we give glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

We give thanks to You, O Lord and God of our salvation. You have done everything that is good for our lives, and we look always to You, Savior and Benefactor of our souls. For You have given us rest in that part of the night which has passed, and now have raised us from our sleep to worship Your honored name. Therefore, O Lord, we pray: give us the grace and strength to be found worthy to sing praise always, and to pray constantly, and to work for our own salvation in fear and trembling, with the help of Your Christ. O Lord, remember those who pray to You in the night. Hear them and have mercy on them and crush under their feet invisible and malicious enemies. For You are the King of Peace, and the Savior of our souls, and we give thanks to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, You have raised us from our sleep and gathered us for this time of prayer. Give us grace that we may open our lips in praise. Accept the thanksgiving we offer with all our strength. Teach us Your decrees, for we do not know how to pray as we should, unless You guide us by Your Holy Spirit. Therefore, we pray, that if until now we have sinned in any way – in word, or deed, or thought, voluntarily or involuntarily – remit, pardon and forgive us; for if You, O Lord, were to look upon our guilt, Lord, who would survive? For with You is found redemption. You alone are holy and a helper and the stronghold of our lives, and our praise is for You forever. Blessed and glorified be the power of Your reign, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Lord our God, You have shaken from us the laziness of sleep; You have called us to be holy, to lift up our hands in the night, and to glorify You for Your just decrees. Receive our prayers, our petitions, our confessions of faith, and our nighttime worship. Bestow on us, O Lord, an invincible faith, a confident hope, and a love without pretense. Bless our comings and our goings, our deeds and works, our words and desires. Grant that we may come to the beginning of the day praising, glorifying, and blessing the goodness of Your inexpressible generosity. For blessed is Your all-holy name, and glorified is Your kingdom, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord our God, You have given us forgiveness through repentance, and as a model of knowledge and confession of sins, You have revealed to us the repentance of the prophet David that led to pardon. Master, have mercy on us who have fallen into so many and so great sins. Have mercy in Your kindness, and in Your compassion blot out our offenses, for against You have we sinned, O Lord, Who know the hidden depths of our hearts, and Who alone have the power to forgive sins. A pure heart You have created for us; You have sustained us with a spirit of fervor and have given us the joy of Your help. Do not cast us away from Your presence, but in Your goodness and love for all, grant that we may offer a sacrifice of righteousness and oblation on Your holy altar until our last breath. Through the mercies and goodness and love of Your only-begotten Son, with Whom You are blessed, together with Your good and life-creating Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O God, our God, who have placed all spiritual and intellectual powers under Your will, we pray and beg You, accept these hymns of praise which we offer to You according to our ability together with all Your creatures. Give us in exchange the riches of Your goodness, for before You all beings in the heavens, or on earth and under the earth bend their knees, and everything that lives or that breathes gives praise to Your glory beyond reach, for You are the one true God, full of mercy. For all the heavenly powers praise You, and we give glory to You, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

God of our ancestors, we praise You, we glorify You, we bless You, we thank You, for You have made the shadow of night pass and have shown us again the light of day. We beg You in Your goodness and in Your great mercy, cleanse our sins and hear our prayer, for we take refuge in You, O merciful and all-powerful God. Make the true Sun of Righteousness shine in our hearts, enlighten our minds, and watch over all our senses, that we may live decently like people of the daytime, so that walking in Your commandments, we may come to eternal life, and may be made worthy of the enjoyment of Your light beyond reach, for You are the source of life. For You are a God of mercy and kindness and love, and we glorify You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

After the recitation of the psalms, the priests returns to the sanctuary and stands before the altar. The deacon leaves the sanctuary, goes in front of the holy doors, and says the litany. If there is no deacon, the priest says the litany before the holy doors.

Litany of Peace

In peace let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (and after each petition).

For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.

For peace throughout the whole world, for the well-being of God’s holy churches and for the unity of all, let us pray to the Lord.

For this holy church and for all who enter it with faith, reverence, and fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.

For our most holy universal Pontiff, N., Pope of Rome, let us pray to the Lord.

For our most blessed Patriarch, N., our most reverend Metropolitan, N., our God-loving Bishop, N., the reverend priesthood, the diaconate in Christ, and all the clergy and the people, let us pray to the Lord.

For our nation under God, for our government, and for all the military, let us pray to the Lord.

For this city (or For this village, or For this holy monastery), for every city and country and for the faithful who live in them, let us pray to the Lord.

For favorable weather, for an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and for peaceful times, let us pray to the Lord.

For the seafarers and travelers, for the sick and the suffering, for those held captive, and for their salvation, let us pray to the Lord.

That we may be delivered from all tribulation, wrath, and misfortune, let us pray to the Lord.

Help and save, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.

Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest: For all glory, honor, and worship befit You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

God the Lord

After the Litany, the choir sings God the Lord... (Ps. 117) in the tone of the first troparion:

God the Lord has revealed Himself to us, blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord.
Verse: Give thanks to the Lord, for He is good; for His love endures forever.
Verse: They encircled me, compassed me about; in the Lord’s name I crushed them.
Verse: I shall not die, I shall live and recount the deeds of the Lord.
Verse: The stone which the builders rejected has become the cornerstone. This is the work of the Lord, a marvel in our eyes.

Then the troparion and the theotokion are taken according to the typikon. After the troparia we sing the Sessional Hymns.

During the Great Fast

Instead of God the Lord..., the choir sings according to the tone of the week: Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
Verse: My spirit yearns for You in the night; yes, keeps vigil for You.
Verse: When Your judgment dawns upon the earth, the world’s inhabitants learn justice.
Verse: Let them be ashamed when they see Your zeal for Your people; let the fire prepared for Your enemies consume them.
Verse: You have increased the nation, O Lord, increased the nation to Your own glory.

Then the choir immediately sings the following trinitarian hymns in the tone of the week.

Tone 1
Through bodily forms, we have come to the spiritual, immaterial understanding of the bodiless powers, and by the singing of the thrice-holy hymn, we have received the light of the divinity in three Persons. Let us sing with the cherubim to our only Lord: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God...

(:) Monday – through the intercession of Your angelic powers have mercy on us.
(:) Tuesday – through the prayers of Your Forerunner have mercy on us.
(:) Wednesday – through the power of Your holy Cross have mercy on us.
(:) Thursday – through the prayers of Your holy Apostles have mercy on us.
(:) Friday – through the power of Your holy Cross have mercy on us.

Glory be: With all the powers of heaven let us sing as the cherubim, and offer the thrice-holy hymn of praise to the Most High: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: Rising from sleep we bow down before You, as we sing again, the hymn of the angels: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 2
On earth we imitate the powers on high, and we offer our hymn of victory to You as we sing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see above).

Glory be: O uncreated Nature and Maker of the universe, open our lips, and our mouths shall proclaim Your praise by singing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: O Lord, You have wakened me from my sleep; enlighten my heart and my spirit, open my lips that I may praise You, O Holy Trinity: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God, through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 3
Consubstantial and indivisible Trinity, unity in three Persons and equal in eternity, with the angels we sing to You, O Lord: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see above).

Glory be: Eternal Father and coeternal Son and the Spirit Who shares eternity with the one God, together with the angels we sing to You, O Lord: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: The Judge will come as a flash of lightning to lay bare the deeds of everyone; at midnight we cry to You with fear: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 4
We mortals now dare to sing and offer You the hymn of Your heavenly ministers: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see p. 120).

Glory be: As the army of angels in heaven, O Lord, with fear we on earth offer You this hymn of victory: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: We dare to glorify You, O Christ our God, together with Your eternal Father and Your Most Holy Spirit; and with the cherubim we cry out: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 5
This is the hour for praise and prayer; let us unceasingly cry to the Lord: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see p. 120).

Glory be: With unworthy voices we dare to represent the heavenly hosts and sing to You, O eternal Trinity: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: O Christ, You dwelt in the virginal womb without being separated from the bosom of the Father; accept our voices with the angels: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 6
With fear and trembling, the cherubim and seraphim sing the Thrice-holy Hymn with unceasing voice; and we sinners also cry out with them: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see p. 120).

Glory be: The cherubim with immaterial lips and the seraphim with unceasing praise, sing the Thrice-holy hymn to You, O our God; and we on earth with our unworthy lips offer You our praise by singing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: Let us glorify the three Persons in one God, united without confusion, and let us take up the hymn of the angels as we sing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 7
Your great glory is praised by the cherubim, O Lord, and the angels adore Your divine majesty; accept from our sinful lips this hymn: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see p. 120).

Glory be: Shaking off both laziness and sleep, arise and offer praise to the Creator, and in fear, O my soul, sing to Him: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: To the unapproachable Divinity and the unique Trinity, let us offer the triple praise of the seraphim, and with fear and trembling, let us sing: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

Tone 8
Lifting our hearts to heaven, let us imitate the heavenly hosts, and let us fall down with fear before the Lord; as we sing the hymn of victory and say: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God... (see p. 120).

Glory be: The cherubim dare not raise their eyes to You, as they joyfully sing the divine words of the Thrice-Holy Hymn; and we sinners also cry out with them: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of all the saints, have mercy on us.

Now and for ever: Overwhelmed by the weight of our many sins, we dare not raise our eyes to heaven. With souls and bodies bowed before You, we sing together with the angels: Holy, holy, holy are You, O our God; through the prayers of the Mother of God, have mercy on us.

After the troparia, we sing the Sessional hymns. At Daily Matins take Psalm 50, (p. 128). On Sunday, from September 22 to December 19, and from January 14 to Cheesefare Sunday, as well as on all feasts, take the Polyeleos (Ps. 134-135):

Polyeleos

Praise the name of the Lord, praise Him, servants of the Lord. Alleluia! (3x)
Who stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our God. Alleluia! (3x)
Lord, Your name stands forever, unforgotten from age to age. Alleluia! (3x)
From Zion may the Lord be blessed, He who dwells in Jerusalem. Alleluia! (3x)
O give thanks to the Lord for He is good, alleluia, for His love endures forever. Alleluia! (3x)
Who fixed the earth firmly on the seas, alleluia, for His love endures forever. Alleluia! (3x)
He snatched us away from our foes, alleluia, for His love endures forever. Alleluia! (3x)
To the God of heaven give thanks, alleluia, for His love endures forever. Alleluia! (3x)

After the Polyeleos, if it is a feast, the Exaltation is sung. The priest, vested in the phelonion, opens the holy doors, sings the Exaltation, and incenses the altar, sanctuary, icons, the people, and the icon of the feast on the tetrapod.

Hosts of Angels
(On all Sundays and on the Saturday of Lazarus)

Verse before each troparion: Blessed are You, O Lord, teach me Your commandments.

The hosts of angels were amazed and dazzled when they beheld You, O Savior, among the dead destroying the power of Death, raising up Adam with You and releasing all the souls from Hades.

The radiant angel standing by the grave cried out to the ointment-bearing women: Why do you lament and mingle your tears with the spices? Look upon the grave and rejoice, for the Savior is risen from the dead.

The ointment-bearing women hastened very early to Your grave. But the angel stood by them and said: The time for lamenting is no more. Do not cry, but go and announce the Resurrection to the disciples.

O Savior, the ointment-bearing women came to Your grave with ointments, and they heard the angel say to them: Why are you seeking the Living One among the dead? Indeed, He is God. He is risen from the dead.

Glory be: We worship the Father and His Son and His Holy Spirit, the Holy Trinity, One in essence, and we cry out with the seraphim: Holy, holy, holy are You, O Lord.

Now and for ever: O Virgin, you bore the Giver of Life, Who redeemed Adam from his sin and granted joy to Eve instead of sadness. For He Who is both God and Man was incarnate of you, and He has restored life to those who had strayed away from it.

Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x)

The Exaltation and the hymn Hosts of angels... are followed by the Small Litany, the Hypakoe (for Sunday, see pp. 1231-1233); the Sessional (on feasts), and the Gradual according to the tone of the week (on Sunday); on feasts according to tone 4.

Gradual Hymn (Tone 4)

My sinful desires have encircled me, from my youth they have oppressed me; but You, O Savior, will come to aid me. You will protect and save me.
May the enemies of Zion be confounded by the Lord; may they be a grass which withers, which is dried up by the fire.
Glory be: Now and for ever: Every spirit lives by the grace of the Holy Spirit, and is raised up in all purity; it is mystically enlightened by the one God in three Persons.

The Gospel

Deacon: Let us be attentive!
Priest: Peace + be with all.
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us be attentive!

The choir sings the resurrectional prokimenon or of the feast. The deacon incenses; if incensing had already been performed at the exaltation, it is not repeated here.

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: For You are holy, our God, and You dwell in the holy place, and to You we give glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Then immediately according to the tone of the prokimenon: Let everything that breathes give praise to the Lord.
Verse: Praise God in His holy place, praise Him in His mighty heavens.
Deacon: That we be deemed worthy of hearing the holy Gospel, let us pray to the Lord, our God.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. (3x)
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us stand and listen to a reading of the holy Gospel.
Priest: Peace + be with all.
Choir: And with your spirit.
Priest: A reading of the holy Gospel according to (name of the Evangelist).
Choir: Glory be to You, O Lord, glory be to You!
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

The priest alone reads the Gospel (see pp. 413-429). After the reading, the priest closes the Gospel Book, kisses it, and places it upon the tetrapod. The choir reads the Hymn of Resurrection which is immediately taken after the Gospel on all Sundays (except Palm Sunday), everyday from the feast of the Pasch (Resurrection) to its leave-taking on the Ascension of our Lord, on the feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, and on the Saturday of Lazarus. It may be sung according to Tone 6.

Hymn of Resurrection

Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, let us adore the holy Lord Jesus Who alone is sinless. We bow to Your cross, O Christ, and we praise and glorify Your holy Resurrection. You are our God and besides You we recognize no other, and we invoke Your name. Come, all you faithful, and let us bow to the holy Resurrection of Christ, since through the Cross joy has come to all the world. Ever praising the Lord, let us extol His Resurrection, since He, having endured the Crucifixion, has destroyed death by His death.

Psalm 50

Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness.* In Your compassion blot out my offense.
O wash me more and more from my guilt* and cleanse me from my sin.
My offenses truly I know them;* my sin is always before me.
Against You, You alone, have I sinned;* what is evil in Your sight I have done.
That You may be justified when You give sentence* and be without reproach when You judge.
O see, in guilt I was born,* a sinner was I conceived.
Indeed, You love truth in the heart;* then in the secret of my heart teach me wisdom.
O purify me, then I shall be clean;* O wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me hear rejoicing and gladness,* that the bones You have crushed may rejoice.
From my sins turn away Your face* and blot out all my guilt.
A pure heart create for me, O God,* put a steadfast spirit within me.
Do not cast me away from Your presence,* nor deprive me of Your Holy Spirit.
Give me again the joy of Your help;* with a spirit of fervor sustain me.
That I may teach transgressors Your ways* and sinners may return to You.
O rescue me, God, my helper,* and my tongue shall ring out Your goodness.
O Lord, open my lips* and my mouth shall declare Your praise.
For in sacrifice You take no delight,* burnt offering from me You would refuse.
My sacrifice, a contrite spirit.* A humbled, contrite heart You will not spurn.
In Your goodness, show favor to Zion:* rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will be pleased with lawful sacrifice, burnt offerings wholly consumed,* Then You will be offered young bulls on Your altar.

After Psalm 50, the following stichera are sung on Sundays and on feasts, unless otherwise prescribed;

Glory be: (Tone 6): Through the intercession of the holy apostles, O Merciful One, remit our many sins.
Now and for ever: Through the intercession of the Mother of God, O Merciful One, remit our many sins.
Verse: Have mercy on me, O God, in Your kindness. In Your compassion blot out my offense.

On Sunday: Jesus is risen from the tomb, as He foretold, and granted us everlasting life and great mercy. (On feast days special stichera are sung).

On Sundays and on Feast days; and during the Great Fast (on all days except Saturday), the deacon says: Save your people, O God... (p. 31).
Choir: Lord, have mercy. (12x)
Priest: Through the mercies and goodness and love of Your only-begotten Son, with Whom You are blessed, together with Your good and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Anointing with Oil

If there was litiya, then after the exclamation: Through the mercies..., the priest with cross in hand, and the deacon with the oil blessed at Litiya and the brush, stand at the right of the tetrapod. The priest anoints, in the form of a cross, the foreheads of the faithful, who come up to kiss the Gospel Book. After the completion of the anointing, they return to the sanctuary, and having closed the holy doors, the priest takes off the phelonion. The anointing may be performed during the great doxology, if it is more convenient.

Canon – Ode 9

The Magnificat is taken everyday, except on those feasts that have a special verse before the hirmos of the 9th Ode. On Sundays and on feasts, the deacon performs the incensing.

Deacon: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos and the Mother of Light in hymns.

Choir: My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God, my Savior.
More honorable than the cherubim, and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word; O true Mother of God, we magnify you (after each verse).

Because He has regarded the humility of His handmaid, for behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
Because He Who is mighty has done great things for me, and holy is His name, and His love is from generation to generation to those who fear Him.
He has shown might in His arm; He has scattered the proud in the conceit of their heart.
He has put down the mighty from their seat and has exalted the humble; He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich He has sent away empty.
He has received Israel His servant, being mindful of his love, as He spoke to our Fathers: to Abraham and to his seed forever.

Then the ninth hirmos and the rest of the canon are taken.

On Sunday, after the canon, Holy is the Lord our God is sung three times in the tone of the matinal prokimenon. Then the Exapostilaria, (pp. 413-429), are taken. The hymn: It is truly right... is omitted.

After the canon, on feasts, prefeasts, and postfeasts, the Exapostilaria of the feast are immediately taken. The hymn: It is truly right... is also omitted.

On other days, after the canon, the hymn: It is truly right... and the Exapostilaria are taken.

It Is Truly Right

(Tone 6) It is truly right to bless you, O God-bearing One, as the ever-blessed and immaculate Mother of our God. More honorable than the cherubim and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word; O true Mother of God, we magnify you.

Daily Exapostilaria

Monday: Angels, archangels, and principalities, virtues, powers and dominions, thrones and many-eyed cherubim, along with the six-winged seraphim, intercede for us, that we may be delivered from all danger and that we may escape the unending flames.
Glory be: Now and for ever: O Virgin, you are my help, the protection of the world and its strong support; I bow down before you and cry out: Deliver me from all affliction and from the eternal fire, for in you, O Virgin, is all my hope.

Tuesday: O glorious prophet and forerunner of grace! You preached to all salvation through repentance, and have made known to all, O blessed One, the Lamb, Who takes away the sins of the world. Today pray to Him, that He may have mercy on the world.
Glory be: Now and for ever: All the prophets foretold you, O Virgin! David called you a mountain and a ship, a lampstand and a ladder, a bridge and the urn that contains the manna, and the blossoming rod; but we fittingly extol you as the Mother of God.

Wednesday: With faith, we praise Your holy Cross, and we adore it, for it is an unconquerable weapon and a bulwark of faith; it is a great protection, the praise of Christians, the defense of orthodoxy, and the glory of the passionbearers; therefore, we venerate it.
Glory be: Now and for ever: Standing near the Cross and seeing your Son crucified on the tree and lifeless, you, O most pure one, wept as a mother would, and tearfully lamenting, you cried out: What is this wonder! That the Creator as a creature gives Himself to be raised upon the cross to be crucified?

Thursday: O Apostles of the Lord, you traveled to the ends of the earth and preached the truth of the Incarnation of the Lord from a virgin, converting nations from deceit, and enlightening and teaching all to worship the Holy Trinity.
Glory be: Now and for ever: O most pure Virgin! With the wise Apostles and the multitude of martyrs, together with the wise Nicholas, pray unceasingly to Christ, that He may deliver us from every kind of misfortune; for we have placed our hope in you, O Virgin!

Friday: Rejoice, O most holy Cross, – impregnable bulwark of the world, harbor of the unfortunate, protection of those who are in distress, victory of kings, protection of armies, crown of the apostles, and salvation of the faithful!
Glory be: Now and for ever: Seeing You nailed to the cross, the most pure one wept and lamented, crying out: How has the Sun of Glory, the most splendorous light, set? How is it; that You, for the sake of the salvation of the human race, were nailed to the cross and pierced in the side with a lance? O my Son and my God!

Saturday: O glorious prophets, blessed apostles, righteous patriarchs, festive assembly of hierarchs, ascetics, just ones, company of holy women, and all the holy martyrs! With the Mother of God, intercede with the Lord, that He may have mercy on your servants.
Glory be: Now and for ever: O sweetness of the angels, joy of the suffering, defender of Christians, O Virgin and Mother of our Lord! Intercede for us and deliver us from the eternal torments.

Exapostilaria during the Great Fast

Tone 1
O Christ, You make the light arise, purify my heart from all sin ...

Monday: through the protection of Your angelic powers and save me.
Tuesday: through the prayers of Your Forerunner, and save me.
Wednesday and Friday: through the power of Your holy cross, and save me.
Thursday: through the prayers of Your holy apostles, and save me.

Glory be: O Christ, You make the light arise, purify my heart from all sin, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: O Christ, You make the light arise, purify my heart from all sin, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 2
Send forth Your eternal light, O Christ our God, illumine my eyes and my heart... (see above).

Glory be: Send forth your eternal light, O Christ our God, and illumine my heart, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: Send forth Your eternal light, O Christ our God, illumine my eyes and my heart, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 3
Send forth Your light, O Christ our God, and illumine my heart... (see above).

Glory be: Send forth Your light, O Christ our God, and illumine my heart, through the prayers of all the saints and save me.
Now and for ever: Send forth Your light, O Christ our God, and illumine my heart, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 4
You make the light shine upon the whole world; enlighten my soul by purifying it of every sin ... (see above).

Glory be: You make the light shine upon the whole world; enlighten my soul by purifying it of every sin, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: You make the light shine upon the whole world; enlighten my soul by purifying it of every sin, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 5
O Lord, the source of light, send forth Your brightness to illumine my heart... (see p. 134).

Glory be: O Lord, the source of light, send forth Your brightness to illumine my heart, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: O Lord, the source of light, send forth Your brightness to illumine my heart, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 6
Send Your everlasting light upon our souls, O Lord... (see p. 134).

Glory be: Send Your everlasting light upon our souls, O Lord, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: Send Your everlasting light upon our souls, O Lord, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 7
Enlighten my heart, O Lord, that I may sing to You; teach me to do Your will... (see p. 134).

Glory be: Enlighten my heart, O Lord, that I may sing to You; teach me to do Your will, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: Enlighten my heart, O Lord, that I may sing to You; teach me to do Your will, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Tone 8
O Christ, the everlasting light, enlighten me completely... (see p. 134).

Glory be: O Christ, the everlasting light, enlighten me completely, through the prayers of all the saints, and save me.
Now and for ever: O Christ, the everlasting light, enlighten me completely, through the prayers of the Mother of God, and save me.

Psalm 148

On Sundays, Feast days, and the final day or leave-taking of a feast, and when the Great Doxology is taken, the choir sings the following verses according to the tone of the first stichera at the praises.

Let everything that lives and that breathes give praise to the Lord.* Praise the Lord from the heavens; praise Him in the heights.* To You is due a hymn, O God!
Praise Him, all His angels,* praise Him, all His hosts.* To You is due a hymn, O God!

If the Lesser Doxology is taken, then we say:
Praise the Lord from the heavens,* praise Him in the heights.
Praise Him, all His angels,* praise Him, all His hosts.
Praise Him, sun and moon,* praise Him, shining stars.
Praise Him, highest heavens* and the waters above the heavens.
Let them praise the name of the Lord.* He commanded: they were made.
He fixed them forever;* gave a law which shall not pass away.
Praise the Lord from the earth,* sea creatures and all oceans,
Fire and hail, snow and mist,* stormy winds that obey His word;
All mountains and hills,* all fruit trees and cedars,
Beasts, wild and tame,* reptiles and birds on the wing;
All earth’s kings and peoples,* earth’s princes and rulers,
Young men and maidens,* old men together with children.
Let them praise the name of the Lord for He alone is exalted.* The splendor of His name reaches beyond heaven and earth.
He exalts the strength of His people.* He is the praise of all His saints, of the children of Israel, of the people to whom He comes close.

Psalm 149

Sing a new song to the Lord,* His praise in the assembly of the faithful.
Let Israel rejoice in its Maker;* let Zion’s sons exalt in their king.
Let them praise His name with dancing* and make music with timbrel and harp.
For the Lord takes delight in His people.* He crowns the poor with salvation.
Let the faithful rejoice in their glory,* shout for joy and take their rest.
Let the praise of God be on their lips* and a two-edged sword in their hand,
To deal out vengeance to the nations* and punishment on all the peoples;
To bind their kings in chains* and their nobles in fetters of iron.
(If 6 stichera are taken) To carry out the sentence preordained* this honor is for all His faithful.

Psalm 150

Praise God in His Holy place,* praise Him in His mighty heavens.
(For 4 stichera) Praise Him for His powerful deeds,* praise His surpassing greatness.
O praise Him with sound of trumpet,* praise Him with lute and harp.
(For 2 stichera) Praise Him with timbrel and dance,* praise Him with strings and pipes.
O praise Him with resounding cymbals praise Him with clashing of cymbals.* Let everything that lives and that breathes give praise to the Lord.

If the Lesser Doxology is taken, see p. 144.

After the stichera, we take, on feasts, the Glory be: and the Now and for ever: according to the typicon.

On Sunday – Glory be: the Gospel stichera; Now and for ever: the following sticherion:

Let Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us* because we have set our hope in You.
Blessed are You, O Lord,* teach me Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Master,* make me understand Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Holy One,* enlighten me with Your laws.
O Lord, You have been our refuge* from one generation to the next.
I said: Lord, have mercy on me,* heal my soul, for I have sinned against You.
O Lord, I have fled to You, teach me to do Your will,* for You, O Lord, are my God.
In You is the source of life* and in Your light we see light.
Keep on loving those* who know You.

Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have mercy on us. (3x)
Glory be: Now and for ever: Holy and Immortal, have mercy on us.
Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have mercy on us.

Then on feasts, the troparion is taken according to the typicon.
On the Sundays of tones 1, 3, 5 and 7, the following troparion is sung:
Today salvation has come to the world. Let us sing to Him Who is risen from the tomb, the Author of life Who has crushed Death by His death and bestowed victory and great mercy.

For tones 2, 4, 6 and 8, the following troparion is sung:
You came forth from death, destroying the eternal bonds of Hades, O Lord. You broke the curse of Death and thus delivered us from the snares of the Evil One. Then You appeared to Your Apostles and sent them forth to preach, and through them You have bestowed Your peace upon all the world, for You alone are rich in mercy.

As the troparion is being sung, the priest, together with the deacon who precedes him, takes the Gospel Book from the tetrapod into the sanctuary, and places it on the altar. Then the deacon says the litany:

Have mercy on us, O God, in the greatness of Your compassion, we pray You, hear us and have mercy.
Choir: Lord, have mercy. (3x)

We also pray for our most holy universal Pontiff, N., Pope of Rome; for our most blessed Patriarch, N.; for our most reverend Metropolitan, N.; our God-loving Bishop, N., for those who serve and have served in this holy church, for our spiritual fathers, and for all our brethren in Christ.

We also pray for our nation under God, for our government, and for all the military.

We also pray for the people here present who await Your great and bountiful mercies, for those who have been kind to us, and for all orthodox Christians.

Priest: For You are a merciful and loving God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Litany

Let us complete our morning prayer to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Help and save, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
That this whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful, and sinless, let us ask the Lord.
Choir: Grant this, O Lord (after each petition).
For an angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies, let us ask the Lord.
For the forgiveness and remission of our sins and offenses, let us ask the Lord.
For all that is good and beneficial for our souls, and for peace for the world, let us ask the Lord.
That we may spend the rest of our life in peace and repentance, let us ask the Lord.
For a Christian end to our lives, one that is painless, unashamed, and peaceful; and for a good defense at the awesome tribunal of Christ, let us ask the Lord.
Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest: For You are a merciful, gracious and loving God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Peace be with all.
Choir: And with Your spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Priest (quietly): Holy Lord, You live on high and yet stoop to look down upon the earth, and with Your divine eyes You see all creatures. Before You we bow down in spirit and body, and we pray You, O Holy of Holies, stretch forth Your invisible hand from Your holy dwelling and bless us. If we have sinned in any way, either deliberately or through human frailty, forgive us, for You are good; You give us earthly and heavenly blessings, and You alone love all.

Exclamation: For it is You alone Who have mercy and save us, and we glorify You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen

Deacon: Wisdom! Choir: Give the blessing. Then the Great Dismissal (p. 36). If the First Hour is to follow, then the choir immediately begins: Come, let us adore...

Lesser Doxology

During the Great Fast, the priest first intones:
For to You belongs glory, O Lord our God, and we render glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen. And then immediately:

Priest: Glory to You Who have shown us the light!
Choir: Glory to God in the highest,* and to His people on earth, peace and good will.
Lord God, Heavenly King, Almighty God and Father,* with the Lord Jesus Christ, only Son of the Father, and the Holy Spirit.
We praise You, we bless You, we worship You,* we glorify You, we thank You for Your great glory.
Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father,* You take away the sins of the world, have mercy on us.
You take away the sins of the world,* hear our prayer.
You are seated at the right hand of the Father,* have mercy on us.
For You alone are holy, You alone are the Lord, Jesus Christ,* for the glory of God the Father. Amen.
I will bless You day after day,* and praise Your name forever.
Lord, You have been our refuge* from one generation to the next.
I said: Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul,* for I have sinned against You.
O Lord, I have fled to You, teach me to do Your will,* for You, O Lord, are my God.
In You is the source of life* and in Your light we see light.
Keep on loving those* who know You.
Count us worthy, O Lord,* of passing this day without sin.
Blessed are You, O Lord, God of our Fathers,* and praised and glorified is Your name forever. Amen.
Let Your mercy, O Lord, be upon us*, because we have set our hope in You.
Blessed are You, O Lord,* teach me Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Master,* make me understand Your commandments.
Blessed are You, O Holy One,* enlighten me with Your laws.
O Lord, Your mercy endures forever;* do not despise the work of Your hands.
It is proper to praise You,* and to You belong hymns.
Glory belongs to You,* Father, Son, and Holy Spirit;
Now and for ever* and ever. Amen.

Then the deacon says the litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ... (p. 143). After the litany, the stichera of the aposticha. On ordinary days the following verses (Ps 89) are added:

In the morning, fill us with Your love; we shall exalt and rejoice all our days. Give us joy to balance our affliction for the years when we knew misfortune.* Show forth Your work to Your servants; let Your glory shine on their children.

Let the favor of the Lord be upon us;* give success to the work of our hands! Give success to the work of our hands!

After the stichera of the aposticha, we recite:
It is good to give thanks to the Lord,* and to make music to Your name, O Most High.
To proclaim Your love in the morning* and Your truth in the watches of the night.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; the troparion according to the typicon (during the Great Fast, see below); then the litany Have mercy on us, O God... (p. 142); and the daily dismissal (p. 37).

If the First Hour is to follow immediately after Matins, then, instead of the Lesser Dismissal, the following is taken:
Deacon: Wisdom!
Choir: Give the blessing.
Priest: Blessed is Christ, our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Then immediately begin the First Hour: Come let us adore...

During the Great Fast, after the Our Father, we recite the following troparion:
Standing in the temple of your glory is like standing in heaven itself. O Mother of God and Gate of Heaven, open for us the door of your mercy.

Lord, have mercy (40x). Master, give the blessing!
Priest: Blessed is Christ our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Heavenly King, strengthen Your church, affirm our faith, calm the nations, give peace to the world, and preserve this city (this village, this monastery). Grant the faithful departed a share in the dwelling of the just, and receive and forgive us after repentance and confession, for You are good and love mankind.
Choir: Amen.
Lord, have mercy (3x). Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word, O true Mother of God, we magnify you.
Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us.
Choir: Amen.

Prayer of St. Ephrem

O Lord and Master of my life, drive from me the spirit of indifference, despair, lust for power, and idle chatter.
(Prostration)
Instead, bestow on me, Your servant, the spirit of integrity, humility, patience, and love. (Prostration)
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins and not judge my brothers and sisters; for you are blessed for ever and ever. Amen. (Prostration)

God, be merciful to me a sinner. God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me. I have sinned without number; forgive me, O Lord. (12 small bows)

If the First Hour is to follow, then the choir begins: Come let us adore...; if not, the priest says:
Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You.
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x): Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God... (p. 37).

After Matins

Sunday:
(Tone 6): O Christ our Savior, the angels in heaven sing the praises of Your resurrection; make us, on earth, also worthy to extol and glorify You with a pure heart.

Monday:
O Immaculate One, imitating the speech of the archangel, we cry out to you: rejoice, O full of grace; the Lord is with you!

Tuesday:
(Tone 6): We have no other help; we have no other hope besides you, O Immaculate Virgin! You are our hope; you are our glory. Therefore, help us for we are your servants. May we not be put to shame.

Wednesday and Friday: By the power of Your cross, O Christ, give me understanding, that I may glorify Your saving crucifixion with song.

Thursday:
(Tone 6): O Mother of God, you are the true vine laden with the Fruit of Life; wherefore, we implore you, O Lady, to intercede together with the apostles and all the saints that we may obtain mercy for our souls.

Saturday:
(Tone 8): O Mother of God, we your servants sing a hymn of thanks to you, a hymn of triumph to a valiant leader; for you have delivered us from all peril. We now exclaim to you: hail, O bride and virgin ever-pure!

On the feasts of our Lord, of the Theotokos, and of the saints, the Exaltation is sung.

THE FIRST HOUR

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God...; (the usual beginning, p. 10; then):

Come, let us adore the King, our God.
Come, let us adore Christ, the King and our God.
Come, let us adore and bow down to the only Lord Jesus Christ, the King and our God.

Psalm 5
(Monday and Thursday)

To my words give ear, O Lord,* give heed to my groaning,
Attend to the sound of my cries, my King and my God.* It is You Whom I invoke, O Lord.
In the morning You hear me;* in the morning I offer You my prayer, watching and waiting.
You are no God Who loves evil;* no sinner is Your guest.
The boastful shall not stand their ground before Your face.* You hate all who do evil;
You destroy all who lie.* Deceitful and bloodthirsty people are hateful to You, O Lord.
But I through the greatness of Your love* have access to Your house.
I bow down before Your holy temple,* filled with awe.
Lead me, Lord, in Your justice, because of those who lie in wait;* make clear Your way before me.
No truth can be found in their mouths,* their heart is all mischief,
Their throat a wide-open grave,* all honey their speech.
Declare them guilty, O God.* Let them fall in their designs.
Drive them out for their many offenses,* for they have defied You.
All those You protect shall be glad* and ring out their joy.
You shelter them;* in You they rejoice, those who love Your name.
Lord, it is You Who bless the upright;* You surround them with favor as with a shield.

Psalm 89
(Tuesday and Friday)

O Lord, You have been our refuge* from one generation to the next.
Before the mountains were born or the earth or the world brought forth,* You are God, without beginning or end.
You turn us back into dust and say:* Go back, children of the earth.
To Your eyes a thousand years are like yesterday, come and gone,* no more than a watch in the night.
You sweep us away like a dream,* like grass which springs up in the morning.
In the morning it springs up and flowers;* by evening it withers and fades.
So we are destroyed in Your anger,* struck with terror in Your fury.
Our guilt lies open before You,* our secrets in the light of Your face.
All our days pass away in Your anger.* Our life is over like a sigh.
Our span is seventy years,* or eighty for those who are strong.
And most of these are emptiness and pain.* They pass swiftly and we are gone.
Who understands the power of Your anger* and fears the strength of Your fury?
Make us know the shortness of our life* that we may gain wisdom of heart.
Lord, relent! Is Your anger for ever?* Show pity to Your servants.
In the morning, fill us with Your love;* we shall exult and rejoice all our days.
Give us joy to balance our affliction* for the years when we knew misfortune.
Show forth Your work to Your servants;* let Your glory shine on their children.
Let the favor of the Lord be upon us:* give success to the work of our hands; give success to the work of our hands.

Psalm 100
(Wednesday, Saturday, and Sunday)

My song is of mercy and justice;* I sing to You, O Lord.
I will walk in the way of perfection.* O when, Lord, will You come?
I will walk with blameless heart within my house;* I will not set before my eyes whatever is base.
I will hate the ways of the crooked;* they shall not be my friends.
The false-hearted must keep far away;* the wicked I disown.
Those who secretly slander their neighbors* I will bring to silence.
Those of proud look and haughty heart* I will never endure.
I look to the faithful in the land* that they may dwell with me.
Those who walk in the way of perfection* shall be my friends.
No one who practices deceit* shall live within my house.
No one who utters lies* shall stand before my eyes.
Morning by morning I will silence all the wicked in the land,* uprooting from the city of the Lord all who do evil.

The choir concludes the psalms in the following manner:
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
Now and ever and forever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x)
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Then Glory be: troparion of the day, or of the saint; during the Great Fast, see below.

Now and for ever: What shall we call you, O Full of Grace?* A heaven, for you have borne the Sun of Justice?* A paradise, for you have brought forth the Flower of Immortality?* A virgin, for you have remained undefiled?* A mother, holding in her holy arms the Son Who is the God of all?* Intercede with Him for the salvation of our souls.

During the Great Fast, the following troparion is taken:

(Tone 6) In the morning You hear me,* O my King and my God.
Verse: To my words give ear, O Lord, give heed to my groaning.
Verse: It is You whom I invoke, O Lord.

Glory be: Now and for ever: What shall we call you... (see above).

Let my way be straight according to Your word;* let no sin overcome me.
Save me from the wickedness of evildoers,* and I will keep Your commandments.
Let Your face shine upon Your servants,* and teach me your laws.
Let my mouth be filled with Your praise, O Lord, and let me sing Your glory and magnificence all the day long.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; on Sunday: the Hypakoe; (see pp. 1233-1235), on other days: the kontakion of the day or of the saint.

During the Great Fast, instead of the kontakion, the following troparia are taken:

(Tone 4, samopodoben): Come to us in haste, O Christ our God,* before we become slaves of those who blaspheme You and threaten our lives.* With Your cross cut down those who make war against us;* let them know how strong is the orthodox faith.* Grant this through the prayers of the Mother of God,* for You alone are the Lover of mankind.

Glory be: O Teacher of wisdom, O Bestower of understanding,* O Instructor of the ignorant and Protector of the poor,* strengthen and teach my heart, O Master.* O Word of the Father, give me words,* and do not prevent my mouth from calling out to You:* I have fallen, have mercy on me, O merciful One.

Now and for ever: Let us with our hearts and lips continually extol* the most glorious Mother of God, holier than the heavenly angels,* and proclaim that she is truly the Theotokos,* for she has truly given birth to God in the flesh* and never ceases to intercede for our souls.

Lord, have mercy. (40x)

O Christ our God, in all times and places You are worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You are long-suffering and generous in Your mercy and compassion. You love the just and show mercy to the sinner, calling all people to repentance through the promise of blessings to come. Deem, O Lord, at this very hour, to receive our supplications and to direct our lives in the path of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies; set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all affliction, trouble, and distress; surround us with Your holy angels so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unspeakable glory. For You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

Lord, have mercy. (3x)
Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim and by far more glorious than the seraphim;* ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word,* O true Mother of God, we magnify you.

During the Paschal Season instead of "More honorable"
Shine in splendor, O New Jerusalem!* For the glory of the Lord is risen upon you.* O Zion, sing with joy and rejoice!* And you, pure Mother of God,* rejoice in the resurrection of your Son.

Give the blessing, Father, in the name of the Lord!
Priest: May God be merciful to us and bless us; may His countenance shine upon us, and may He have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

During the Great Fast the following prayer of St. Ephrem is recited:

O Lord and Master of my life, drive from me the spirit of indifference, despair, lust for power, and idle chatter. (Prostration)
Instead, bestow on me, Your servant, the spirit of integrity, humility, patience, and love. (Prostration)
Yes, O Lord and King, let me see my own sins and not judge my brothers and sisters; for you are blessed, now and for ever and ever. Amen. (Prostration)

God, be merciful to me a sinner. God, cleanse me of my sins and have mercy on me. I have sinned without number; forgive me, O Lord. (12 small bows)

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father.
Lord, have mercy (12x); and the prayer of the First Hour:

Prayer of the First Hour

O Christ, the true Light who enlightens and sanctifies everyone in the world, mark us with the light of Your countenance so that we may see the unapproachable radiance. Let our life be straight along the path of Your commandments, through the prayers of Your most pure Mother and of all Your saints. Amen.

If the next Hour is to follow, then begin: Come let us adore....; otherwise, the following dismissal is taken:

Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You!
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers; and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.

THIRD HOUR

Come, let us adore... (3x) – see page 150.

Psalm 16
(Monday and Thursday)

Lord, hear a cause that is just,* pay heed to my cry.
Turn Your ear to my prayer,* no deceit is on my lips.
From You may my judgment come forth.* Your eyes discern the truth.
You search my heart, You visit me by night.* You test me and You find in me no wrong.
My words are not sinful like human words.* I kept from violence because of Your word,
I kept my feet firmly in Your paths;* there was no faltering in my steps.
I am here and I call, You will hear me, O God.* Turn Your ear to me; hear my words.
Display Your great love,* You Whose right hand saves Your friends from those who rebel against them.
Guard me as the apple of Your eye.* Hide me in the shadow of Your wings from the violent attack of the wicked.
My foes encircle me with deadly intent.* Their hearts tight shut, their mouths speak proudly.
They advance against me,* and now they surround me.
Their eyes are watching to strike me to the ground, as though they were lions ready to claw* or like a young lion crouched in hiding.
Lord, arise, confront them, strike them down!* Let Your sword rescue my soul from the wicked;
Let Your hand, O Lord, rescue me from my enemy,* from those whose reward is in this present life.
You give them their fill of Your treasures;* they rejoice in abundance of offspring and leave their wealth to their children.
As for me, in my justice I shall see Your face and be filled,* when I awake, with the sight of Your glory.

Psalm 24
(Tuesday and Friday)

To You, O Lord, I lift up my soul;* I trust You.
Let me not be disappointed;* do not let my enemies triumph.
Those who hope in You shall not be disappointed,* but only those who wantonly break faith.
Lord, make me know Your ways* Lord, teach me Your paths.
Make me walk in Your truth, and teach me,* for You are God my Savior.
In You I hope all day long* because of Your goodness, O Lord.
Remember Your mercy, Lord,* and the love You have shown from of old.
Do not remember the sins of my youth.* In Your love remember me.
The Lord is good and upright.* He shows the path to those who stray,
He guides the humble in the right path,* He teaches His way to the poor.
His ways are faithfulness and love* for those who keep His covenant and will.
Lord, for the sake of Your name forgive my guilt,* for it is great.
To those who revere the Lord* He will show the path they should choose.
Their souls will live in happiness* and their children shall possess the land.
The Lord’s friendship is for those who revere Him;* to them He reveals His covenant.
My eyes are always on the Lord,* for He rescues my feet from the snare.
Turn to me and have mercy* for I am lonely and poor.
Relieve the anguish of my heart* and set me free from my distress.
See my affliction and my toil* and take all my sins away.
See how many are my foes,* how violent their hatred for me.
Preserve my life and rescue me.* Do not disappoint me, You are my refuge.
May innocence and uprightness protect me,* for my hope is in You, O Lord.
Redeem Israel, O God,* from all its distress.

Psalm 50
(Wednesday, Saturday, and Sunday)

Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness.* In Your compassion blot out my offense.
O wash me more and more from my guilt* and cleanse me from my sin.
My offenses truly I know them;* my sin is always before me.
Against You, You alone, have I sinned;* what is evil in Your sight I have done.
That You may be justified when You give sentence* and be without reproach when You judge.
O see, in guilt I was born,* a sinner was I conceived.
Indeed, You love truth in the heart;* then in the secret of my heart teach me wisdom.
O purify me, then I shall be clean;* O wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me hear rejoicing and gladness,* that the bones You have crushed may thrill.
From my sins turn away Your face* and blot out all my guilt.
A pure heart create for me, O God,* put a steadfast spirit within me.
Do not cast me away from Your presence,* nor deprive me of Your holy spirit.
Give me again the joy of Your help;* with a spirit of fervor sustain me.
That I may teach transgressors Your ways* and sinners may return to You.
O rescue me, God, my helper,* and my tongue shall ring out Your goodness.
O Lord, open my lips* and my mouth shall declare Your praise.
For in sacrifice You take no delight,* burnt offering from me You would refuse.
My sacrifice, a contrite spirit.* A humbled, contrite heart You will not spurn.
In Your goodness, show favor to Zion:* rebuild the walls of Jerusalem.
Then You will be pleased with lawful sacrifice, burnt offerings wholly consumed,* Then You will be offered young bulls on Your altar.

The choir concludes the psalms in the following manner:
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
Now and for ever, and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory to You, O God! (3x)
Lord, have mercy. (3x)

Then the prescribed troparion. During the Great Fast, (see below).

Now and for ever: O Mother of God, you are the true vine laden with the Fruit of Life;* wherefore, we implore you, O Lady,* to intercede together with the apostles and all the saints* that we may obtain mercy for our souls.

During the Great Fast, the following troparion is taken:

(Tone 6) At the third hour, O Lord,* You sent Your Holy Spirit to Your apostles.* Do not take Him from us, O gracious One,* but rather, renew Him within us as we pray to You.
Verse: A pure heart create for me, O God, put a steadfast spirit within me.
Verse: Do not cast me away from Your presence, nor deprive me of Your holy Spirit.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Mother of God... (see above)

Blessed is the Lord God! Blessed is the Lord day by day! May the God of our salvation* smooth our path. Our God is the God of salvation.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the kontakion.

During the Great Fast, instead of the kontakion, the following troparia are taken:

(Tone 8) Blessed are You, O Christ our God.* You filled the fishermen with wisdom,* sending down upon them the Holy Spirit.* Through them You have caught the whole world in your net.* O Lover of mankind, glory be to You!

Glory be: When the Most High descended and confused tongues,* He scattered the people;* but when He distributed the tongues of fire, He called all to unity.* Therefore, with one voice,* let us praise the most Holy Spirit.

Now and for ever: O most pure Mother of God,* you are a hope, a stronghold, and a refuge for Christians;* you are an unconquerable wall and a peaceful haven for the weary.* Through your unceasing intercession you are saving the world;* and we ask you to also remember us, O Virgin worthy of all praise.

Lord, have mercy (40x);

O Christ our God, in all times and places You are worshiped and glorified both in heaven and on earth. You are long-suffering and generous in Your mercy and compassion. You love the just and show mercy to the sinner, calling all people to repentance through the promise of blessings to come. Deem, O Lord, at this very hour, to receive our supplications and to direct our lives in the path of Your commandments. Sanctify our souls; purify our bodies; set aright our minds; cleanse our thoughts; deliver us from all affliction, trouble, and distress; surround us with Your holy angels so that, guided and guarded in their camp, we may attain oneness of faith and the knowledge of Your unspeakable glory. For You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

Lord, have mercy. (3x), Glory be, Now and for ever, More honorable... to the prayer of the First Hour, see p. 156.

Prayer of the Third Hour

O God our Master, almighty Father; only-begotten Son, Lord Jesus Christ; and You, O Holy Spirit, one God and one Might, have mercy on me a sinner, and save me, Your unworthy servant, according to the ways of Your wisdom. For You are blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

If the Sixth Hour is to follow, then immediately begin: Come, let us adore...; if not, then the small dismissal is taken:

Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You!
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers; and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.

SIXTH HOUR

Come, let us adore... (3x) – see page 150.

Psalm 53
(Monday and Thursday)

O God, save me by Your name;* by Your power, uphold my cause.
O God, hear my prayer;* listen to the words of my mouth.
For the proud have risen against me,* ruthless foes seek my life.
They have no regard for God.* But I have God for my help. The Lord upholds my life.
Let the evil recoil upon my foes;* You Who are faithful, destroy them.
I will sacrifice to You with willing heart* and praise Your name for it is good;
For You have rescued me from all my distress* and my eyes have seen the downfall of my foes.

Psalm 54
(Tuesday and Friday)

O God, listen to my prayer,* do not hide from my pleading,
Attend to me and reply; with my cares, I cannot rest.* I tremble at the shouts of the foe, at the cries of the wicked;
For they bring down evil upon me.* They assail me with fury.
My heart is stricken within me,* death’s terror is on me,
Trembling and fear fall upon me* and horror overwhelms me.
O that I had wings like a dove* to fly away and be at rest.
So I would escape far away* and take refuge in the desert.
I would hasten to find a shelter from the raging wind,* from the destructive storm, O Lord, and from their plotting tongues.
For I can see nothing but violence and strife in the city.* Night and day they patrol high on the city walls.
It is full of wickedness and evil, it is full of sin.* Its streets are never free from tyranny and deceit.
If this had been done by an enemy* then I could bear it.
If a rival had risen against me,* then I could hide.
But it is you,* my own companion, my intimate friend!
How close was the friendship between us.* We walked together in harmony in the house of God.
May death fall suddenly upon them!* Let them go to the grave;
For wickedness dwells in their home* and deep in their hearts.
As for me, I will cry to God* and the Lord will save me.
Evening, morning and at noon I will cry and lament,* and He will hear my voice.
God will deliver my soul in peace in the attack against me,* for those who fight me are many, but He hears my voice
God will hear and will humble them,* the eternal judge;
For they will not amend their ways.* They have no fear of God.
The traitor has turned against me;* has broken our pact, with speech softer than butter, but war within the heart.
With words smoother than oil* though they are naked swords.
Entrust your cares to the Lord and He will support you.* He will never allow the just one to stumble.
But You, O God, will bring them down to the pit of death.* The bloodthirsty and the deceitful shall not live half their lives. O Lord, I will trust in You.

Psalm 90
(Wednesday, Saturday, and Sunday)

Those who dwell in the shelter of the Most High* and abide in the shade of the Almighty
Say to the Lord: My refuge, my stronghold,* my God in whom I trust!
It is He Who will free you from the snare of the fowler* who seeks to destroy you;
He will conceal you with His pinions* and under His wings you will find refuge.
You will not fear the terror of the night* nor the arrow that flies by day,
Nor the plague that prowls in the darkness* nor the scourge that lays waste at noon.
A thousand may fall at your side, ten thousand fall at your right,* you, it will never approach,* His faithfulness is buckler and shield.
Your eyes have only to look to see* how the wicked are repaid.
You who have said: Lord, my refuge!* and have made the Most High your dwelling
Upon you no evil shall fall,* no plague approach where you dwell.
For you He has commanded His angels,* to keep you in all your ways.
They shall bear you upon their hands* lest you strike your foot against a stone.
On the lion and the viper you will tread* and trample the young lion and the dragon.
You set your love on Me so I will save you,* protect you for you know My name.
When you call I shall answer: I am with you,* I will save you in distress and give you glory.
With length of days I will content you;* I shall let you see my saving power.

The choir concludes the psalms in the following manner:
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
Now and for ever, and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x)
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Then the troparion, according to the typicon. During the Great Fast, see below.

Now and for ever: Since we have no one in whom to confide because of our many sins,* O Virgin Mother of God, intercede for us with the One Who was born of you;* for a mother’s prayer is a powerful means for obtaining the Master’s favor.* You are most worthy of veneration, so do not turn away from the pleading of us sinners;* for the One Who willed to suffer in the flesh for our sake is full of mercy,* and His power is sufficient to save us.

During the Great Fast, the following troparion is taken:

(Tone 6) O Lord, on the sixth day and at the sixth hour* You nailed to the cross the sin which Adam presumed to commit in paradise.* Now also tear up the list of our iniquities and save us,* O Christ our God.
Verse: O God, listen to my prayer,* do not hide from my pleading.
Verse: As for me, I will cry to God,* and the Lord will save me.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Since we have no one... (see above).

Troparion of the Prophecy, Wisdom! Let us be attentive! First prokimenon and verse. Priest: Wisdom! Announce the reading from the Old Testament. Priest: Let us be attentive! Reading, and then second prokimenon and verse.

Let Your bounties, O Lord, come down upon us in haste, for our need has become great indeed. Help us, O God our Savior, for the glory of Your name. Save us, O Master, and forgive our sins for the sake of Your name.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the kontakion.

During the Great Fast, instead of the kontakion, the following troparia are sung:

(Tone 2) In the middle of the earth You brought about our salvation;* upon the cross You stretched out Your most pure hands* to gather all the nations who sing to You:* O Lord, glory be to You.

Glory be: We bow before Your sacred image, O gracious Lord,* and beg forgiveness for our offenses, O Christ our God;* for You, of your own free will, deigned to ascend the Cross in Your human nature* to deliver from the bondage of the Enemy those whom You have created.* Therefore, we gratefully cry out to You:* Through Your coming to save the world,* O Savior, You have filled all with joy.

Now and for ever: O Mother of God, fount of mercy;* deem us worthy of compassion.* Look upon a sinful people; as always show your power.* For, placing our trust in you, we cry out to you: Hail!* as once did Gabriel, the prince of angels.

On Wednesday and Friday, instead of O Mother of God... the following:

Now and for ever: We praise you, O Mother of God, more glorious than all others;* Death was put to death, and Hades was crushed by the cross of your Son;* He raised us from death and granted us eternal life.* Paradise is again opened, for us to enjoy as before.* Therefore, in thanksgiving we glorify the love and power of Christ our God.

Lord, have mercy (40x); Prayer: “O Christ our God ...” all the rest as in the First Hour to the prayer of the First Hour, (see p. 155 ff.), then:

Prayer of the Sixth Hour

O God, Lord of Powers and Maker of the whole creation, through Your compassion beyond our understanding, You sent down Your only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, for the salvation of our race. Through His cross He cancelled the debt of our sins and triumphed over the powers and masters of darkness. Now accept from us sinners these prayers of thanksgiving and petition, and preserve us from any deadly fall in the darkness and against every visible and invisible enemy who may seek our harm. Pierce our bodies with fear of You, and let not our souls fall into evil words or thoughts, but, instead, wound them with longing for You so that, looking upon You at all times and guided by the light that emanates from You, we may contemplate the unapproachable eternal light. May we ever address our thanksgiving and worship to You, O eternal Father, and to Your only-begotten Son, and to Your all-holy, gracious, and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

If the Ninth Hour is to follow, then begin immediately: Come, let us adore...; otherwise, the small dismissal is taken:

Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You!
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers; and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.

NINTH HOUR

Come, let us adore... (3x) – see page 150.

Psalm 83
(Monday and Thursday)

How lovely is Your dwelling-place,* Lord, God of hosts.
My soul is longing and yearning,* is yearning for the courts of the Lord.
My heart and my soul ring out their joy to God,* the living God.
The sparrow herself finds a home and the swallow a nest for her brood;* she lays her young by Your altars,
Lord of hosts,* my king and my God.
They are happy, who dwell in Your house,* forever singing Your praise.
They are happy, whose strength is in You,* in whose hearts are the roads to Zion.
As they go through the Bitter Valley they make it a place of springs,* the autumn rain covers it with blessings.
They walk with ever-growing strength,* they will see the God of gods in Zion.
O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer,* give ear, O God of Jacob.
Turn Your eyes, O God, our shield,* look on the face of Your anointed.
One day within Your courts* is better than a thousand elsewhere.
The threshold of the house of God* I prefer to the dwellings of the wicked.
For the Lord God is a rampart, a shield;* He will give us His favor and glory.
The Lord will not refuse any good* to those who walk without blame.
Lord, God of hosts,* happy are those who trust in You!

Psalm 84
(Tuesday and Friday)

O Lord, You once favored Your land* and revived the fortunes of Jacob,
You forgave the guilt of Your people* and covered all their sins.
You averted all Your rage, You calmed the heat of Your anger.* Revive us now, God, our helper!
Put an end to Your grievance against us.* Will You be angry with us forever, will Your anger never cease?
Will You not restore again our life* that Your people may rejoice in You?
Let us see, O Lord, Your mercy* and give us Your saving help.
I will hear what the Lord God has to say,* a voice that speaks of peace,
Peace for His people and His friends* and those who turn to Him in their hearts.
His help is near for those who fear Him* and His glory will dwell in our land.
Mercy and faithfulness have met;* justice and peace have embraced.
Faithfulness shall spring from the earth* and justice look down from heaven.
The Lord will make us prosper* and our earth shall yield its fruit.
Justice shall march before Him* and peace shall follow His steps.

Psalm 85
(Wednesday, Saturday, and Sunday)

Turn Your ear, O Lord, and give answer* for I am poor and needy.
Preserve my life, for I am faithful;* save the servant who trusts in You.
You are my God, have mercy on me, Lord,* for I cry to You all the day long.
Give joy to Your servant, O Lord,* for to You I lift up my soul.
O Lord You are good and forgiving,* full of love to all who call.
Give heed, O Lord, to my prayer* and attend to the sound of my voice.
In the day of distress I will call* and surely You will reply.
Among the gods there is none like You, O Lord,* nor work to compare with Yours.
All the nations shall come to adore You* and glorify Your name, O Lord,
For You are great and do marvelous deeds,* You Who alone are God.
Show me, Lord, Your way so that I may walk in Your truth.* Guide my heart to fear Your name.
I will praise You, Lord my God, with all my heart* and glorify Your name forever;
For Your love to me has been great,* You have saved me from the depths of the grave.
The proud have risen against me;* ruthless enemies seek my life; to You, they pay no heed.
But You, God of mercy and compassion,* slow to anger, O Lord,
Abounding in love and truth* turn and take pity on me.
O give Your strength to Your servant* and save Your handmaid’s child.
Show me a sign of Your favor that my foes may see to their shame* that You console me and give me Your help.

The choir concludes the psalms in the following manner:
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
Now and for ever, and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory to You, O God! (3x)
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Then Glory be: the troparion, according to the typicon, usually Patron of the Church; during the Great Fast, see below.

Now and for ever: O gracious Lord, for our sake You were born of the Virgin and were crucified.* You crushed Death by Your death,* and, being God, brought forth the resurrection.* Do not turn away from those You have made with Your own hands;* but reveal instead Your love to us, O Lord of mercy.* Accept as intercessor the Virgin Mother of God who gave You birth.* O our Savior, save a desperate people.

If it is the Great Fast, the following troparion is taken:

(Tone 8) O Lord, Who, for our sake, endured bodily death at the ninth hour, subdue the passions of our flesh, O Christ our God, and save us.
Verse: Lord, let my cry come before You; teach me by Your word.
Verse: Let my pleading come before You: save me by Your promise.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O gracious Lord... (see above).

For the sake of Your holy name, do not abandon us forever;* do not forget Your covenant.* For the sake of Abraham the trustful one,* Isaac Your servant, and Israel Your holy one,* do not take Your mercies away from us.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the kontakion.

During the Great Fast, instead of the kontakion, the following troparia are taken:

(Tone 8) Seeing the Prince of life hanging on the cross,* the good thief cried out in faith:* If the One crucified with us were not God incarnate,* the sun would not have hid its rays, nor would the earth have shaken with terror.* O Lord, You endure all this patiently,* remember me in Your kingdom.

Glory be: Your cross was set up on Calvary,* the balance of justice between two thieves;* the one was carried down to Hades by the weight of his blasphemy;* the other was lightened from his sins and ascended to the knowledge of God.* O Christ our God, glory to You.

Now and for ever: Seeing upon the cross, the Lamb, the Shepherd and the Savior of the world,* she who gave You birth, said amidst her tears:* The world rejoices to see its redemption,* and my heart is spent at the sight of the crucifixion, which You endured for us,* O my Son and my God.

Lord, have mercy (40x); Prayer: “O Christ our God ...” the rest as in the First Hour to the concluding prayer; then, during the Great Fast, and if the Typica is to follow, then immediately begin: Remember us, O Lord..., (p. 179); if not, then the priest says following prayer of the Ninth Hour:

Prayer of the Ninth Hour

O Master, Lord Jesus Christ, You patiently endured our sins and led us to this very hour at which You were hung upon the life-giving wood. You opened a way to paradise for the penitent thief, and crushed Death by Your death. Now forgive the trespasses that we Your servants have committed, unworthy sinners that we are. We have sinned indeed and transgressed Your law. We are unworthy even to lift up our eyes to heaven, for we have abandoned the path of Your holiness and pursued the desires of our hearts. But now we implore Your immense goodness: Spare us, O Lord, in the multitude of Your mercies; save us for the sake of Your most holy name: Our days were spent in vanity; wrest us from the hands of our enemy, and forgive our sins. Subdue in us the cravings of our flesh, so that, after putting off the old, we may put on the new and live for You, our Lord and Benefactor; and that, obeying Your commandments, we may reach eternal repose in the place where all the blessed abide; for You are truly joy and delight to those who love You, O Christ our God. We send up glory to You, and to Your eternal Father, and to your all-holy, gracious, and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You.
Choir: Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.
Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing.
Priest: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother; of our venerable and God-bearing fathers; and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.

THE TYPICA

Outside of the Great Fast, this service may begin immediately after the prayer of the Sixth Hour; however, during the Great Fast – see the Ninth Hour. During the Great Fast, Psalms 102, 145, and Only-Begotten Son are omitted. Immediately begin: Remember us, O Lord...

Psalm 102 (see p. 110).

(After the Psalm) Glory be: Now and for ever: My soul, give thanks to the Lord;* all my being, bless His holy name. My soul, give thanks to the Lord!

Psalm 145

My soul, give praise to the Lord;* I will praise the Lord all my days, make music to my God while I live.
Put no trust in princes,* in mortals in whom there is no help.
Take their breath, they return to clay,* and their plans that day come to nothing.
He is happy who is helped by Jacob’s God,* whose hope is in the Lord his God;
Who alone made heaven and earth,* the seas and all they contain.
It is He Who keeps faith forever,* Who is just to those who are oppressed.
It is He Who gives bread to the hungry,* the Lord, Who sets prisoners free.
The Lord Who gives sight to the blind,* Who raises up those who are bowed down.
The Lord, Who protects the stranger* and upholds the widow and orphan.
It is the Lord Who loves the just* but thwarts the path of the wicked.
The Lord will reign forever,* Zion’s God, from age to age.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O only-begotten Son and Word of God, Who, being immortal, deigned for our salvation to become incarnate of the holy Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, and became man without change; You were also crucified, O Christ our God, and by death have trampled Death. Being One of the Holy Trinity, glorified with the Father and the Holy Spirit, save us.

The Beatitudes

Remember us, O Lord,* when You come into Your kingdom.
Blessed are the poor in spirit,* for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

(During the Great Fast, we add to each of the verses: When You come into Your kingdom, remember us, O Lord).

Blessed are they who mourn,* for they will be comforted.
Blessed are the meek,* for they will inherit the land.
Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness,* for they will be satisfied.
Blessed are the merciful,* for they will be shown mercy.
Blessed are the clean of heart;* for they will see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers;* they will be called children of God.
Blessed are they who are persecuted for the sake of righteousness,* for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are you when they insult you and persecute you,* and utter every kind of evil against you because of me.
Rejoice and be glad, for your reward will be great in heaven.

Outside of the Great Fast, the following verses are also taken:

Remember me, O Lord, when You come into Your kingdom,* and save me, for You alone love mankind.
Accept my repentance, O Christ, just as You accepted the tears of Peter,* and grant me forgiveness of sins.
I implore you, O baptizer and forerunner of the Lord, who preached repentance to the people,* help me to repent.
Since you are the blessed ones who have passed through the storm of passions, O saints,* deliver those who are sailing through the storm of pain.
Glory be: O my Savior, Whom the prophets sincerely and unceasingly glorified in the Trinity,* save me through the prayers of the forerunner.
Now and for ever: O mediatrix, hope of those who are in distress,* deliver me from the anxieties of this life and save me, O blessed Lady.

Then the Epistle to the Colossians (3:12-16) and the Gospel according to St. Mark (8:34 - 9:1) are read:

During the Great Fast

Remember us, O Lord,* when You come into Your kingdom.
Remember us, O Master,* when You come into Your kingdom.
Remember us, O Holy One,* when You come into Your kingdom.
The heavenly choirs sing to You and say:* holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts. Heaven and earth are full of Your glory.
Verse: Approach and be enlightened;* you will not be made to blush.
Again: The heavenly choirs sing to You....
Glory be: The choir of holy angels and archangels,* with all the powers of heaven, sings to You, saying:* Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts.* Heaven and earth are full of Your glory.
Now and for ever: I believe in one God... (p. 48).

Remit, pardon, and forgive, O God, our transgressions, voluntary and involuntary, whether of word or deed, committed knowingly or through human frailty, committed by day or night, committed willfully and knowingly. Forgive us all, for You are gracious and You love mankind.

Our Father... then, on feasts take the kontakion of the feast; but on other days the kontakion of the patron-saint of the church, of the day, and of the saint of the day are taken; then immediately:

Glory be: (Tone 8, kontakion): To the souls of Your servants, O Christ,* grant rest among the saints,* where there is no pain, no sorrow, no mourning,* but only life without end.

Now and for ever: O gentle protectress of Christians,* unfailing mediatrix before the Creator,* do not despise the prayerful voices of sinners;* but in your goodness hasten to assist those who cry out to you:* Inspire us to prayer, and hasten to hear our supplication,* intercede always, Mother of God, in behalf of those who honor you.

Lord, have mercy. (12x).

The rest as on pp. 41-42: O all-holy Trinity...; Blessed is the name of the Lord...; Psalm 33; It is truly right...; Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing - and the dismissal.

During the Great Fast, then immediately after O gentle protectress...: we take Lord, have mercy (40x); Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim...; the rest as in the First Hour to the concluding prayer; then, the prayer of the Ninth Hour, and the dismissal.