RESURRECTION GOSPELS, EXAPOSTILARIA AND GOSPEL STICHERA

First Gospel: Mt 28: 16-20

[At that time,] the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain to which Jesus had ordered them. When they saw him, they worshiped, but they doubted. Then Jesus approached and said to them, "All power in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go, therefore, and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, until the end of the age." [Amen.]

Exapostilarion:
O faithful, let us gather with the disciples on the mountain in Galilee* to behold Christ as He says to them:* I have received all power over all things on high and those below.* Let us learn how He taught them to baptize all nations* in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,* and how He promised His disciples* to be present with them to the end of the world.

Glory be: Now and for ever: You rejoiced with the disciples, O Virgin Mother of God, * for you beheld Christ risen from the tomb on the third day as He said.* He appeared to His disciples, teaching them and revealing things sublime.* He commanded them to baptize the believers* in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit* so that we may believe in His resurrection* and that we may glorify you, O Theotokos.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 1): The Lord appeared to His disciples* who had hastened to the mountain for His ascension from here below,* and they bowed before Him.* They learned of His universal power* and were sent to all the peoples of the earth* to announce His resurrection from the dead* and His return from earth to heaven.* He also promised to be with them always,* and His word is truth;* for He is Christ our God, the Savior of our souls.

Second Gospel: Mk. 16: 1-8

[At that time,] when the sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary, the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so that they might go and anoint him. Very early when the sun had risen, on the first day of the week, they came to the tomb. They were saying to one another, "Who will roll back the stone for us from the entrance to the tomb?" When they looked up, they saw that the stone had been rolled back; it was very large. On entering the tomb they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a white robe, and they were utterly amazed. He said to them, "Do not be amazed! You seek Jesus of Nazareth, the crucified. He has been raised; he is not here. Behold, the place where they laid him. But go and tell his disciples and, Peter, 'He is going before you to Galilee; there you will see him, as he told you.'" Then they went out and fled from the tomb, seized with trembling and bewilderment. They said nothing to anyone, for they were afraid.

Exapostilarion:
When the myrrh-bearing women saw the stone rolled away, they rejoiced;* for they saw a young man sitting at the grave who said to them:* Behold, Christ is risen!* Say to Peter, the disciple of the Lord:* Hasten to the mountain in Galilee;* there you shall see Christ* as He had said to His friends.

Glory be: Now and for ever: At the time of Your conception, O Lord,* an angel said to the Virgin: Rejoice!* At the time of Your resurrection* an angel also rolled the stone away from Your glorious tomb.* Instead of sadness and death one proclaimed signs of joy;* the other announced You as the Source of life* extolling Your resurrection to the disciples and the women.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 2): They who were with Mary came and brought ointments,* but they wondered how they would achieve their goal.* However, they saw that the stone had already been rolled away,* and a divine angel appeared and gave peace to their troubled souls.* He said: The Lord Jesus has risen.* Therefore, proclaim to His disciples* that they should hasten to Galilee and behold Him risen from the dead;* for He is the Lord, the Giver of life.

Third Gospel: Mk. 16: 9-20

[At that time,] when Jesus had risen, early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had driven seven demons. She went and told his companions who were mourning and weeping. When they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her, they did not believe. After this she appeared in another form to two of them walking along on their way to the country. They returned and told the others; but they did not believe them either. [But] later, as the eleven were at table, he appeared to them and rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart because they had not believed those who saw him after he had been raised. He said to them, "Go into the whole world and proclaim the gospel to every creature. Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved; whoever does not believe will be condemned. These signs will accompany those who believe: in my name they will drive out demons, they will speak new languages. They will pick up serpents [with their hands], and if they drink any deadly thing, it will not harm them. They will lay hands on the sick, and they will recover." So then the Lord Jesus, after he spoke to them, was taken up into heaven and took his seat at the right hand of God. But they went forth and preached everywhere, while the Lord worked with them and confirmed the word through accompanying signs. [And they reported all the instructions briefly to Peter's companions. Afterwards Jesus himself, through them, sent forth from east to west the sacred and imperishable proclamation of eternal salvation. Amen.]

Exapostilarion:
Truly Christ is risen.* Let no one doubt or be suspicious.* For He appeared to Mary and then to those who went fishing.* Then He appeared to His eleven apostles as they were eating.* He sent them forth to baptize the whole world;* then He ascended to heaven from which He had descended,* confirming His divine message by a multitude of miracles.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Sun that has risen from the tomb on this day* as a groom from His bridal chamber,* You led Hades captive and trampled Death.* By the intercession of Your Mother,* send us light to enlighten our hearts and souls* and lead us that we may all walk* in the way of Your commandments and in the paths of peace.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 3): The disciples were rebuked for the hardness of their hearts* because they doubted when Mary Magdalene proclaimed to them* the resurrection of the Savior and His appearance to her.* But when they were strengthened with miracles and wonders,* they were sent out to preach.* And when You, O Lord, ascended to Your Father, the Source of all light,* the disciples preached throughout the world* verifying their words with wonders and miracles.* Therefore, we who were enlightened by them,* glorify Your resurrection from the dead, O Lover of mankind.

Fourth Gospel: Lk. 24: 1-12

[At that time,] at daybreak on the first day of the week [the women] took the spices they had prepared and went to the tomb. They found the stone rolled away from the tomb; but when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus. While they were puzzling over this, behold, two men in dazzling garments appeared to them. They were terrified and bowed their faces to the ground. They said to them, "Why do you seek the living one among the dead? He is not here, but he has been raised. Remember what he said to you while he was still in Galilee, that the Son of Man must be handed over to sinners and be crucified, and rise on the third day." And they remembered his words. Then they returned from the tomb and announced all these things to the eleven and to all the others. The women were Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the mother of James; the others who accompanied them also told this to the apostles, but their story seemed like nonsense and they did not believe them. But Peter got up and ran to the tomb, bent down, and saw the burial cloths alone; then he went home amazed at what had happened.

Exapostilarion:
Resplendent with virtues* let us behold the men standing in brilliant clothes inside the grave,* giving life to the saddened myrrh-bearing women.* Let us learn of the resurrection of the Lord of heaven* and hasten with Peter to the tomb of life.* Let us stand before His wondrous resurrection* and contemplate the marvels of Christ.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Lord, when You told the myrrh-bearing women to rejoice,* You ended the sadness of our first parents,* and You brought the joy of the resurrection into the world.* Therefore, O Giver of life* by the prayers of the One who gave You birth,* send the light of Your love to shine in our hearts,* that we may cry to You: O Lover of mankind and our God,* glory to Your resurrection!

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 4): The women came at early dawn to Your tomb, O Christ,* but they did not find Your venerable body.* As they were perplexed, an angel in shining clothes said to them:* Why do you seek the Living among the dead?* He is risen as He foretold.* Have you forgotten what He said?* Being assured by the words of the angel,* the women preached to the disciples about the things they saw.* But their good news was received with ridicule;* for the disciples were still without understanding.* Peter, however, hastened to Your tomb* and then glorified Your wonders, O Lord.

Fifth Gospel: Lk: 24:12-35

[At that time,] Peter got up and ran to the tomb, bent down, and saw the burial cloths alone; then he went home amazed at what had happened. Now that very day two of them were going to a village seven miles from Jerusalem called Emmaus, and they were conversing about all the things that had occurred. And it happened that while they were conversing and debating, Jesus himself drew near and walked with them, but their eyes were prevented from recognizing him. He asked them, "What are you discussing as you walk along?" They stopped, looking downcast. One of them, named Cleopas, said to him in reply, "Are you the only visitor to Jerusalem who does not know of the things that have taken place there in these days?" And he replied to them, "What sort of things?" They said to him, "The things that happened to Jesus the Nazarene, who was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people, how our chief priests and rulers both handed him over to a sentence of death and crucified him. But we were hoping that he would be the one to redeem Israel; and besides all this, it is now the third day since this took place. Some women from our group, however, have astounded us: they were at the tomb early in the morning and did not find his body; they came back and reported that they had indeed seen a vision of angels who announced that he was alive. Then some of those with us went to the tomb and found things just as the women had described, but him they did not see." And he said to them, "Oh, how foolish you are! How slow of heart to believe all that the prophets spoke! Was it not necessary that the Messiah should suffer these things and enter into his glory?" Then beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted to them what referred to him in all the scriptures. As they approached the village to which they were going, he gave the impression that he was going on farther. But they urged him, "Stay with us, for it is nearly evening and the day is almost over." So he went in to stay with them. And it happened that, while he was with them at table, he took bread, said the blessing, broke it, and gave it to them. With that their eyes were opened and they recognized him, but he vanished from their sight. Then they said to each other, "Were not our hearts burning [within us], while he spoke to us on the way and opened the scriptures to us?" So they set out at once and returned to Jerusalem where they found gathered together the eleven and those with them who were saying, "The Lord has truly been raised and has appeared to Simon!" Then the two recounted what had taken place on the way and how he was made known to them in the breaking of the bread.

Exapostilarion:
Christ our Way and our Life, * after His resurrection from the dead, * accompanied Luke and Cleopas, * who had recognized Him at Emmaus in the breaking of the bread.* Their hearts and souls were inflamed as He spoke to them on the way, * explaining to them all the Scriptures that pertained to Him.* Let us, therefore, shout with them, saying:* Truly, the Lord is risen and has appeared to Peter.

Glory be: Now and for ever: I praise Your love without limit, O my Creator;* for You emptied Yourself to put on our broken nature to save us.* O all-compassionate Lord, even though You are God, You consented for my sake to be born into our human condition* and to descend into Hades to save us,* through the intercession of Your most pure Mother.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 5): How wise are Your judgments, O Christ!* You granted Peter the understanding of Your resurrection by the burial wrappings alone.* Even though You accompanied Luke and Cleopas and conversed with them,* yet You did not reveal Yourself.* You were taunted by them as though You alone were a stranger in Jerusalem,* not knowing what had recently happened there.* But since You ordained all things for the good of each,* You explained to them what the prophets had spoken concerning You.* In the breaking of the bread they recognized You* because their hearts were already burning with the desire to know You.* When they came together with the disciples,* they proclaimed openly Your divine resurrection* by which we ask that You have mercy upon us.

Sixth Gospel: Lk. 24: 36-53

[At that time, when Jesus rose from the dead,] he stood in their midst and said to them, "Peace be with you." But they were startled and terrified and thought that they were seeing a ghost. Then he said to them, "Why are you troubled? And why do questions arise in your hearts? Look at my hands and my feet, that it is I myself. Touch me and see, because a ghost does not have flesh and bones as you can see I have." And as he said this, he showed them his hands and his feet. While they were still incredulous for joy and were amazed, he asked them, "Have you anything here to eat?" They gave him a piece of baked fish; he took it and ate it in front of them. He said to them, "These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you, that everything written about me in the law of Moses and in the prophets and psalms must be fulfilled." Then he opened their minds to understand the scriptures. And he said to them, "Thus it is written that the Messiah would suffer and rise from the dead on the third day and that repentance, for the forgiveness of sins, would be preached in his name to all the nations, beginning from Jerusalem. You are witnesses of these things. And [behold] I am sending the promise of my Father upon you; but stay in the city until you are clothed with the power from on high." Then he led them [out] as far as Bethany, raised his hands, and blessed them. As he blessed them he parted from them and was taken up in heaven. They did him homage and then returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and they were continually in the temple praising God.

Exapostilarion:
After Your resurrection from the grave, O Savior, * You revealed Your human nature as You stood in the midst of the disciples; * You ate with them and taught them the baptism of repentance.* Then You ascended to Your Father and promised to send them the Paraclete.* Therefore, O Lover of mankind and God most high, * glory to Your holy resurrection!

Glory be: Now and for ever: The Author of all creation and the God of all* took a human body from your pure womb, O holy Virgin.* He renewed our nature which had been corrupt, * preserving Your virginity after birthgiving as you were before. * Therefore, we all praise you in faith and exclaim:* Rejoice, O Queen of the whole world!

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 6): Since You are the true peace of God for us, O Christ,* You gave Your peace to Your disciples after Your resurrection.* They were frightened when they thought that they were beholding a spirit.* But You removed the anxiety of their hearts when You showed them Your hands and feet,* yet they were still in doubt.* But when You took food with them, reminding them of Your preaching,* You opened their minds to understand the Scriptures.* You made the eternal covenant with them;* You, blessed them and rose, ascending into heaven. Therefore, with them, we worship You;* O Lord, glory to You!

Seventh Gospel: Jn. 20: 1-10

[At that time,] on the first day of the week, Mary of Magdala came to the tomb early in the morning, while it was still dark, and saw the stone removed from the tomb. So she ran and went to Simon Peter and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and told them, "They have taken the Lord from the tomb, and we don't know where they put him." So Peter and the other disciple went out and came to the tomb. They both ran, but the other disciple ran faster than Peter and arrived at the tomb first; he bent down and saw the burial cloths there, but did not go in. When Simon Peter arrived after him, he went into the tomb and saw the burial cloths there, and the cloth that had covered his head, was not with the burial cloths but rolled up in a separate place. Then the other disciple also went in, the one who had arrived at the tomb first, and he saw and believed. For they did not yet understand the scripture that he had to rise from the dead. Then the disciples returned home.

Exapostilarion:
When Mary Magdalene said they have carried away my Lord,* Peter and the other disciple whom Jesus loved hastened to the grave.* They both came and found the wrappings inside the tomb,* and the cloth, which was on His head, lying aside.* The disciples remained silent until they truly beheld Christ.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O most merciful Christ, * You performed wondrous deeds for my sake.* You were born of a virgin Maiden in a manner beyond description;* You suffered the crucifixion and death;* and You rose in glory, releasing our nature from death.* Therefore, glory to Your majesty and power, O Christ.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 7): Behold the end of night and dawn of day.* Why have you stood at the grave, O Mary?* Great darkness covered your mind, so you asked the angel:* Where has Jesus been placed?* Behold, the disciples who hastened to the tomb* saw a sign of His resurrection in the burial wrappings and the cloth* and remembered what was said about Him in the Scriptures.* Therefore, we who believe through them* praise You, O Christ, the Giver of life.

Eighth Gospel: Jn. 20:11-18

[At that time,] Mary stayed outside the tomb weeping. And as she wept, she bent over into the tomb and saw two angels in white sitting there, one at the head and one at the feet where the body of Jesus had been. And they said to her, "Woman, why are you weeping?" She said to them, "They have taken my Lord, and I don't know where they laid him." When she had said this, she turned around and saw Jesus there, but did not know it was Jesus. Jesus said to her, "Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you looking for?" She thought it was the gardener and said to him, "Sir, if you carried him away, tell me where you laid him, and I will take him." Jesus said to her, "Mary!" She turned and said to him in Hebrew, "Rabbouni," which means Teacher. Jesus said to her, "Stop holding on to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers and tell them, 'I am going to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.'" Mary of Magdala went and announced to the disciples, "I have seen the Lord," and what he told her.

Exapostilarion:
When Mary saw two angels inside the grave,* she was seized with fright.* She did not recognize Christ but thought that He was the gardener;* she said to Him: "Sir, where have You placed the body of Jesus?"* She knew from His voice that He was the Savior,* and she obeyed Him when He said:* "Touch Me not for I am going to My Father.* Tell this to My disciples."

Glory be: Now and for ever: You have given birth, O Virgin,* to one of the Trinity in a manner beyond description,* dual in nature, dual in will, but one in Person.* Therefore, always beseech Him for those who honor you in faith,* that we may escape the temptations of the enemy;* for in you we now seek refuge, O Theotokos.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 8): The warm tears of Mary were not shed in vain;* for behold, she has been worthy to hear the angels* and to behold Your face, O. Jesus.* But being a woman still thinking of earthly things,* she was not permitted to touch You, O Christ.* However, she was sent to proclaim to Your disciples the good news announcing Your return to Your heavenly inheritance.* With her, therefore, make us worthy to see You, O Lord.

Ninth Gospel: Jn. 20:19-31

[At that time, ] on the evening of the first day of the week, when the doors were locked, where the disciples were, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in their midst and said to them, "Peace be with you." When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord. [Jesus] said to them again, "Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me, so I send you." And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them, "Receive the holy Spirit. Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them, and whose sins you retain are retained." Thomas called Didymus, one of the Twelve, was not with them when Jesus came. So the other disciples said to him, "We have seen the Lord." But he said to them, "Unless I see the mark of the nails in his hands and put my finger into the nailmarks and put my hand into his side, I will not believe." Now a week later his disciples were again inside and Thomas was with them. Jesus came, although the doors were locked, and stood in their midst and said, "Peace be with you." Then he said to Thomas, "Put your finger here and see my hands, and bring your hand and put it into my side, and do not be unbelieving, but believe." Thomas answered and said to him, "My Lord and my God!" Jesus said to him, "Have you come to believe because you have seen me? Blessed are those who have not seen and have believed." Now Jesus did many other signs in the presence of [his] disciples that are not written in this book. But these are written that you may [come to] believe that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God, and that through this belief you may have life in his name.

Exapostilarion:
Though the doors were locked, O Lord, * You entered and filled Your apostles with the Holy Spirit,* and breathing over them, You gave them Your peace.* You said to them: Whose sins you forgive, they are forgiven;* whose sins you bind, they are bound.* After eight days You showed Thomas Your hands and Your side.* With them, therefore, we cry to You: You are my Lord and my God!

Glory be: Now and for ever: When you beheld your Son risen from the tomb after three days,* O most holy Virgin bride of God, * you put away all sorrow* which you had borne as a Mother when you beheld Him suffering.* Now that your soul is filled with joy* you sing hymns of praise together with the disciples.* Now save those who proclaim you as the Mother of God.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 5): In the fullness of time, O Christ, * You appeared among Your beloved ones on the Sabbath evening.* And through a new wonder, * You confirmed Your resurrection from the dead* by Your entrance while the doors were closed.* You filled the disciples with joy, * granting them the Holy Spirit and bestowing on them power to forgive sins!* As for Thomas, You did not permit him to drown in the depths of faithlessness.* Therefore, grant us the knowledge of the truth* and forgiveness of sins, O compassionate Lord.

Tenth Gospel: Jn 21:1-14

[At that time,] Jesus revealed himself again to his disciples at the Sea of Tiberias. He revealed himself in this way. Together were Simon Peter, Thomas called Didymus, Nathanael from Cana in Galilee, Zebedee's sons, and two others of his disciples. Simon Peter said to them, "I am going fishing." They said to him, "We also will come with you." So they went out and got into the boat, but that night they caught nothing. When it was already dawn, Jesus was standing on the shore; but the disciples did not realize that it was Jesus. Jesus said to them, "Children, have you caught anything to eat?" They answered him, "No." So he said to them, "Cast the net over the right side of the boat and you will find something." So they cast it, and were not able to pull it in because of the number of fish. So the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, "It is the Lord." When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he tucked in his garment, for he was lightly clad, and jumped into the sea. The other disciples came in the boat, for they were not far from shore, only about a hundred yards, dragging the net with the fish. When they climbed out on shore, they saw a charcoal fire with fish on it and bread. Jesus said to them, "Bring some of the fish you just caught." So Simon Peter went over and dragged the net to the shore full of one hundred and fifty-three large fish. Even though there were so many, the net was not torn. Jesus said to them, "Come, have breakfast." And none of the disciples dared to ask him, "Who are you?" because they realized it was the Lord. Jesus came over and took the bread and gave it to them, and in like manner the fish. This was now the third time Jesus was revealed to his disciples after being raised from the dead.

Exapostilarion:
The two sons of Zebedee, with Peter, Nathaniel, and Thomas, and two others were fishing in the Lake of Tiberias.* By the command of Christ, they cast the net on the right side* and drew out many fish.* Peter, recognizing Christ, came swimming toward Him.* This was the third appearance of the Lord after His resurrection.* Then He shared with them bread and fish from the fire.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Virgin, pray to the Lord Who rose from the tomb on the third day* for us Christians who praise and bless you with zeal.* For we have all taken you as a refuge of salvation* and as a mediatrix with Him.* For we are your servants, O Mother of God;* we are the people of your house,* and we all await your protection.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 6): After Your descent into Hades, O Christ,* and Your resurrection from the dead, the disciples grieved over Your departure.* They returned to their occupations* and attended to their nets and their boats,* but their fishing was in vain.* You appeared to them since You are Lord of all;* You commanded them to cast the nets on the right side.* Immediately Your word became deed.* They caught a great number of fish,* and they found an unexpected meal prepared for them on the shore,* which they immediately ate.* Now, make us worthy to enjoy this meal with them in a spiritual manner,* O Lord and Lover of mankind.

Eleventh Gospel: Jn 21:15-25

[At that time,] when they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, "Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these?" He said to him, "Yes, Lord, you know that I love you." He said to him, "Feed my lambs." He then said to him a second time, "Simon, son of John, do you love me?" He said to him, "Yes, Lord, you know that I love you." He said to him, "Tend my sheep." He said to him the third time, "Simon, son of John, do you love me?" Peter was distressed that he had said to him a third time, "Do you love me?" and he said to him, "Lord, you know everything; you know that I love you." [Jesus] said to him, "Feed my sheep. Amen, amen, I say to you, when you were younger, you used to dress yourself and go where you wanted; but when you grow old, you will stretch out your hands, and someone else will dress you and lead you where you do not want to go." He said this signifying by what kind of death he would glorify God. And when he had said this, he said to him, "Follow me." Peter turned and saw the disciple following whom Jesus loved, the one who had also reclined upon his chest during the supper and had said, "Master, who is the one who will betray you?" When Peter saw him, he said to Jesus, "Lord, what about him?" Jesus said to him, "What if I want him to remain until I come? What concern is it of yours? You follow me." So the word spread among the brothers that that disciple would not die. But Jesus had not told him that he would not die, just "What if I want him to remain until I come? [What concern is it of yours?]" It is this disciple who testifies to these things and has written them, and we know that his testimony is true. There are also many other things that Jesus did, but if these were to be described individually, I do not think the whole world would contain the books that would be written.

Exapostilarion:
After His resurrection the Lord asked Peter three times:* Do you love Me?* Then the Lord set Peter as a shepherd over His sheep.* When Peter saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following Him,* he asked the Lord: What about him?* And the Lord said: If I want him to wait until I come again,* what is that to you, O Peter, my beloved?

Glory be: Now and for ever: What an awesome mystery; what a dazzling wonder!* Death has been abolished completely by death.* O Word, Who then will not praise,* and who will not glorify Your resurrection?* Who will not praise the Theotokos* who gave birth to You in the flesh and in purity?* Therefore, by her prayers, save us all from Hades.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 8): When You showed Yourself to the disciples* after Your resurrection, O Savior, * You appointed Simon to watch over Your sheep* as a recompense for His love; * You asked him to tend the flock with care.* You said to him: If you love Me, O Peter,* feed my lambs and feed my sheep.* But at once he inquired concerning the other disciple,* revealing him to be the beloved.* Therefore, by the intercession of both, O Christ,* keep Your flock from the ravaging wolves.