SUNDAY OF THE PRODIGAL SON
VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

Seven stichera from the resurrectional tone of the week and the following:

(Tone 1): I have sown sin in a land of innocence and life* and have harvested the ears of thoughtlessness.* I have gathered my actions into bundles of sheaves,* but I have not placed them on the threshing floor of repentance.* And now I pray to You, O my God,* for You are the eternal Tiller of our fields:* With the breath of Your loving-kindness,* winnow the grain of my actions,* feed my soul with Your grace and forgiveness,* gather me into Your heavenly granaries and save me.

O faithful, let us discover the power of the divine mystery.* The prodigal came back from his sin and returned to his father’s house;* in his loving kindness his father came out to meet him and kissed him.* He restored him to the glory of his house* and prepared a mystical banquet on high.* He killed the fatted calf so that we may share in his joy:* the joy of the Father Who offers with love,* and the joy of the Lamb Who gives Himself for us;* for He is Christ, the Savior of our souls.

(Tone 4): As the prodigal son I also come to You, O God of goodness,* after having spent my life far from You. O Father,* I wasted the riches that You gave me.* Receive my repentance, O Lord, and have mercy on me.

Glory be: (Tone 2): From what blessings have I been deprived in my wretchedness,* from what kingdom have I been exiled!* I squandered the treasure that I received from You,* and I have wandered far from Your law.* Alas, O my poor soul, you shall be delivered to the eternal fire;* but before the end cry out to Christ our God:* Receive me, O Lord, as the prodigal son,* and have mercy on me.

Now and for ever: Dogmaticon of the tone of the week.

Aposticha

From the resurrectional tone of the week, then the following:

Glory be: (Tone 6): I have wasted the treasure that my Father gave to me;* I have lived among senseless animals,* I have longed to eat the food of swine,* and because no one offered it to me I remained hungry.* But now I return to my Father Who is so good,* and with tears I cry out:* Treat me as one of Your servants,* for I no longer deserve Your love;* and in Your mercy, save me.

Now and for ever: Christ the Lord, our Creator and Redeemer,* came forth from your womb, O most pure Virgin.* He clothed Himself in our human flesh* to set us free from the original curse of Adam.* Therefore, O Mary, we praise you, without ceasing,* as the true Virgin Mother of God,* and we sing with the angels:* Rejoice, O Lady, advocate, protector, and salvation of our souls.

Canticle of Simeon; Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; resurrectional troparion; Glory be... now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion.

SUNDAY MATINS

Everything resurrectional until the polyeley, then Psalm 136:

By the rivers of Babylon there we sat and wept, remembering Zion. Alleluia! (3x)
For it was there that they asked us; our captors, for songs, our oppressors, for joy. Alleluia! (3x)
Sing to us they said, one of Zion’s songs. Alleluia! (3x)
O how could we sing the song of the Lord on alien soil? Alleluia! (3x)
O Babylon, destroyer, one is happy who repays you the ills you brought on us. Alleluia! (3x)
Glory be: Now and for ever: Alleluia (3x).
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory be to You, O God!

By the Rivers of Babylon

(Musical transcription of stichera lyrics)
By the rivers of Babylon. Alleluia. There we sat and wept, as we remembered Zion, as we remembered Zion. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Sing to us now, sing to us now songs of Zion. Sing to us they said one of Zion’s songs. How can we sing songs of the Lord in a foreign land? O Babylon, O destroyer, happy is he, who repays you the ills that you have brought on us. Glory be to the Father and the Son and to the Holy Spirit, Now and for ever and ever, Amen. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to You, O Lord.

Hosts of angels; everything else resurrectional including Psalm 50; then: Open to me the doors..., (p. 434).

Canon (resurrectional and the following):

Ode 9, Hirmos (Tone 2): What mortal has ever heard of this? Who has ever known a virgin to conceive and give birth without pain? But this is your wondrous mystery, O holy Mother of God, and we extol you.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!

O Christ, behold the affliction of my heart; do not despise my conversion and my tears. Embrace me in Your mercy, and add me to the number of Your elect, so that in thanksgiving I may praise Your love.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!

As the thief I cry out: Remember me. As the humble publican, I strike my breast and implore Your mercy. As the prodigal, deliver me from all iniquity, O God of mercy, so that I may praise the condescension of my King.

Glory be: Now and for ever: By the brightness of your intercession, O Virgin, enlighten the dark eyes of my spirit. Lead me on the paths of repentance, so that I may praise you as is fitting. For you have brought into the world in an ineffable manner the Word of God.

Katabasia: What mortal has ever heard... (see above). To Feb. 9, the following katabasia is taken: In the shadows and the writings..., (p. 261).

Holy is the Lord our God (3x).

Exapostilarion and the following:

Glory be: The treasury of grace that You have given me, O God and Savior, I have wasted in a wretched way. Wickedly I squandered it, living far from You in foolish company. But now I return to You: Accept me, O God of mercy, as You once received the prodigal, and save me.

Now and for ever: O holy Virgin and Mother of God, the glory of apostles, martyrs, prophets and all the saints, pierce the heart of your Son and Lord, in behalf of your servants, when He shall come to judge us and render to all according to their deeds.

Stichera at the Praises

Stichera from the resurrectional tone of the week and then the following:

(Tone 2): O Lord, I offer You the confession of the prodigal;* I have sinned before You,* and I have squandered the treasure of Your grace.* Receive my repentance, O Savior, and save me.

(Tone 4): As the prodigal son I also come to You, O God of goodness,* after having spent my life far from You.* O Father, I wasted the riches that You gave me.* Receive my repentance, O Lord, and have mercy on me.

(Tone 8): Foolishly I wasted all my Father’s goods;* I became poor and alone in a land of the wicked.* No longer able to bear their company,* I now return to You, O Father all good,* and I cry out to You:* I have sinned against heaven and against You;* I am no longer worthy to be called Your child;* accept me as one of Your servants and have mercy on me.

Glory be: (Tone 6): O Father of mercy, I have separated myself from You;* do not abandon me nor deprive me of Your heavenly kingdom.* For the evil enemy has stripped me and taken away all my wealth.* I have foolishly squandered my spiritual treasure;* but now I arise and return to You, saying:* Accept me as one of Your servants,* for You are the One Who stretches out Your hands on the cross* to deliver me from the evil monster,* and to clothe me once again in my true robe.

Now and for ever: (Tone 2): You are truly most blessed, (p. 140).
