MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion of St. Basil; Glory be: Now and for ever: the troparion of the Circumcision, (p. 1276).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 5, Podoben – Sobeznachalne slovo): Let us all extol Basil as the holy adornment of the Church,* the rich treasury of teachings.* Through them he taught us to honor the holy Trinity,* united in essence and distinct in persons.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 1): The Creator of all and the Lord of the universe,* Who is with the Father and the Spirit on high,* is circumcised on earth as an eight day old infant.* Your works, O Lord, are truly divine and wonderful.* O Master, You were circumcised for our sake that the law might be fulfilled.

(Tone 8): Marvelously drawing on the secret wealth of ineffable wisdom,* you stored up the waters of the true faith for all.* You made the hearts of the faithful rejoice,* and you destroyed the teachings of the unbelievers as deserved.* Because of your noble efforts you became the invincible champion of the holy Trinity.* O archbishop Basil, intercede with Christ our God to grant remission of sins* to those who celebrate your holy memory.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 4): The One Who is invisible in substance today appears in the flesh.* Today the uncreated Word is born from a chaste Virgin* for the salvation of the human race.* As a child of eight days He is circumcised according to the Law.* Therefore, let us worship Him as our Savior.

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung:

We extol you,* O Basil, archbishop of Christ,* and we honor your holy memory* because you pray for us to Christ our God.

Verse: The mouth of the just utters wisdom; and his lips speak what is right.
Verse: Your priests shall be clothed with holiness; your faithful shall ring out their joy.
Verse: They are happy, who dwell in your house, forever singing your praise.

Glory be; Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 8): The grace of your God-inspired words* and the mystical depths of your teachings were a ladder of divine ascent for us.* O Father, having become the trumpet of the Spirit,* you proclaimed the divine dogmas.* Therefore, you now dwell in the divine kingdom,* having received the reward of your efforts, O holy Bishop Basil.* Intercede with Christ our God to grant forgiveness of sins* to those who lovingly celebrate your holy memory.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 48 (Tone 4)
My lips will speak words of wisdom.* My heart is full of insight.
Verse: Hear this, all you peoples; give heed, all who dwell in the world.

Gospel: Jn 10:9-16 (p. 768). After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse, as on Sunday; then the following stichera:

(Tone 6): The grace flowed from your lips, O holy Father Basil. You were the shepherd of the Church of Christ, teaching your spiritual sheep to believe in the holy Trinity, consubstantial in the one Godhead.

Canon (Tone 2): Come, let us the faithful..., (p. 756).

Ode 9: Omit the Magnificat. Immediately after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the ninth Hirmos with its verse:

Verse: O my soul, extol our father among the hierarchs Basil the Great.

Hirmos: The Divine Star had risen before daybreak and came to dwell among us. Ineffably conceived in the flesh, God came to us from your virginal womb, O pure and blessed One. Therefore, we extol you, O Mother of God.

Verse: Holy father and hierarch Basil, pray to God for us!

O holy father Basil, as a faithful sheep of Christ, you followed in the life-giving footsteps of the Shepherd. You courageously delivered your life into the hands of the tyrant, O blessed Father, exposing yourself to danger for the sake of the Church.

Verse: Holy father and hierarch Basil, pray to God for us!

O holy father Basil, you became worthy of the chair of the apostles, the ranks of the martyrs of Christ, the tabernacles of the patriarchs, the delight of the holy ones, and the company of the prophets. You were a friend of the Mother of God and a servant of the holy Trinity.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Come, let us extol the holy name of Christ - Jesus, which today is being bestowed upon Him in the temple; and let us also honor the memory of holy Basil.

Verse: Extol, my soul, the Virgin, the most pure Mother of God, who is more honorable and beyond compare more glorious than the heavenly hosts.

Katabasia: Hirmos (Tone 2): No tongue is capable of praising you worthily,* and no mind, however superhuman, is able to extol you, O Mother of God.* Good as you are, accept our faith,* for you know our love of God.* You are the guide of Christians, and we glorify you.

Exapostilarion: O wise Basil,* with your love of philosophy and by your miracles* you appeared to the world like the sun,* enlightening the minds of the faithful,* O godly minded father,* initiate of the Holy Trinity* and servant of the Mother of God!

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 5, Podoben – Radujsia): O Basil, by your rebirth in divine baptism,* you became a son of God.* You professed the eternal Son and Word of God* to be consubstantial and coeternal with the Father.* With the wisdom of your words,* you sealed the mouths of the heretics.* Therefore, you entered the heavenly kingdom,* truly reigning with Christ, the sole ruler by nature,* who bountifully gives His great mercy to the world.

Totally dedicated to God from your childhood,* you were enlightened with rays of divine knowledge.* You clarified the understanding of all creation,* clearly explaining and wisely making known its good order.* You laid the solid foundations of theology.* Therefore, we honor you as a prophetic and blessed teacher,* a light-bearing torch of the Church,* as we sing the praises of Christ* Who grants great mercy to the world.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 8): In His love for the human race,* the Savior condescended and willed to be wrapped in swaddling clothes.* Eight days old according to His mother* and eternal according to His Father,* He did not look down upon the circumcision of the flesh.* Therefore, O believers, let us cry out to Him:* You are our God; have mercy on us!

After the great doxology: the troparion of St. Basil; Glory be: Now and for ever: the troparion of the Circumcision, (p. 1276); the litanies; and the great dismissal.
