MATINS

After God the Lord...: the Troparion of the saint, (p. 1304); Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4), (p. 1266).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 4, Podoben – Skoro predvary): Your glorious and light-bearing feast has arrived, O God-wise Anthony,* summoning a multitude of the faithful and monastics* to glorify and venerate your holy death.* They ask, through your intercession,* that Christ may bestow upon them great mercy.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Having given birth to the Master, O Theotokos,* you showed yourself to be higher than the heavenly powers* and raised the nature of man, O bride of God.* Therefore we, the faithful, exalt you in spirit and in word,* as the true Mother of God.

(Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): You were a converser and co-dweller with the holy fathers* on the holy mountain, O father Anthony!* And by imitating them, you lived like an angel on earth.* Therefore, you showed yourself to be a co-dweller with the angels.* Rejoice now with them in heaven,* pray for the salvation of our souls;* for we praise you unceasingly.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Samopoboben): Joseph stood in amazement, witnessing the supernatural:* In spirit he saw your seedless conception, O Theotokos,* as dew falling on fleece, as the unburnable bush, the blossoming rod of Aaron.* Having witnessed this, your spouse and guardian cried out to the priest:* The Virgin gives birth and after birth remains a virgin.

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung (see the common service of a Venerable, p. 1197).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 8): You truly were sanctified from childhood, O blessed Anthony,* and, on earth, lived the life of an angel.* You mortified the body, O venerable One,* worthily imitating Anthony of the Caves,* thus pleasing the most Holy Trinity.* You also, O glorious One, have led numerous ascetics to the zeal of your divine life.* Beseech, O God-bearing father, Christ God,* that He grant forgiveness of sins to those who with love venerate your memory.

The rest of the service is taken from the common service of a Venerable, (p. 1197).

Canon – Ode 9

Hirmos (Tone 4): Let everyone on earth dance for joy in spirit. Let the heavenly ranks celebrate in honor of the sacred feast; O Mother of God, let them cry: Rejoice, ever-blessed Theotokos and ever-virgin.

Verse: Venerable father Anthony, pray to God for us!

In all things you strove to imitate the life of the great Anthony, who in ancient times was glorified. He dwelt alone in the desert, while you, father, shut yourself up in a cave, and for many long years did not leave it.

Verse: Venerable father Anthony, pray to God for us!

By the same way that led to the holy mountain, you, O father Anthony, arrived in the city of Kyiv, where you found it fitting to build a church in honor of our Lady, the Mother of God. There, together with blessed Theodosius, you built that most holy church for the glory of the Mother of God. Therefore, we all, together with him, extol you.

Glory be: Now and for ever: With hands raised to God, you performed glorious miracles, O father Anthony; for through your prayers you drew down from heaven fire to purify the site for the Church of the most pure One, whom we extol together with you.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 4): Let everyone on earth dance..., (see above).

Exapostilarion: You put to death worldly pleasures, and, having recognized the passing glory,* you immediately turned away from it, preferring the narrow road that leads to the wide heavens.* Therefore, pray, father Anthony, for the salvation of those who venerate you.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 2, Podoben – Jehda ot dreva): Desiring to see the unspeakable happiness of the saints* and the joy of the righteous who have pleased God,* you spurned every worldly joy, and spent your life in fasting and tears* until you had put to death the cravings of the passions. For this, you have been made worthy of the joy of the venerables.* With them, pray for the salvation of our souls.

Like a light in a dark place, you have shone forth, O venerable father,* and have caused the dark faces of the demons to blush.* Then, O all-wise one, you ascended into heaven,* where you stand in awe before the throne of Christ.* Therefore, remember us, who honor your memory, O father Anthony,* that we may find mercy on the day of judgment.

Glory be: (Tone 8): Having left your homeland, O venerable father Anthony* and having willingly undertaken a journey for the sake of the Lord,* you endured the burden of the long journey – thirst and hunger, heat and cold – for the sake of Christ.* For this, you heard His words: Good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of your Lord.* Pray, father, that we, who always glorify you with love,* may also hear these words.

Now and for ever: O Lady, accept the prayers of your servants,* and deliver us from all misery and affliction.

After the great doxology: the troparion of the saint, (p. 1304), Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4,) (p. 1266), the litanies; and the great dismissal.

JULY 11
BLESSED OLHA, PRINCESS OF KYIV
VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 4, Podoben – Jako dobl’a): Like the sun,* your glorious memory shone forth, O God-wise Olha,* mother of the Rus-Ukrainian kings, beloved of Christ.* Reared in the apostolic teachings,* you opposed the pagan idols, above all, the devil;* and, enlightened by the power of the Holy Spirit, you led your nation and people from the darkness of ignorance to God.

With your enlightened mind you humiliated the enemy who deceived Eve,* and broke his weapon.* You cultivated the God-planted paradise – the Church – and in it you planted the life-giving tree of the cross* and prepared a banquet of divine food,* and an inexhaustible spring of Christ’s blood.* Having drunk of it, you now live in incorruptibility,* praying for us.

Rejoice in spirit, O lands of Rus,* venerating the memory of the God-wise Olha.* For having as her helper the most holy Theotokos,* she, together with the wonder-workers and martyrs,* prays unceasingly to Christ, in order to deliver from misfortune and sorrow* those who with faith praise her and keep her sacred memory.

Glory be: Raising your mind on the wings of the knowledge of God, O glorious Olha,* you soared above the visible world and reached God, the Creator of the universe.* Having found Him, you received a new life in baptism* and forever abide in incorruptibility,* enjoying the fruits of the life-giving tree.

Now and for ever: theotokion or the staurotheotokion, (p. 1221).
