NINTH HOUR

Come, let us adore....

Psalm 113

When Israel came forth from Egypt, Jacob’s sons from an alien people,* Judah became the Lord’s temple, Israel became His kingdom.
The sea fled at the sight;* the Jordan turned back on its course.
The mountains leapt like rams* and the hills like yearling sheep.
Why was it, sea, that you fled,* that you turned back, Jordan, on your course?
Mountains, that you leapt like rams,* hills, like yearling sheep?
Tremble, O earth, before the Lord,* in the presence of the God of Jacob,
Who turns the rock into a pool* and flint into a spring of water.

Psalm 85, (p. 174) and Psalm 93 may also be taken.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: (Tone 4): After Elijah had gone up..., (p. 1277).

Now and for ever: O gracious Lord, for our sake You were born of the Virgin and were crucified.* You crushed Death by Your death,* and, being God, brought forth the resurrection.* Do not turn away from those You have made with Your own hands;* but reveal instead Your love to us, O Lord of mercy.* Accept as intercessor the Virgin Mother of God who gave You birth.* O our Savior, save a desperate people.

Then we sing following stichera:

(Tone 7, Samohlasen): It was astonishing to see at the river Jordan, the Creator of heaven and earth,* Who stripped Himself naked, and, as a servant,* received from a servant baptism for our salvation;* the hosts of angels, filled with fear and joy, were struck with amazement.* With them we also worship You, crying out: Save us!

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 5): The hand with which you, O Forerunner and baptizer,* touched the most pure head of our Lord and pointed Him out to the people,* stretch out to Him in our behalf, seeing as you have great confidence in Him,* for He said that you are the greatest of all the prophets.* Also raise your eyes to the all-holy Spirit,* Whom they have seen in the form of a dove descending upon Him,* and implore for us, O Baptizer, His grace.* Come and join us; give us the sign to sing and begin a hymn of praise.

The rest is taken according to the typicon prescribed in the First Hour.

Prokimenon: Ps 26 (Tone 3)
The Lord is my light and Savior; whom shall I fear?
Verse: The Lord is the defender of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?

A reading from the Book of the prophet Isaiah.
Thus says the LORD: / In a time of favor I answer you, / on the day of salvation I help you, / To restore the land / and allot the desolate heritages, / Saying to the prisoners: Come out! / To those in darkness: Show yourselves! / Along the ways they shall find pasture, / on every bare height shall their pastures be. / They shall not hunger or thirst, / nor shall the scorching wind or the sun strike them; / For he who pities them leads them / and guides them beside springs of water. I will cut a road through all my mountains, / and make my highways level. / See, some shall come from afar, / others from the north and the west, / and some from the land of Syene. Sing out, O heavens, and rejoice, O earth, / break forth into song, you mountains, / For the LORD comforts his people / and shows mercy to his afflicted. But Zion said, “The LORD has forsaken me; / my Lord has forgotten me.” / Can a mother forget her infant, / be without tenderness for the child of her womb? / Even should she forget, / I will never forget you. (49:8-15).

A reading from the letter of St. Paul to Titus.
Titus my child: For the grace of God has appeared, saving all and training us to reject godless ways and worldly desires and to live temperately, justly, and devoutly in this age, as we await the blessed hope, the appearance of the glory of the great God and of our savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us to deliver us from all lawlessness and to cleanse for himself a people as his own, eager to do what is good. But when the kindness and generous love of God our savior appeared, / not because of any righteous deeds we had done / but because of his mercy, / he saved us through the bath of rebirth / and renewal by the holy Spirit, / whom he richly poured out on us / through Jesus Christ our savior, / so that we might be justified by his grace / and become heirs in hope eternal life. (2:11-14; 3:4-7).

Gospel: Mt 3:13-17 – the priest himself reads the Gospel.

The holy doors are closed, and the choir says the following prayer:
For the sake of Your holy name, do not abandon us for ever; do not forget Your covenant. For the sake of Abraham the trustful one, Isaac Your servant, and Israel Your holy one, do not take Your mercies away from us.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; kontakion: Today the Lord stood in the waters..., (p. 806); the rest as in the First Hour; then the concluding prayer: O Master, Lord Jesus Christ..., (p. 177).

JANUARY 6
THEOPHANY OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST

Note: If the eve of the Theophany (Jan. 5) falls on a Saturday or a Sunday, then, in the morning, we take the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom, and, in the evening – Vespers without the Liturgy; but on the day of the Theophany we take the Liturgy of St. Basil.

If the eve of the Theophany falls on another day of the week, then we take Vespers with the Liturgy of St. Basil according to the directions given on Great Thursday (p. 550); but on the day of the Theophany we take the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom.

Vespers with the Liturgy of St. Basil the Great

(dark-red vestments)

Blessed is the man... is taken only on Saturday and Sunday evenings.

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 2): When the Forerunner saw the One Who is our enlightenment,* the One Who has brought light to all,* coming to be baptized,* his heart rejoiced, and his hand trembled.* He pointed Him out to the people and said:* This is the Savior of Israel Who delivered us from corruption.* O Christ our God, O sinless One, glory to You!

O our Savior, the armies of angels trembled* when they saw You baptized by Your servant,* and the Holy Spirit bearing witness and descending,* and when they heard the voice of the Father speaking from heaven:* This One upon Whom the Forerunner lays his hands* is my beloved Son in Whom I am well pleased.* O Christ our God, glory to You!

When the Jordan River received You, O Fountainhead,* the Comforter descended in the form of a dove.* Now behold the marvel:* the One Who bowed the heavens bows His head to the Forerunner,* and the one made of clay cries out to His Maker:* Why do You command me to perform what is beyond my power?* It is I who need to be baptized by You.* O Christ our God, O sinless One, glory to You!

O God and Lord, when You resolved to save those who had strayed from You,* You condescended to take the form of a servant,* for it was fitting that You assumed our human nature for us.* And when You were baptized in the flesh, O our Redeemer,* it made us worthy of Your forgiveness.* Therefore, we cry out to You:* O Christ our God, our Benefactor, glory to You!

Upon touching Your immaculate head, the hand of the Baptist trembled.* The streams of the Jordan turned back, feeling unworthy to serve You.* How could the one who stood in awe of Joshua, the son of Nun,* be unafraid to stand before the Creator of Joshua?* You have completed all that was assigned to You, O Savior,* so that You might redeem the world by Your epiphany,* for You alone love the human race.

Desiring to fulfill all that was ordained for You from eternity, O Lord,* You received ministers from all creation at this mystery of Yours:* Gabriel from among the angels, the Virgin from among the human race,* the star from among the heavens,* and Jordan from among the waters;* and in it You have cleansed the sins of the world.* O our Savior, glory to You!

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 2): You have bowed Your head before the Forerunner,* and You have crushed the heads of the demons.* You have descended into the waters and given light to all things* that they may glorify You, O Savior, the Enlightenment of our souls.

The entrance with the Gospel Book; O Joyful Light; prokimenon of the day; on Friday, the great Prokimenon: What God is great..., (p. 25); and the following readings: Genesis 1:1-13; Exodus 14: 15-29; Exodus 15: 22-27 (see below).

Lector: A reading from the Book of Exodus.

Then Moses led Israel forward from the Red Sea, and they marched out to the desert of Shur. After traveling for three days through the desert without finding water, they arrived in Marah, where they could not drink the water, because it was too bitter. Hence this place was called Marah. As the people grumbled against Moses, saying, “What are we to drink?” he appealed to the LORD who pointed out to him a certain piece of wood. When he threw this into the water, the water became fresh. It was here that the LORD, in making rules and regulations for them, put them to the test. “If you really listen to the voice of the LORD, your God,” he told them, “and do what is right in his eyes: if you heed his commandments and keep all his precepts, I will not afflict you with any of the diseases with which I afflicted the Egyptians; for I, the LORD, am your healer.” Then they came to Elim, where there were twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees, and they camped there near the water. Having set out from Elim the whole Israelite community came into the desert of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departure from the land of Egypt. (15:22-16: 1).

The priest (deacon or lector) intones the following troparion and verses, and the choir sings the conclusion of this troparion, like a prokimenon:

Troparion (Tone 5): O Creator of the world,* You appeared in the world in order to shine upon those who live in darkness.* O merciful One, glory to You!
Choir: In order to shine upon those who live in darkness, O merciful One, glory to You!
Verse: O God, be gracious and bless us and let Your face shed its light upon us; so that we may know Your ways upon earth and all nations may learn Your saving help.
Choir: In order to shine upon those....
Verse: Let the peoples glorify You, O God, let all the peoples praise You; let them all be happy, for You are the Ruler of all the nations; and You govern them with justice.
Choir: In order to shine upon those....
Glory be: Now and for ever:
Choir: In order to shine upon those....
And again: O Creator of the world....
Choir: In order to shine upon those....

Then the second series of readings follows: Book of Joshua (see below); 2 Kings 2:6-14; 2 Kings 5:9-14.

Lector: A reading from the Book of Joshua.

Then the LORD said to Joshua, “Today I will begin to exalt you in the sight of all Israel, that they may know I am with you, as I was with Moses. Now command the priests carrying the ark of the covenant to come to a halt in the Jordan when they reach the edge of the waters.” No sooner had these priestly bearers of the ark waded into the waters at the edge of the Jordan, which overflows all its banks during the entire season of the harvest, than the waters flowing from upstream halted, backing up in a solid mass for a very great distance indeed, from Adam, a city in the direction of Zarethan; while those flowing downstream toward the Salt Sea of the Arabah disappeared entirely. Thus the people crossed over opposite Jericho. While all Israel crossed over on dry ground, the priests carrying the ark of the covenant of the LORD remained motionless on dry ground in the bed of the Jordan until the whole nation had completed the passage. (3:7-8, 15-17).

The priest (deacon or lector) intones the following troparion and verses, and the choir sings the concluding words of this troparion like a prokimenon.

Troparion (Tone 6): O our Savior, through the greatness of your mercy,* You cleansed the sinners and the publicans,* and now Your light shines upon those who live in darkness.* O Lord, glory to You!
Choir: And now Your light shines upon those who live in darkness. O Lord, glory to You!
Verse: The Lord is King, in majesty enrobed; the Lord has robed Himself with might; He has girded Himself with power. The world will surely stand in place, never to be moved. Your throne stands from old; You are from everlasting, Lord.
Choir: And now Your light shines upon those....
Verse: The floods have lifted up, O Lord; the waters have lifted up their voice; the waters have lifted up their thunder.
Choir: And now Your light shines upon those....
Glory be: Now and for ever:
Choir: And now Your light shines upon those....
And again: O our Savior, through the greatness of Your mercy....
Choir: And now Your light shines upon those....

Then the third series of readings: Isaiah 1:16-20 (see below); Genesis 32: 2-11; Exodus 2: 5-10; Judges 6: 36-40; 1 Kings 18: 30-39; 2 Kings 2: 19-22; Isaiah 49: 8-15.

Lector: A reading from the book of the prophet Isaiah.

Thus says the Lord: / Wash yourselves clean! / Put away your misdeeds from before my eyes; / cease doing evil; learn to do good. / Make justice your aim: redress the wronged, / hear the orphan’s plea, defend the widow. Come now, let us set things right, / says the LORD: / Though your sins be like scarlet, / they may become white as snow; / Though they be crimson red, / they may become white as wool. / If you are willing, and obey, / you shall eat the good things of the land; / But if you refuse and resist, / the sword shall consume you; / for the mouth of the LORD has spoken! (1: 16-20).

The deacon intones the small litany:

Again and again, in peace let us pray to the Lord.
Help and save, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.
Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

Priest: For You are holy our God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever:
Deacon: And ever.
Choir: Amen. Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have mercy on us. – The rest is the Liturgy of St. Basil the Great.

Prokimenon: Ps 26 (Tone 3)
The Lord is my light and Savior; whom shall I fear?
Verse: The Lord is the defender of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?

Lector: A reading from the first letter of St. Paul to the Corinthians.

Brethren: Although I am free in regard to all, I have made myself a slave to all so as to win over as many as possible. To the Jews I became like a Jew to win over Jews; to those under the law I became like one under the law – though I myself am not under the law – to win over those under the law. To those outside the law I became like one outside the law – though I am not outside God’s law but within the law of Christ – to win over those outside the law. To the weak I became weak, to win over the weak. I have become all things to all, to save at least some. All this I do for the sake of the gospel, so that I too may have a share in it. Do you not know that the runners in the stadium all run in the race, but only one wins the prize? Run so as to win. Every athlete exercises discipline in every way. They do it to win a perishable crown, but we an imperishable one. Thus do not run aimlessly; I do not fight as if I were shadowboxing. No, I drive my body and train it, for fear that, having preached to others, I myself should be disqualified. (I, 9: 19-27).

Alleluia: Ps 44 (Tone 4)
My heart overflows with noble words. To the king I must speak the song I have made.
Verse: You are the fairest of the children, and graciousness is poured upon your lips, because God has blessed you forevermore.

Gospel: Lk 3:1-8.
Instead of It is truly right... the choir sings: In you, O Woman Full of Grace....
Communion Verse: Praise the Lord from the heavens. Praise him in the highest. Alleluia (3x).

After the prayer behind the ambo we begin the blessing of water, (p. 831).

After Blessed be the name of the Lord...: Psalm 33 and the dismissal. After the dismissal the two choirs stand in the middle of the church and sing the troparion and kontakion of the Theophany, (p. 1278).
