JULY 15
ST. VOLODYMYR, GRAND PRINCE OF KYIV
VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 4, Podoben – Jako Dobl’a): O glorious Volodymyr, in word and deed* you were like the great Constantine,* who was born during the Christian age* and had lived for many years as a pagan.* Although you also were a pagan,* you loved Christ, Who loved you.* Now that you are joyfully with the Lord,* never cease to intercede for us,* who celebrate your memory.

Just as the holy mountain of Zion,* brightly shining with the light of the Lord* and sanctified by the Law of Moses,* forever rejoices, so too, the great city of Kyiv rejoices and is glad,* for through you, glorious Volodymyr,* your nation recognized the Father with the Son and the Holy Spirit.* Pray to Him to enlighten and save our souls.

Like fragrant myrrh* the glory of our enlightener,* the great Volodymyr, spread abroad.* For, having loved Christ,* he destroyed the pagan idols* and built Christian churches.* For this, he received the heavenly kingdom* and an eternal crown.

Glory be: (Tone 6): Let us solemnly and joyfully venerate our holy enlightener,* the glorious Volodymyr; for he turned away from paganism to the knowledge and love of Christ,* Who chose and loved him,* and whom He called to Himself, together with the glorious Olha.* Let us implore him,* that he pray to the Lord for peace and salvation of our souls.

Now and for ever: Dogmaticon (Tone 6), (p. 331); on Friday and Saturday evenings: the Dogmaticon of the tone of the week.

The entrance; O Joyful Light; Prokimenon of the day; and readings:

Lector: A reading from the First Book of Kings.

Solomon stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of the whole community of Israel, and stretching forth his hands toward heaven, he said, “LORD, God of Israel, there is no God like you in heaven above or on earth below: you keep your covenant of kindness with your servants who are faithful to you with their whole heart. You have kept the promise you made to my father David, your servant. You who spoke that promise, have this day, by your own power, brought it to fulfillment. Now, therefore, LORD, God of Israel, keep the further promise you made to my father David, your servant, saying, ‘You shall always have someone from your line to sit before me on the throne of Israel, provided only that your descendants look to their conduct so that they live in my presence, as you have lived in my presence.’ Now, LORD, God of Israel, may this promise which you made to my father David, your servant be confirmed. “Can it indeed be that God dwells among men on earth? If the heavens and the highest heavens cannot contain you, how much less this temple which I have built! Look kindly on the prayer and petition of your servant, O LORD, my God, and listen to the cry of supplication which I, your servant, utter before you this day. May your eyes watch night and day over this temple, the place where you have decreed you shall be honored; may you heed the prayer which I your servant, offer in this place, Listen to the petitions of your servant and of your people Israel which they offer in this place. Listen from your heavenly dwelling and grant pardon.” (8:22-30).

Other readings: Isaiah 60:1-11; Isaiah 61:10-62:5), (p. 906).

Aposticha

(Tone 4, Podoben – Dal jesy znamenije): You gave Your holy cross, O Lord,* to our enlightener as a powerful weapon,* through which he became worthy of Your grace* to live righteously on earth and to merit the heavenly kingdom.* Therefore, we glorify Your loving providence,* O almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls.

Verse: I have exalted one chosen from the people.

As the King of kings and Lord of all,* you gave, O Lover of mankind,* your honorable servant the wisdom of Solomon,* the meekness of David,* and the true faith of the apostles.* Therefore, we glorify Your loving providence,* O almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls.

Verse: With My holy oil I have anointed him.

The Lord has sent to us a wise leader, Volodymyr, His servant.* He brought to God delightful shoots and fruits – the just and martyrs.* For this reason, saint Volodymyr, equal to the apostles,* shone forth to us like a bright sun.

Glory be: (Tone 6): Truly, Kyiv became the mother of all the cities* of your kingdom, O great Volodymyr.* Upon all the altars throughout your domain,* Christ enthroned Himself with the Father and the Holy Spirit,* because of your efforts and those of the grandmother Olha.* For this, your people glorify you,* our enlightener and swift intercessor.* We also implore Christ together with you* for peace for the nation and for the salvation of our souls.

Now and for ever: Christ the Lord, my Creator and Savior,* O most pure One, came forth from your womb* and clothed Himself in my human nature,* freeing Adam from the original curse.* Therefore, we sing unceasingly with the angels to you,* O most pure One, as to the Mother of God and Virgin:* Hail! O queen, guide and protectress, and salvation of our souls!

The troparion of the saint, (p. 1305), Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4), (p. 1266).

MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion of the saint, (p. 1305), Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4), (p. 1266).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 1): Our nation extols you as its baptizer and enlightener,* O holy and equal to the apostles Volodymyr!* Therefore, pray Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins* to those who with love honor you sacred memory.

Glory be: Now and for ever: When the angel announced to you: Hail, O Virgin!* At the sound of his voice, you conceived the body of the Lord in you,* the holy tabernacle, as the righteous David had predicted;* and you have shown yourself to be more spacious than the heavens,* carrying your Creator. Glory to Him, Who made His dwelling in you!* Glory to Him, Who came forth from you!* Glory to Him, Who delivered us through your birth-giving.

(Tone 8): Being taught by God ineffable heavenly wisdom,* you acquired a rich understanding of His faith and hastened to His beauty.* Thus, you cleared your spiritual eyes* and raised them up to the understanding of the true faith.* Therefore, we cry out in celebration:* Blessed is God, Who illuminated your heart* with a spiritual light, O glorious luminary Volodymyr.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O gracious Lord, for our sake* You were born of the Virgin and were crucified.* You crushed Death by Your death,* and, being God, brought forth the resurrection.* Do not turn away from those You have made with Your own hands;* but reveal instead Your love to us, O Lord of mercy.* Accept as intercessor the Virgin Mother of God who gave You birth.* O our Savior, save a desperate people.

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol you,* holy equal to the apostles Volodymyr,* and we venerate your memory,* for you enlightened our nation through holy baptism.

Verse: Blessed are those of blameless life who walk in the law of the Lord.
Verse: I put the law You have given before all the gold and silver in the world.
Verse: Your hands have made me and formed me; give me understanding that I may learn Your commandments.

Glory be: Now and for ever:

Sessional Hymn (Tone 4): You had a great and strong longing for the faith of Christ.* Quickly you found the fountain of living-waters,* which rises to God and immediately accepted the spiritual bath,* in order to be purified of the stain of sin.* You also brought your people to Christ;* therefore, entreat Him to save our souls.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 88 (Tone 4)
I have exalted one* chosen from the people.
Verse: My arm shall make him strong.

Gospel: Jn 10:9-16 (p. 768). After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse, as on Sunday, then the following sticherion:

(Tone 8): We solemnly and joyfully honor equal to the apostles,* the great and glorious prince Volodymyr,* the enlightener of our nation, for through him we received faith in Christ God.* Let us all together celebrate his memory,* for he our leader who will guide us to the heavenly kingdom.

Canon – Ode 9

Hirmos (Tone 8): Heaven was struck with amazement and the earth shook with fear as our God appeared in the flesh. Your womb has become more spacious than the heavens, O Mother of God. Therefore, the leaders of the heavenly hosts command both angels and people to extol you.

Verse: O holy great prince Volodymyr! Pray to God for us!

David was the king of Israel, who saved his people, by destroying the pagan idols. Inspired by the Spirit, he foretold the Son of God, but you, holy Volodymyr, profess the God in the Holy Trinity, Whom we extol.

Verse: Holy great prince Volodymyr, pray to God for us!

Today the faithful have gathered, who received through you the holy faith, and they extol you: Teacher and quick intercessor, remember us, that through your prayers we may lead peaceful life.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Inspired by the Holy Spirit, all generations glorify you with love, O God-bearer, for you have abolished the curse of the first mother. We piously praise the Word of God, Whom you, without being consumed, received in your womb and brought forth in the flesh. Beseech Him, that your faithful flock may be delivered from all sorrow and affliction.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 4): Let everyone on earth dance for joy in spirit. Let the heavenly ranks celebrate in honor of the sacred feast. O Mother of God, let them cry: Rejoice, ever-blessed Theotokos and ever-Virgin.

Exapostilarion: Having enlightened your nation with the faith of Christ* and having been warmed by the love of God,* you, Volodymyr, together with your grandmother Olha,* were glorified before God as a true apostle.* Through you we also glory Christ wondrous in the saints.

Stichera at the praises are the same as those of yesterday's stichera of the Aposticha, (p. 943).

After the great doxology: troparion of the saint, (p. 1305), Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4), (p. 1266); the litanies; and the great dismissal.
