MATINS

After God the Lord...: the Troparion of St. John, (p. 1301); Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4), (p. 1266).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): The adornment of the desert and the support of the prophets,* the fruit of Zechariah has sprouted forth for us,* and he understandingly gladdens the hearts of the faithful.* The forerunner of Christ and the true witness of His coming has appeared.* Therefore, let us cry aloud to the Baptizer with spiritual hymns:* O prophet and preacher of the truth,* intercede for the salvation of our souls.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Samopodoben): Joseph was amazed when he saw that which is beyond nature.* In your seedless conception, O Theotokos,* he thought of the dew which remained on the fleece,* the bush unconsumed by fire, and the rod of Aaron which sprouted.* Your betrothed and guardian testified by calling out to the priests:* A Virgin bears a child* and still remains a virgin after giving birth.

(Tone 8, Podoben – Vozleh na persy): You are the true herald of the coming of Christ.* You have been most gloriously born, O praiseworthy John.* Being the fountainhead of the prophets and the voice of the Word, you called out:* Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.* Therefore, having prepared the way of the Lord,* you have been revealed to the ends of the earth as the forerunner of grace,* O baptizer and apostle.* Intercede with Christ our God to grant the remission of sins* to those who lovingly celebrate your holy memory.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O most holy Virgin and Mother of God,* I pray that you heal the wicked passions of my soul,* and grant me knowledge of my sins which I have committed foolishly.* I am sorry that I have defiled my body and soul.* Woe is me! What shall I do* when the angels separate my soul from my suffering body?* At that time, O Lady, be my help and most fervent intercessor* because I, your unworthy servant, call upon you as my hope.

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung:

We extol you,* O John the Forerunner of the Savior,* and we venerate your glorious birth* from the barren one.

Verse: He has raised a horn of saving strength for us in the house of David His servant.
Verse: For you shall go before the Lord to prepare straight paths for Him.
Verse: In order to guide our feet into the path of peace.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 8, Podoben – Povelinnoje tajno): May the father rejoice; and you, O mother, be happy,* for according to the promise,* you have given birth today to a prophet on earth,* the forerunner named by God.* The barren mother nurses the infant, the baptizer;* and Zechariah rejoices at this childbirth, saying:* My tongue is loosed by your coming on earth,* O luminary of the great Light;* this is truly a strange and glorious wonder!

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Lk 1:68, 76 (Tone 4)
And you, O child,* shall be called prophet of the Most High.
Verse: Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, because He has visited and ransomed His people.

Gospel: Lk 1:24-25, 57-68, 76, 80.

After this time his wife Elizabeth conceived, and she went into seclusion for five months, saying, “So has the Lord done for me at a time when he has seen fit to take away my disgrace before others.” When the time arrived for Elizabeth to have her child she gave birth to a son. Her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown his great mercy toward her, and they rejoiced with her. When they came on the eighth day to circumcise the child, they were going to call him Zechariah after his father, but his mother said in reply, “No. He will be called John.” But they answered her, “There is no one among your relatives who has this name.” So they made signs, asking his father what he wished him to be called. He asked for a tablet and wrote, “John is his name,” and all were amazed. Immediately his mouth was opened, his tongue freed, and he spoke blessing God. Then fear came upon all their neighbors, and all these matters were discussed throughout the hill country of Judea. All who heard these things took them to heart saying, “What, then, will this child be?” For surely the hand of the Lord was with him. Then Zechariah his father, filled with the holy Spirit, prophesied, saying: / “Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel; / for he has visited and brought redemption to his people. / And you, child, will be called prophet of the Most High, / for you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways.” / The child grew and became strong in spirit, and he was in the desert until the day of his manifestation to Israel.

After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse, as on Sunday, then the following sticherion:

(Tone 8): Today the voice of the prophet Isaiah* is fulfilled in the birth of the greatest of the prophets, John;* He had said: Behold, I will prepare the way of the Lord.* He will be a soldier of the kingdom of heaven,* running before the path of our God.* By nature he was a man, yet in the present life he became an angel;* for he welcomed moderation in complete purity.* He had a human nature but fled what was according to nature* and struggled beyond the natural.* Therefore, let all the faithful imitate his virtues* and beg him to pray for the salvation of our souls.

Canon (Tone 4)

Hirmos 1: I pray to You, Who were born of the Virgin: drown in the sea of sinlessness the three chief commanders of the soul – the mind, the will, and the passions, so that, having brought them under control, I may, as though on cymbals, sing to You a hymn of victory.

Hirmos 3: Not of wisdom and strength, nor of riches do we boast, but of Your Christ, true wisdom of the Father, for there is no one holier than You, O God, Lover of mankind.

Hirmos 4: Jesus, the true God, Who sits in glory upon the divine throne, now appears riding on a swift cloud; and with His pure hand He saves those who cry: Glory to Your power, O Christ!

Hirmos 5: Today I shall rise, predicted God, today I shall be glorified, today I shall be exalted, in order to receive from the Virgin him who had fallen, and raise him up to the spiritual light of My Divinity.

Hirmos 6: I have sunk to the bottom of the sea; the storm of my great sins have drowned me; but You, as God, pull me out of the depths of my sinful life, O merciful One.

Hirmos 7: The three youths of Babylon, disregarding the insane command of their oppressors, sung amid the flames: Blessed are You, God of our fathers.

Hirmos 8: The almighty Deliverer of all came down, and showered with dew those who piously stood in the midst of the flames, and taught them to sing: All you creatures bless and glorify the Lord.

Ode 9 – Hirmos (Tone 4): O all-pure Virgin, the ineffable mystery of the Word of God is clearly fulfilled in you. In His compassion, God has become flesh through you. Therefore, we extol you as Theotokos.

Verse: Holy prophet, forerunner and baptizer John pray to God for us!

Behold the voice that goes before all, singing to barren and desolate hearts: Now make ready the way of Christ, for He comes in glory. Let us bow down and glorify Christ.

Verse: Holy prophet, forerunner and baptizer John pray to God for us!

O Forerunner of old, by the power of the all-holy Spirit, you proclaimed Christ as the Son and Lamb of God Who takes away the sins of the world. Now ask that your flock be delivered from their sins.

Glory be: Now and for ever: He Who was in the bosom of the Father took up His abode in you, O Virgin. He was born without pain and corruption, and out of mercy He brought us to the Father and to the Holy Spirit.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 4): Let everyone on earth dance for joy in spirit.* Let the heavenly ranks celebrate in honor of the sacred feast.* O Mother of God, let them cry: Rejoice, ever-blessed Theotokos and ever-Virgin.

Exapostilarion: Today the joy-creating birth of the Forerunner* ends the sadness of his father’s muteness* and the barrenness of his mother.* Indeed, his birth heralds the present joy and happiness.* Therefore, all creation celebrates in splendor.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Theotokos, the prophets preached, the apostles taught;* and the God-wise martyrs clearly confessed your Son as God of all.* Together with them, we now extol you,* for we have been delivered from the ancient curse through you.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 8, Podoben – O preslavnoho chudese): How wonderful is the miracle!* Today John, the foremost herald of the Word,* hastens to come forth from his aged mother.* By his birth he loosens the tongue* and clearly reveals how to speak with glory.* How ineffable is Your providence, O Master!* By it, O Christ, save our souls, for You alone are merciful.

How wonderful is the miracle!* The highest prophet of those born of women* ends the condemnation of his mother’s barrenness.* He came forth with the Spirit and the power of Elijah* to make straight the way of the Lord.* How unspeakable is Your compassion, O Master!* By it, O Christ, save our souls, for You alone are merciful.

How wonderful is the miracle!* The one who proclaimed the birth of Christ to all* makes known from on high all things by his voice.* Through divine power he ends the barrenness of her who gave him birth.* He also loosens Zechariah’s tongue.* How great are Your miracles, O Master. By them,* O Christ, save those who honor Your great Forerunner.

Glory be: (Tone 6): The star of stars and the Forerunner,* John, the one desired by God,* today is born on earth from a barren womb,* and he reveals the star of Christ, the Orient from on high* and the Passover of all the faithful.

Now and for ever: O Mother of God, you are the true vine laden with the fruit of life.* Therefore, we implore you, O Lady,* to intercede together with the apostles and the saints* so that we may obtain mercy for our souls.

After the great doxology: the troparion of St. John, (p. 1301); Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4), (p. 1266); the litanies; and the great dismissal.
