MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1331).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 4, Podoben – Skoro predvary): Today a branch has sprouted forth from the root of Jesse;* today Mary is conceived without any stain of sin;* today she crushed the head of the ancient serpent. Alleluia.

Glory be: Now and for ever: The choir of prophets in times past foretold the immaculate,* pure and divine Virgin, who was conceived in the sterile womb of the childless Anna.* Today we extol her with joy,* for we were saved because of her, the only immaculate One.

(Tone 8, Podoben – Vozleh na persy): Rejoice, O pure and immaculate Mary!* For Christ chose and prepared you for the salvation of the world.* Never did the moth of vileness touch her sanctity* which was prepared in advance for our salvation.

Glory be: Now and for ever: What praises can I offer to your name,* O ship which no storm of ungodliness has ever touched in any way?* You are that immaculate earth, that place of life.* You are that ship laden with the rich treasures from the Father’s house,* which has come to our shores,* in order to bestow riches upon our fruitless and orphaned souls.

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol you,* O most holy Virgin,* and we venerate your holy parents* and glorify your immaculate conception.

Verse: Then the Lord said to the serpent: I will put an enmity between you and the woman.
Verse: Between your offspring and hers.
Verse: He will strike at your head, while you strike at His feet.
Verse: Then shall I know that You love me, when my enemy ceases to gloat over me.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to you, O God. (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 3, Podoben – Krasoti divstva tvojeho): Who can express in words or speak of the pure, immaculate, holy, sanctified, unwedded ever-Virgin, who from the very moment of her conception was sanctified and chosen to become the dwelling place of the eternal living God.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon (Tone 4), (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 44 (Tone 4)
Listen, O daughter,* give ear to my word!
Verse: The richest of people shall seek your favor.

Gospel: Lk 1:39-50, 56 (p. 1045). After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse, as on Sunday; then the following sticherion:

(Tone 6): Angels, archangels, principalities, dominions, powers, virtues, thrones, cherubim and seraphim, bow down and venerate with us, our Queen, immaculately conceived in the womb of blessed Anna.

Canon (Tone 1)

Hirmos 1: When Moses, the mystic, and the Israelites began to sing a canticle of praise, Miriam led the pious women in a song of victory: Let us sing to our God – our Savior!

Hirmos 3: Having made a permanent vow before the conception of the just Samuel, the holy mother Anna today rejoices and sings with us: My heart has been strengthened in the Lord.

Hirmos 4: In days of old, Habakkuk heard of Your renown, O Christ, and with fear he exclaimed: God shall come from the south, – the Holy One from Mount Paran: Glory to Your power, O Lord.

Hirmos 5: Holding an ember with tongs, the seraphim touched the mouth of Isaiah with it; and, having been purified, he learned the truth and preached it to all.

Hirmos 6: O Lover of mankind, You rescued the prophet from the sea monster; pull me also out of the depths of sin.

Hirmos 7: We faithful recognize you as a spiritual fire, O Theotokos; for just as the Most High rescued the three youths, so too, the ever-praised and glorious God of our fathers renewed the whole world in your womb.

Hirmos 8: In former times, the fiery furnace that was covered with dew prefigured an incomprehensible miracle: For the fire did not consume the three youths, but represented the divine birth of Christ from a Virgin. Therefore, let us cry out and sing: Let all creation bless the Lord, and extol Him forever.

Ode 9: The Magnificat is omitted; but immediately after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the following verse and hirmos:

Verse: My soul, extol the Virgin Mary, who was alone with Christ immaculately conceived.

Hirmos (Tone 1): The God of Israel has shown the might in His arm; He has put down the mighty from their seat and has exalted the humble. Thus, did the Orient from on high visit us and lead us onto the path of peace.

Verse: O most holy Mother of God, save us!
The Most High has cast down the proud Satan from heaven and has exalted you, O most pure One, who wished to show yourself as the most humble of all; and He has taken you out from under his power at the very moment of your conception.

Verse: O most holy Mother of God, save us!
My soul magnifies the Lord and my spirit rejoices in God, my Savior, O most pure One, for the Holy and Almighty has done a great thing by creating you alone without the stain of sin from the very moment of your conception.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Today the Lord has remembered His mercy to Abraham and to his descendants forever, by producing from his seed and immaculately preserving the most blessed Virgin Mary. For in her Offspring all nations of the earth shall be blessed.

Verse: My soul, extol the Virgin Mary, who with Christ was immaculately conceived.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 1): I contemplate a divine and marvelous mystery: heaven has become a cave; the throne of Cherubim, a Virgin; and the manger, an honorable place in which lies Christ God, the Incomprehensible. Let us praise and extol Him.

Exapostilarion: To you, O Virgin, the only good One,* do we pray: Make us, who are wicked, good;* and fervently implore Christ, the gracious One,* that we may end our life doing good.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 5): Today from the ark of the Old Testament Church* a dove – the immaculate Mary – is sent out into the world.* Her wings are of silver and her pinions are of gold* shining with the brightness of the most holy Spirit.* Desiring to be His messenger,* she brings to those who are being saved from the flood of sin* the olive branch – Christ,* so that, with His grace all mankind may be anointed for the battle* with the prince of this world.

Today the Ewe is immaculately conceived.* She is to give birth to the unblemished Lamb – Christ,* Who will offer Himself up as a sacrifice for the life of the world.* Because of His mercy,* the Creator will cover with His grace the nakedness of man,* banished from paradise.

Today a ladder is placed between heaven and earth.* It unites earth with heaven; on it the Lord is to sit.* Therefore, let Jacob awaken from sleep* and from the extraordinary vision and cry out:* Truly the Lord is in this spot, although I did not know it.* This is nothing else but an abode of God,* and that is the gateway to heaven.* It is that gateway which prefigured you,* O immaculate One.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): Let the sea of the world be aroused;* for in it is born a shell which desires to receive in the womb the divine ray* and give birth to a precious pearl from which the King,* clothed in the purple of the flesh,* has come forth to preach forgiveness to those held captive.

After the great doxology: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1331); the litanies; and the great dismissal.

After December 11
