THIRD HOUR

Come, let us adore....

Psalm 2 (Messianic)

Why this tumult among nations,* among peoples this useless murmuring?
They arise, the kings of the earth, princes plot against the Lord and His Anointed:* “Come, let us break their fetters, come, let us cast off their yoke.”
He Who sits in the heavens laughs;* the Lord is laughing them to scorn.
Then He will speak in His anger,* His rage will strike them with terror.
“It is I Who have set up My king* on Zion, My holy mountain.”
I will announce the decree of the Lord: The Lord said to me:* You are my Son. It is I Who have begotten You this day.
Ask and I shall bequeath You the nations,* put the ends of the earth in Your possession.
With a rod of iron you will break them,* shatter them like a potter’s jar.”
Now, O kings, understand,* take warning, rulers of the earth.
Serve the Lord with awe* and rejoice in trembling.
Pay Him your homage lest he be angry and you perish;* for suddenly His anger will blaze.
Blessed are they* who put their trust in God.

Psalms 50, (p. 161), and 66 may also be taken.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!: Glory be to You, O God! (3x).
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: (Tone 4): At that time, Mary registered..., (p. 1334).

Now and for ever: O Mother of God, you are the true vine laden with the Fruit of life; wherefore, we implore you, O Lady, to intercede together with the apostles and all the saints that we may obtain mercy for our souls.

Then the following stichera are sung:

(Tone 6, Samohlasen): Such is our God, Who was born of a Virgin and lived among men;* no other is to be compared to Him.* The only-begotten Son, as man, is laid in a poor manger;* the Master of all is wrapped in swaddling clothes;* and a star announces to the magi to come and worship Him,* and we sing: Holy Trinity, save our souls.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 3): Joseph, tell us:* How is it that you bring to Bethlehem a Virgin with child,* whom you received from the holy temple?* I – he replies – having ascertained from the prophets* and having received a message from the angel, was assured,* that Mary would give birth to the incomprehensible God,* Whom the magi from the East will come to worship and honor with precious gifts.* O Lord, Who for us appeared in the flesh, glory be to You.

The rest is taken according to the rules given in the First Hour.

Prokimenon: Is 9:6 (Tone 4)
A child is born to us,* a son is given us.
Verse: Upon his shoulder dominion rests.

A reading from the Book of the prophet Baruch.
Such is our God; / no other is to be compared to him: / He has traced out all the way of understanding, / and has given her to Jacob, His servant, / to Israel, His beloved son. Since then she has appeared on earth, and moved among men. She is the book of precepts of God, / the law that endures forever; / All who cling to her will live, / but those will die who forsake her. / Turn, O Jacob, and receive her: / walk by her light toward splendor. / Give not your glory to another, / your privileges to an alien race. / Blessed are we, O Israel; / for what pleases God is known to us! (3:36-4:4).

A reading from the letter of St. Paul to the Galatians.
Brethren: Before faith came, we were held in custody under law, confined for the faith that was to be revealed. Consequently, the law was our disciplinarian for Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a disciplinarian. For through faith you are all children of God in Christ Jesus. For all of you who were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free person, there is not male and female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus. And if you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham's descendant, heirs according to the promise (3:23-29).

Gospel: Lk 2:1-20 (read by the priest).

The holy doors are closed, and the choir reads:
Blessed is the Lord God! Blessed is the Lord day by day! May the God of our salvation smooth our path. Our God is the God of salvation.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; the kontakion: Today the Virgin..., (p. 1124). The rest is as in the First Hour, (p. 1124); the concluding prayer: O God our Master... is on p. 164.

SIXTH HOUR

Come, let us adore....

Psalm 71 (Messianic)

O God, give Your judgment to the king,* to a king's son Your justice,
That He may judge Your people in justice* and Your poor in right judgment.
May the mountains bring forth peace* for the people and the hills, justice.
May He defend the poor of the people* and save the children of the needy and crush the oppressor.
He shall endure like the sun* and the moon from age to age.
He shall descend like rain on the meadow,* like raindrops on the earth.
In His days justice shall flourish* and peace till the moon fails.
He shall rule from sea to sea,* from the Great River to earth’s bounds.
Before Him His enemies shall fall,* His foes lick the dust.
The kings of Tarshish and the sea coasts shall pay Him tribute.* The kings of Sheba and Seba shall bring Him gifts.
Before Him all kings shall fall prostrate,* all nations shall serve Him.
For He shall save the poor when they cry* and the needy who are helpless.
He will have pity on the weak* and save the lives of, the poor.
From oppression He will rescue their lives,* to Him their blood is dear.
Long may He live, may the gold of Sheba be given Him;* they shall pray for Him without ceasing and bless Him all the day.
May corn be abundant in the land to the peaks of the mountains;* may its fruit rustle like Lebanon;* in the cities may men flourish like grass on the earth.
May His name be blessed for ever and endure like the sun;* every tribe shall be blessed in Him, all nations bless His name.
Blessed be the Lord, God of Israel,* Who alone works wonders.
Ever blessed His glorious name.* Let His glory fill the earth.

Psalms 90, (p 167), and 131 may also be taken.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: At that time Mary registered..., (p. 1334).

Now and for ever: Since we have no one in whom to confide because of our many sins,* O Virgin Mother of God, intercede for us* with the One Who was born of you;* for a mother’s prayer is a powerful means for obtaining the Master’s favor.* You are most worthy of veneration,* so do not turn away from the pleading of us sinners;* for the One Who willed to suffer in the flesh for our sake is full of mercy,* and His power is sufficient to save us.

Then we sing the following sticherion:

(Tone 1, Samohlasen): Come, O faithful, inspired by God,* let us arise and behold the divine condescension from on high* that is manifested to us in Bethlehem.* Cleansing our minds, let us offer virtues through our lives instead of myrrh,* preparing with faith our entry into the feast of the Nativity,* storing up treasure in our souls and singing:* Glory in the highest to God in the Trinity,* Whose good pleasure is now revealed to all,* that in His love for the human race He may set Adam free from the ancestral curse.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 5): Come, O faithful, bearers of Christ,* let us behold a wonder that overtakes all minds with amazement.* In reverent worship let us sing praises with faith.* Today a maiden bearing a child comes to Bethlehem to give birth to the Lord,* and choirs of angels go before her.* Seeing these things, Joseph, her betrothed, cries out:* What is this strange mystery in you, O Virgin?* What is this strange mystery in you,* how are you to bring forth a child, without knowing man?

The rest is taken according to the rules given in the First Hour.

Prokimenon: Ps 109 (Tone 4)
From the womb, before the daystar, I have begotten You:* the Lord has sworn and He will not repent.
Verse: The Lord said to my Lord: Sit at My right hand till I make Your enemies Your footstool.

A reading from the Book of the prophet Isaiah.
Again the LORD spoke to Ahaz: Ask for a sign from the LORD, your God; let it be deep as the nether world, or high as the sky! But Ahaz answered, “I will not ask! I will not tempt the LORD!” Then he said: Listen, O house of David! Is it not enough for you to weary men, must you also weary my God? Therefore the Lord himself will give you this sign: the virgin shall be with child, and bear a son, and shall name him Immanuel. / Know, O peoples, and be appalled! / Give ear, all you distant lands! / Arm, but be crushed! Arm, but be crushed! / Form a plan, and it shall be thwarted; / make a resolve, and it shall not be carried out, / for “With us is God!” (7:10-14; 8:9-10).

A reading from the letter of St. Paul to the Hebrews.
At the beginning, O Lord, you established the earth, / and the heavens are the works of your hands. / They will perish, but you remain; / and they will all grow old like a garment. / You will roll them up like a cloak, / and like a garment they will be changed. / But you are the same, and your years will have no end. But to which of the angels has he ever said: / “Sit at my right hand / until I make your enemies your footstool”? / Are they not all ministering spirits sent to serve, for the sake of those who are to inherit salvation? Therefore, we must attend all the more to what we have heard, so that we may not be carried away. For if the word announced through angels proved firm, and every transgression and disobedience received its just recompense, how shall we escape if we ignore so great a salvation? Announced originally through the Lord, it was confirmed for us by those who had heard (1:10-2:3).

Gospel: Mt 2:1-12 (read by the priest).

The holy doors are closed, and the choir reads:
Let Your bounties, O Lord, come down upon us in haste, for our need has become great indeed. Help us, O God our Savior, for the glory of Your name. Save us, O Master, and forgive our sins for the sake of Your name.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; the kontakion: Today the Virgin give birth..., (p.1124). The rest is as in the First Hour, (p. 1124); the concluding prayer: O God, Lord of powers... is on p. 170.
