MATINS

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 1, Podoben – Hrob tvoj, Spase): Having been the disciple of Christ,* you have taught all the people concerning the Master.* You have enlightened the world by instructing them in this knowledge, O apostle.* Therefore, we call you in truth: preacher, theologian, and beloved friend of Christ.

Glory be: Now and for ever: from the Triodion or: O Holy tabernacle... (p. 211).

(Tone 5, Podoben – Sobeznachal’noje Slovo): O perfect apostle and disciple of Christ,* you proclaimed to all the divine birth from the Father of Christ,* our Redeemer and King.* Let us extol John in songs and holy praises,* for he is worthy of honor,* and he prays unceasingly for the salvation of our souls.

Glory be: Now and for ever: from the Triodion or: Rejoice, O gate.... (p. 328).

After the Polyeleos we sing the Exaltation – see the common service for an apostle, (p. 1177).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 8, Samopodoben): You who reclined upon the bosom of Jesus,* and as a disciple having confidence in Him, asked:* Lord, who is the betrayer?* And He Who loved you very much,* O most glorious one, pointed him out with bread and salt.* Therefore, being a seer of unspeakable things,* you preached, O apostle theologian, to the ends of the earth the incarnation of the Word.* Pray to Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins to those who with love praise your memory.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 18 (Tone 4)
Through all the world their voice resounds,* their message reaches to the ends of the earth.
Verse: The heavens proclaim the glory of God, and the firmament shows forth the work of His hands.

Gospel: Jn 21:15-25. After Having seen the resurrection... and Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse as on Sunday, then the following sticherion:

(Tone 2): O disciple of the Savior, O celibate and theologian,* Christ our God entrusted the virgin Theotokos to you.* You protected her as the most cherished one.* Therefore, intercede that our souls may be saved.

Canon – from the Triodion and the following:

Ode 9 – Hirmos (Tone 8): Heaven was struck with amazement and the earth shook with fear as our God appeared in the flesh. Your womb has become more spacious than the heavens, O Mother of God; Therefore, the leaders of the heavenly hosts command both angels and people to extol you.

Verse: Holy apostle and evangelist John, pray to God for us!

The beloved disciple and pure theologian stood beneath the cross of the Master. As a virgin himself, he was entrusted with the care of the Virgin and pure Mother of God. Since he is called to be the guardian of the one who is without blemish, he himself is truly called blessed.

Verse: Holy apostle and evangelist John, pray to God for us!

You snuffed out the pagan godlessness, O wise One, declaring that in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, through Whom all things were made, visible and invisible.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Be my pillar of salvation, O Mother of God, and make the Evil One powerless against me. Preserve me from the many temptations and dangers; drive far away from me the attacks of my enemies. Set me free and grant me the fullness of the gifts of divine grace.

Katabasia: from the Triodion or: Let everyone on earth dance..., (p. 920).

Exapostilarion: As a son of thunder, you proclaimed to the people* that in the beginning was the Word;* and leaning faithfully on the bosom of your Master, O John the Apostle,* you have drawn streams of theology* from which you have watered the whole creation.

Glory be: Now and for ever: from the Triodion.

Stichera at the Praise are the same as yesterday's stichera of the aposticha, (p. 893).

MAY 9
THE TRANSLATION OF THE RELICS OF ST. NICHOLAS OF MYRA
VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 8): You have reached the heights of virtue, O blessed ambassador of Christ,* and have become the glorious wonder-worker of Myra.* While your body rests in Bari, receiving worthy veneration, in spirit you visit the faithful everywhere, delivering them from misfortune,* O blessed one of the hierarchs.* Today, we call upon you with supplications and earnestly beseech you:* Pray, O bishop Nicholas, to the Savior of all,* that He grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.

Let us the faithful honor with joy and hymns of praise* the translation of the precious relics of our intercessor,* who enlightens every nation with miracles, consoles the sorrowing, and protects the poor.* For the sake of almsgiving, he fell into God’s debt;* for this he received a hundredfold reward.* To him we all cry out: Pray, O bishop Nicholas,* to the Savior of all, that He grant peace to the world and save our souls.

Because of your virtues you, O God-bearing Nicholas,* have entered the palaces of the angels and stand before your Master Christ,* Whose most humble servant you have become.* From your relics you exude myrrh;* you help the faithful by your miracles, and lead the true believers to God.* Not from Bari do we call upon you, but from the heavenly Jerusalem,* where you are rejoicing with the apostles, prophets, and bishops.* Pray today to the Savior of all,* that He grant peace to the world and save our souls.

Glory be: (Tone 6): Let us all together venerate with canticles of praise* the beauty of the hierarchs and the glory of the fathers,* the fountain of miracles and the great intercessor of the faithful, crying out:* Rejoice, O protector of the laity, honorable archbishop and unshakeable pillar!* Rejoice, universal lamp that illumines all nations with miracles!* Rejoice, holy joy of the afflicted and sincere defender of the downtrodden!* Do not cease, O all-praised Nicholas,* even today to pray to Christ God for those* who with faith and love always honor your blessed and sacred memory.

Now and for ever: from the Triodion or the Dogmaticon.

The entrance; O Joyful Light; the prokimenon of the day; and readings (see December 6, p. 1083).

Aposticha

From the Triodion or from December 6

Glory be: (Tone 4): O bishop Nicholas,* by sea, You made your journey from Myra in Lycia to the city of Bari.* Your coffin was removed from the tomb* and transferred from the East to the far off West, O most glorious Nicholas.* It was followed by pious monks* who, by the will of God, performed services at your tomb.

Now and for ever: from the Triodion or: Look upon..., (p. 272).

MATINS: take the service from the Triodion and from December 6.
