THIRD HOUR

Come, let us adore...

Psalm 28

O give the Lord, you sons of God,* give the Lord glory and power;
Give the Lord the glory of His name.* Adore the Lord in His holy court.
The Lord’s voice resounding on the waters,* the Lord on the immensity of waters;
The voice of the Lord, full of power,* the voice of the Lord, full of splendor.
The Lord’s voice shattering the cedars,* the Lord shatters the cedars of Lebanon;
He makes Lebanon leap like a calf* and Sirion like a young wild-ox.
The Lord's voice flashes flames of fire.* The Lord’s voice shaking the wilderness, the Lord shakes the wilderness of Kadesh.
The Lord’s voice rending the oak tree and stripping the forest bare.* In His temple they all cry: Glory!
The Lord sat enthroned over the flood;* the Lord sits as king for ever.
The Lord will give strength to His people,* the Lord will bless His people with peace.

Psalm 50, (p. 161) and Psalm 41 may also be taken.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!; Glory be to You, O God. (3x).
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: (Tone 4): After Elijah had gone up..., (p. 1277).

Now and for ever: O Mother of God, you are the true vine laden with the Fruit of Life; wherefore, we implore you, O Lady, to intercede together with the apostles and all the saints that we may obtain mercy for our souls.

Then the following stichera are sung:

(Tone 8, Samohlasen): The right hand of the Forerunner, baptizer and prophet,* the most venerated of all the prophets,* trembled, when he beheld the Lamb of God,* Who takes away the sins of the world.* Overwhelmed by the awesome task he was about to perform, he said:* I do not dare, O Word, to touch Your head.* You Yourself, O bountiful One, sanctify and enlighten me,* for You are the Life and the Light and the Peace of the world.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 5): You come, O Lord, as a man in the flesh to the Jordan,* desiring, O Giver of life, to be baptized,* in order to deliver us from the wiles and traps of the serpent, and to enlighten us.* The Father bore witness to You* and the Holy Spirit in the form of a dove hovered above You.* Have Him dwell within our souls, O Lover of mankind.

The rest is taken according to the rules as prescribed in the First Hour.

Prokimenon: Ps 76 (Tone 6)
The waters saw You, O God;* the waters saw You and trembled.
Verse: I cry aloud to God, I cry aloud to God, that He may hear me.

Lector: A reading from the Book of the prophet Isaiah, (p. 821).
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles.

While Apollos was in Corinth, Paul traveled through the interior of the country and came [down] to Ephesus where he found some disciples. He said to them, “Did you receive the holy Spirit when you became believers?” They answered him, “We have never even heard that there is a holy Spirit.” He said, “How were you baptized?” they replied, “With the baptism of John.” Paul then said “John baptized with a baptism of repentance, telling people to believe in the one who was to come after him, that is, in Jesus.” When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul laid [his] hands on them, the holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke in tongues and prophesied. Altogether there were about twelve men. He entered the synagogue, and for three months debated boldly with persuasive arguments about the kingdom of God (19:1-8).

Gospel: Mk 1:1-8 – is read by the priest himself.

The holy doors are closed, and the choir reads the following prayer:
Blessed is the Lord God! Blessed is the Lord day by day! May the God of our salvation smooth our path. Our God is the God of salvation.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; kontakion: Today the Lord stood in the waters..., (p. 806). The rest as in the First Hour; then the concluding prayer: O God, our Master..., (p. 164).

SIXTH HOUR

Come, let us adore....

Psalm 76

I cry aloud to God, cry aloud to God* that He may hear me.
In the day of my distress I sought the Lord.* My hands were raised at night without ceasing; my soul refused to be consoled.
I remembered my God and I groaned.* I pondered and my spirit fainted.
You withheld sleep from my eyes,* I was troubled, I could not speak.
I thought of the days of long ago* and remembered the years long past.
At night I mused within my heart,* I pondered and my spirit questioned.
Will the Lord reject us forever?* Will He show us his favor no more?
Has his love vanished forever?* Has his promise come to an end?
Does God forget his mercy* or in anger withhold His compassion?
I said: This is what causes my grief;* that the way of the Most High has changed.
I remember the deeds of the Lord;* I remember Your wonders of old.
I muse on all Your works* and ponder Your mighty deeds.
Your ways, O God, are holy.* What God is great as our God?
You are the God Who works wonders.* You showed Your power among the peoples.
Your strong arm redeemed Your people,* the sons of Jacob and Joseph.
The waters saw You, O God, the waters saw You and trembled,* the depths were moved with terror.
The clouds poured down rain, the skies sent forth their voice;* Your arrows flashed to and fro.
Your thunder rolled round the sky,* Your flashes lighted up the world; the earth was moved and trembled.
Your way led through the sea, Your path through the mighty waters;* and no one saw Your footprints.
You guided Your people like a flock* by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Psalms 90, (p. 167), and 73 may also be taken.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!; Glory be to You, O God! (3x).
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: (Tone 4): After Elijah had gone up..., (p. 1277).

Now and for ever: Since we have no one in whom to confide because of our many sins,* O Virgin Mother of God, intercede for us with the One Who was born of you;* for a mother’s prayer is a powerful means for obtaining the Master’s favor.* You are most worthy of veneration,* so do not turn away from the pleading of us sinners;* for the One Who willed to suffer in the flesh for our sake is full of mercy,* and His power is sufficient to save us.

Then we sing the following stichera:

(Tone 8, Samohlasen): The Lord spoke these words to John:* Come and baptize Me, your Creator, O prophet,* for I enlighten and purify all people by grace.* Place your hand on my head and do not doubt.* O prophet, allow it to be this way now,* for I have come to fulfill all justice.* Cast away all your doubt;* for I hasten to put to death the prince of darkness,* the enemy who hides in the waters,* so I may release the world from his hold* and grant eternal life in my love for all.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 5): O Jordan, why do your waters change course?* Why do your streams stop, and why do you not flow as you should?* The river then answered:* I cannot hold the Fire that consumes me.* I am amazed and awed at his great condescension.* For I am not accustomed to wash Him Who is clean;* I have not learned to bathe the sinless,* but to purify the unclean vessels.* Christ, now baptized in me, teaches me to burn the thorns of sin.* John, the voice of the Word, testifies with me and cries out:* Behold the Lamb of God Who takes away the sin of the world.* O faithful, with a loud voice, let us say:* You are manifested for our salvation; O God, glory to You!

The rest is taken according to the rubrics in the First Hour.

Prokimenon: Ps 76 (Tone 4)
Your way led through the sea. Your path through the mighty waters.
Verse: Your thunder rolled round the sky.

A reading from the Book of the prophet Isaiah, (p. 832).
A reading from the letter of St. Paul to the Romans, (p. 630).
Gospel: Mk 1:9-15 – the priest himself reads the Gospel.

The holy doors are closed, and the choir recites the following prayer:
Let Your bounties, O Lord, come down upon us in haste, for our need has become great indeed. Help us, O God our Savior, for the glory of Your name. Save us, O Master, and forgive our sins for the sake of Your name.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; the following kontakion: Today the Lord stood in the waters..., (p. 806). The rest according to the typicon as prescribed in the First Hour; then the concluding prayer: O God, Lord of powers..., (p. 170).
