MATINS

After God the Lord...: Troparion of the saints, (p. 1302), Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4), (p. 1266).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 8, Podoben – Vozleh na persy): Having put aside fishing in the deep,* you received from the Father Himself the revelation of the incarnation of the Word.* Thus you confidently cried out in faith to your Creator:* I know that You are the Son of God, consubstantial with Him.* Therefore, you were truly revealed as the rock of faith and a trustee of the keys of grace.* Intercede, therefore, O apostle Peter, with Christ our God* to grant forgiveness of sins to those who lovingly celebrate your holy memory.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 1): O most holy Virgin, heavenly are your hands* with which you carried the Creator* Who became incarnate through His goodness.* Now extend your hands and beseech Him to deliver from temptation,* passion, and danger all those who lovingly praise you and cry out* “Glory to Him Who dwelled in you!* Glory to Him Who came forth from you!* Glory to Him Who delivered us through your birth-giving!”

(Tone 8, Podoben – Vozleh na persy): Having received from Christ a calling from heaven,* you were revealed as a preacher of the Light.* By your teachings you enlightened the good will of all* because you uprooted the servitude to the written law.* You illumined the faithful in their knowledge of the Spirit.* Because of this, you ascended worthily to the third heaven and attained paradise.* Therefore, O apostle Paul, intercede with Christ our God* to grant forgiveness of sins to those who lovingly celebrate your holy memory.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 4): Let us, the faithful, praise the Theotokos* who is the fervent intercessor of those in trouble.* She is our help and our reconciler with God.*

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung:

We extol you,* O Peter and Paul, apostles of Christ.* By your teachings you have enlightened the whole world* and have drawn the ends of the earth near to Christ.

Verse: The heavens proclaim the glory of God; and the firmament shows forth the work of His hands.
Verse: His lightning flashes illuminate the entire universe.
Verse: The Lord gives strength and power to His people. Blessed be God.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 8, Podoben – Vozleh na persy): Let us praise Peter and the most wise Paul,* great lampstands and lights, who were revealed as the first of the disciples.* They glistened by means of the fire of the divine Spirit* and burned up the whole cloud of deceit.* Therefore, they worthily showed themselves to be soldiers of the kingdom on high* and sharers of the throne of grace.* We, therefore, cry out to them:* O apostles of Christ our God,* obtain remission of the sins* of those who lovingly celebrate your memory.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 18 (Tone 4)
Through all the world their voice resounds;* their message reaches to the ends of the earth.
Verse: The heavens proclaim the glory of God, and the firmament shows forth the work of His hands.

Gospel: Jn 21:15-25 (the eleventh resurrectional Gospel, p. 428). After Having seen the resurrection... and Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse, as on Sunday, then the following sticherion:

(Tone 6): With hymns of praise let us venerate Peter, the rock of faith,* and Paul, a true teacher and mystic of Christ.* Both were preachers of true piety and very brilliant stars of the Church,* because they sowed the true word in the hearts of the faithful,* bestowing fruitfulness to all.* Now they entreat Christ our God that our souls be saved.

Canon (Tone 4)

Hirmos 1: There is no one like You, O glorious Lord, for by the might of Your arm You have delivered Your people whom You have inherited, O Lover of mankind!

Hirmos 3: Not of wisdom and strength, nor of riches do we boast, but of You, O Christ, the true wisdom of the Father, for there is no one holier than You, O God, Lover of mankind.

Hirmos 4: Our God is One Who was incarnate of the Virgin and deified our nature; glorifying Him, we cry out: Glory to Your might, O Lord.

Hirmos 5: O Lord, Who inherited us, Your chosen people through the shedding of Your blood, grant us Your peace, and preserve Your flock in oneness of spirit.

Hirmos 6: The three-day entombment of Jonah in the belly of the whale foretold You as dead; the Immortal One, Who deigned, of Your own free will, to remain buried three days in the heart of the earth.

Hirmos 7: O Word, co-eternal with the Father and the Spirit, only-begotten Son, You are blessed and full of glory, O God of our Fathers!

Hirmos 8: You, O Christ, Who sustains all things with Your everlasting might, covered with dew the youths who, in the blazing furnace, sang: All you works of the Lord, praise the Lord.

Ode 9 – Hirmos (Tone 4): We extol you in hymns, O most glorious bride and most holy Theotokos, for you have given birth to the Creator of all things visible and invisible.

Verse: Holy apostle Peter, pray to God for us!

The brightness of your grace, O Peter, now shines forth, and even your shadow heals the sufferings of the sick. Therefore, we extol you.

Verse: Holy apostle Paul, pray to God for us!

You were chained as a criminal for the sake of Christ. We venerate both these chains and the wounds that you bear on your glorious and triumphant body.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O most holy Mother of God, you are the praise of the apostles and the glory of the martyrs, and the foundation of the prophets. Therefore, together with them we, the faithful, dutifully extol you.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 4): Let everyone on earth dance for joy in spirit.* Let the heavenly ranks celebrate in honor of the sacred feast.* O Mother of God, let them cry: Rejoice, ever-blessed Theotokos and ever-Virgin.

Exapostilarion: Come, let us extol the apostles Peter and Paul,* those divine leaders of the apostles and lights of the universe,* the preachers of the faith and two trumpets of the Word of God,* the interpreters of teachings, pillars of the Church, and those who refute error.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 4, Podoben – Zvanyj svyshe byv): When the incarnate Savior asked the twelve disciples:* Who do people say that I am?* Peter, the elect of the apostles, having received grace from heaven,* proclaimed You clearly, speaking of Your Godhead, saying:* You are Christ, the Son of the living God.* Therefore, it is proper to bless him, for he received the revelation from above.* Indeed, he justly received the power to bind and loosen sins.

O Paul, apostle and preacher of Christ and proud bearer of His cross,* you greatly desired the divine love above all things since it binds its lovers to the Beloved.* You were also called a prisoner of Christ;* you were strengthened by temptations which you considered sweeter than all nourishment.* Because you lived only for your Master,* you were made worthy of forgiveness at death.* Entreat Him to save and enlighten our souls.

Christ, the Word of God,* the revelation of the Father, asked all of you:* Who do you say that I am?* Peter then answered:* You are the Son of the living God for You preached the Word of God to all.* He replied: Blessed are you, Simon, son of Jonah.* You received your reward from God because you glorified Him in faith.* In return He has called upon you to receive riches.* He placed you as the solid rock and foundation of the Church.

Glory be: (Tone 6): The most honorable feast has arrived,* the feast of the Church of Christ,* the feast of the intercessors of our salvation.* Therefore, let us mystically rejoice, saying to them:* Rejoice, for you have become the light of those in darkness,* shining splendors of the spiritual Sun.* Rejoice, O Peter and Paul, unshakable foundations of divine teachings,* friends of Christ and chosen vessels.* Be present among us in an invisible manner* and grant spiritual gifts to those who praise your feast with hymns.

Now and for ever: O Mother of God, you are the true vine laden with the Fruit of life.* Therefore, we implore you, O Lady,* to intercede together with the apostles and the saints* so that we may obtain mercy for our souls.

After the great doxology: the Troparion of the saints, (p. 1302), Glory be: Now and for ever: the resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4), (p. 1266); the litanies; and the great dismissal.
