MAY 11
STS. CYRIL AND METHODIUS
Teachers of the Slavs
VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 2, Podoben – Kijmy pokhvalnymy): With what crowns of praise shall we crown Cyril and Methodius,* the celebrated preachers of the consubstantial Trinity.* With the light of the Gospel,* they illumined the Slav nations sitting in the darkness of ignorance and in the shadow of death?* Through them we also, like a wild olive tree,* have been grafted onto the fertile root of the true faith.* Therefore, we have received peace and great mercy from Christ.

With what hymns of praise shall we bless the blessed teachers?* Methodius, lover of the wilderness, enriched himself with the fruits of the Spirit amid silence;* and the golden-voiced Cyril possessed wisdom through a yearning for the philosophy on high.* They shamed the foolishness of the sages of the Khazars.* Because of them, Christ our God granted great mercy to us.

With what beautiful hymns shall we praise the blessed teachers?* Methodious spumed all the beautiful things of the world out of love for Christ.* He fought mightily like an angel out of love for the King of heaven.* Cyril chose wisdom for himself in community life from early youth,* and for God’s glory he doubled the talents given to him.* Through them we came to know the one God,* the ever-existing Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

Glory be: (Tone 2): With what spiritual hymns shall we extol you, O blessed teachers?* You were apostles for the salvation of the Slavs.* With the light of the knowledge of God,* you labored well for their enlightenment though the door was closed to it.* By your invention of the Slavonic writing, this door was opened.* Having entered into it,* the Slavs now understand the mysteries of the Gospel of Christ* and receive peace and great mercy from Him.

Now and for ever: from the Triodion or Dogmaticon.

The entrance; O Joyful Light; Prokimenon of the day; and readings.

Lector: A reading from the Book of Deuteronomy.

Think! The heavens, even the highest heavens, belong to the LORD, your God, as well as the earth and everything in it. Yet in his love for your fathers the LORD was so attached to them as to choose you, their descendants, in preference to all other peoples, as indeed he has now done. Circumcise your hearts; therefore, and be no longer stiff-necked. For the LORD, your God, is the God of gods, the LORD of lords, the great God; mighty and awesome, who has no favorites, accepts no bribes; who executes justice for the orphan and the widow, and befriends the alien, feeding and clothing him. So you too must befriend the alien, for you were once aliens yourselves in the land of Egypt. The LORD, your God, shall you fear, and him shall you serve; hold fast to him and swear by his name. He is your glory, he, your God, who has done for you those great and terrible things which your own eyes have seen (10:14-21).

Other readings: Deuteronomy 1:8-17 (p. 720); Wisdom 3:1-9 (p. 744).

Aposticha

(Tone 4, Podoben – Jako dobl'a): O God-wise Cyril and Methodius,* you followed the footsteps of the apostles* in seeking the people who had strayed.* You struggled together and traveled the Slav regions like swift eagles.* You illumined them with the light of the knowledge of God,* and you guided them to the Lover of mankind and Savior of our souls.

Verse: Your priests shall be clothed with holiness; Your faithful shall ring out their joy.

O toilers in the vineyard of Christ and sowers of piety,* you zealously sought and found the Slav people who were likened to the lost coin.* They received the Word like a treasury of eternal life, O God-bearing fathers,* and now you rejoice with the angels.* Pray to Christ, the Lover of mankind and Savior of our souls.

Verse: The mouth of the just utters wisdom, and his lips speak what is right.

O defenders of the Holy Trinity;* O guides of those who strayed;* O persuaders against the wicked blasphemy of the Khazars,* you put the disgrace of the non-believers to shame.* For Christ, the Lover of mankind and Savior of our souls,* you hastened to keep the Church intact and favorable to God* from the snares of the enemy.* Thus is the Church which you had taught through your God-pleasing labors and toil.

Glory be: (Tone 6): O people, piously observing the memory of our enlighteners,* let us gratefully cry out: Rejoice, O most splendrous shining lights!* You illumined the Slavs.* Rejoice, regions, with the light of the knowledge of God.* O good shepherds who gathered into one the human flock that was scattered in the ravines of unbelief.* You brought it back to Christ, the chief Shepherd.* We extol Him; and we bless you.

Now and for ever: from the Triodion or: Christ the Lord, my Creator and Savior... (p. 332).

MATINS

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 3): O Cyril and Methodius, you are now standing in the inaccessible light* before the life-creating Trinity Whom the angelic powers extol unceasingly* and Whom you preached with a loud voice among the Gentiles.* Please pray for the Trinity to grant forgiveness of sins* and deliverance from eternal damnation* to all who lovingly venerate your memory.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 4): We praise you... (p. 267).

(Tone 5): May the Slav races rejoice today.* They are splendidly celebrating the sacred memory of the God-wise sanctifiers.* It is through them that the Divine Liturgy is celebrated in the Slavonic language.* Because of it, a well of flowing water to eternal life,* which cannot run dry, is being given to us.* Drinking from it, we shall never cease to extol you, O Cyril and Methodius.* Now that you are happy in the glory of the saints,* please pray that our souls may be saved.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 4): Rejoice, impassable Gate... (p. 328).

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung:

We extol you,* O holy Methodius and Cyril, equals to the apostles,* for by your teachings you illumined all the Slav nations* and guided them to Christ.

Verse: Through all the world their voice resounds; their message reaches to the ends of the earth.
Verse: From the rising of the sun to its setting the name of the Lord is praised.
Verse: Your justice I have proclaimed in the great assembly.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 4): Come, with loud voices let us venerate our enlighteners.* By pious teaching they fed the Slav nations* who had perished from hunger for the Word of God.* By translating the Gospel of the Son of Thunder into the native language for the Slavs,* they enlightened them as by the rays of the sun.* We also have received enlightenment from it,* and we gratefully exclaim:* Rejoice, O ever-glorified Cyril and Methodius!

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 131 (Tone 4)
Your priests shall be clothed with holiness;* Your faithful shall ring out their joy.
Verse: My lips will speak words of wisdom. My heart is full of insight.

Gospel: Jn 10:9-16 (p. 768). After (Having seen the resurrection... and) Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse as on Sunday, then the following sticherion:

(Tone 6): With your glorious life you shone forth like bright stars in the firmament of the Church,* O teachers, equals to the apostles.* With the net of your teachings* you caught for Christ many nations* and have passed on to light inaccessible.* There you now dwell, together with the angels.* Therefore, pray for us who celebrate your memory before the Lord.

Canon from the Triodion and the following:

Ode 9 – Hirmos (Tone 3): Behold, O new and divine wonder! The Lord passes through the sealed virginal doors; He enters without a body, and exits clothed in the flesh, though the doors remain sealed. This miracle prefigured the Mother of God, whom we ineffably extol.

Verse: O holy equals to the apostles, Cyril and Methodius, pray to God for us!

O ever-praised fathers, as the main foundation of our faith, you, first of all, loudly proclaimed the heavenly words of the Son of Thunder, John the Theologian: – In the beginning was the Word, – and then the melodious words of the Psalmist, which the Church lovingly repeats: All you works of the Lord, praise the Lord.

Verse: O holy equals to the apostles, Cyril and Methodius, pray to God for us!

Who is able to praise you, O ever-praised Cyril and Methodius? Who is able to count your labors and struggles, which you, as apostles, have endured for the salvation of sinful people? Above of all, we extol you for having taught us to glorify God in our native tongue.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Let us piously sing with unceasing hymns to the Mother of God: Rejoice, O holy mountain! Rejoice! O fiery throne, that bears the King of all! Rejoice, O praise of the apostles and glory of the saints!

Katabasia: from the Triodion.

Exapostilarion: O holy fathers, we brightly celebrate your memory and, implore you with our whole heart:* Make the nations wealthy with the treasure of piety;* make them firm on the rock of professing Christ and preserve our lives in peace.

Glory be: Now and for ever: from the Triodion.

Stichera at the Praises – the same stichera as those of yesterday’s aposticha, (p. 901).
