MATINS

After God the Lord...: the Troparion of the feast, (p. 1283).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 1): Let the heavenly hosts marvel at this mystery,* and let those on earth praise in song* as we behold the ineffable condescension of God.* He is now embraced in aged arms,* the One before Whom the powers of heaven tremble,* the One Who alone loves all.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 1): The One Who is with the Father upon the holy throne* has come to earth and has been born of a Virgin.* The One, Whose years are incomprehensible, becomes a babe.* Simeon received Him in his arms and cried out, rejoicing:* Now, O merciful Lord, let me depart in peace,* for You have brought joy to Your servant.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung:

We extol You,* O Christ, the Giver of life,* and we venerate Your most pure Mother,* who according to the Law brought You this day into the temple of the Lord.

Verse: The Lord is in His holy temple, the Lord Whose throne is in heaven.
Verse: They behold Your entrance, O God, the entrance of my God and my King.
Verse: Holy is this temple, awesome in righteousness.
Verse: Holiness is fitting to Your house, O Lord, until the end of time.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): The Ancient of Days becomes a child for my sake.* The most holy God is purified* in order to confirm the reality of the human flesh* which He received from the Virgin.* Simeon, upon beholding this mystery,* acknowledged Him as God revealed in the flesh.* The Elder greeted Him as Life,* and, rejoicing, cried out in his old age:* Let me depart, for I have seen You, the Life of all.

Gradual Hymn: Antiphon (Tone 4), (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 44 (Tone 4)
May this song make Your name forever remembered.* May the people praise You from age to age.
Verse: My heart overflows with noble words. To the King I must speak the song I have made.

Gospel: Lk 2: 25-32.

Now there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon. This man was righteous and devout, awaiting the consolation of Israel, and the holy Spirit was upon him. It had been revealed to him by the holy Spirit that he should not see death before he had seen the Messiah of the Lord. He came in the Spirit into the temple; and when the parents brought in the child Jesus to perform the custom of the law in regard to him, he took him into his arms and blessed God, saying: / “Now, Master, you may let your servant go / in peace, according to your word, / for my eyes have seen your salvation, / which you prepared in sight of all the peoples, / a light for revelation to the Gentiles, / and glory for your people Israel.”

After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse as on Sunday; then the following sticherion (Tone 6): Today the gates of heaven..., (p. 857).

Canon (Tone 3)

Hirmos 1: The sun shed its rays upon dry land in the middle of the sea. The water on both sides stood firm as a wall while Israel walked across. They sang this hymn pleasing to God: Let us praise the Lord, for He has been greatly glorified.

Hirmos 3: O Lord, the solid rock of those that place their trust in You, strengthen the Church which You have purchased with Your precious blood.

Hirmos 4: O Christ, Your virtue has filled the heavens. You were born from an all-pure Mother, the ark of Your majesty, and You now enter the temple of Your glory as an infant in arms; and the entire universe is filled with Your glory.

Hirmos 5: In a vision Isaiah saw the Lord seated on a high and lofty throne, surrounded by angels, and he cried out: Woe is me! For I have seen in advance the incarnate One, the Lord of the light that knows no evening, and the King of peace.

Hirmos 6: When Simeon beheld with his own eyes the salvation which was to come to the people, he cried out to God: O Christ Who comes from God, You are truly my God.

Hirmos 7: We praise with fervor the Word of God Who sent down dew upon the youths in the furnace as they spoke about heavenly things and Who has now taken flesh from the pure Virgin. We sing to Him: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers.

Hirmos 8: The three youths stood together in the unendurable fire, unharmed by the flame. As defenders of righteousness, they sang a hymn of praise: O all you works of the Lord, bless the Lord and glorify Him above all forever.

Ode 9: The Magnificat is omitted; but immediately after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos...; the choir sings the 9th Hirmos with the following verses:

O Virgin Mother of God, helper of Christians, protect, watch, and save those who have placed their hope in you.

O Virgin Mother of God, helper of the world, protect and preserve us from every care and worry.

O pure virgin Mother, the great things done for you are incomprehensible to angels and mortals.

The pure dove, the unspotted Lamb, carries the Lamb and Shepherd into the temple.

O God-bearing Simeon, come and raise up Christ to Whom the Virgin gave birth.

O mystical tongs, how do you carry the Coal? How do you nourish Him Who gives food to all?

Simeon the Elder receives in his arms the Maker of the Law and Master of all.

The aged Simeon does not hold Me; but I uphold him, for he entreats Me to let him depart.

The wise Anna, calm in spirit, awesomely speaks out, acknowledging Christ as the Creator of heaven and earth.

O daughter of Phanuel, come and stand with us, giving thanks to Christ our Savior, the Son of God.

O Christ, King of all, grant me the gift of tears that I may weep for my soul, lost in evil.

Hirmos (Tone 3): We, the faithful, see the figure of Christ in the shadow and the letter of the law which says: Every male who opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord. Therefore, we extol the firstborn of the eternal Father and the Virgin Mother.

Exapostilarion: Inspired by the Spirit, the Elder Simeon came to the temple.* He received in his arms the Master of the Law and cried out:* O Lord, release Your servant from the bonds of the flesh* according to Your word, in peace;* because my eyes have seen Your revelation,* Who is a light to the Gentiles and the salvation of Israel.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 4, Podoben – Dal jesy znamenije): In fulfillment of the Law, the Lover of mankind now is brought to the Temple.* Simeon takes Him in his aged arms and cries out:* Now let me depart to the blessedness of the world to come;* for I have beheld on this day, clothed in mortal flesh,* the One Who is Lord of life and Master of death.

As a light of revelation to the Gentiles,* You manifested Yourself, O Lord.* The Sun of justice sits upon a light cloud.* You fulfilled the shadow of the Law and showed the beginning of the new grace.* Therefore, beholding You, Simeon cried out:* Release me from corruption, for I have seen You today.

When You became incarnate as You willed,* You did not separate Yourself from the bosom of the Father.* You uphold the whole world with Your hand,* yet You were held in the arms of the ever-Virgin,* and You were handed over to the arms of Simeon, the servant of God.* Therefore, he cried out with joy:* Now You may dismiss Your servant in peace, O Lord, for I have seen You.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): O Christ our God, this day You have been pleased* to rest in the arms of the Elder* as You sit upon the throne of the Cherubim.* Deliver us, who sing Your praises, from the force of passions,* and grant salvation to our souls.

After the great doxology: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1283); the litanies; and the great dismissal.

Blessing of Candles
(The blessing usually takes place after the Divine Liturgy)

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.

Priest: O Lord Jesus Christ, Who are the true Light that enlightens every man who comes into the world, we humbly implore You, bestow Your blessing upon these Candles and sanctify † them with the light of Your grace. And just as the visible light of the candles dispels all darkness and shadow, so let the invisible flame of the Holy Spirit which illuminates our hearts cast out the darkness of sin, so that with the eye of an enlightened soul we may see that which is pleasing to You and necessary for our salvation, and having triumphed over the dark afflictions of this world we may in the end attain light everlasting:

Exclamation: For You are our Savior, and we give glory to You, together with Your eternal Father, and Your all-holy, gracious, and life-giving Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.

The priest then sprinkles the candles with holy water, saying:
These Candles are blessed † and sanctified by the sprinkling of this holy water, in the name of the Father, † and of the Son, † and of the Holy Spirit. † Amen.
