MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion of the feast.

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 1, Podoben – Hrob tvoj, Spase): The venerable choir of the divine apostles* was reunited in a marvelous manner* to bury your most pure body, O glorious Mother of God.* With them the multitude of angels also sang in honor of your passage to heaven* which we now celebrate in faith.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 3, Podoben – Krasoti divstva tvojeho): In giving birth, your conception was without seed;* in falling asleep, your body did not undergo corruption.* You have passed from one miracle to another, O Mother of God.* How did the Virgin who knew not man nourish an infant?* And how did the Mother of God know death?* Therefore, with the angels we cry out to you:* Rejoice, for you are full of grace.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol you,* O all-pure Mother of Christ our God,* and we praise your all-glorious dormition.

Verse: Shout joyfully to the Lord all the earth; sing praise to His name; give to Him glorious praise!
Verse: Glorious things have been said about you, O City of God!
Verse: The Most High has sanctified His dwelling place.
Verse: Holiness is becoming to Your house, O Lord, unto length of days!

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): Tell us, O David, what feast is now being celebrated?* The one, he said, of which I sang in the book of the Psalms.* Christ has transferred into the dwelling place above* the One who is virgin, daughter, and servant of God,* she who bore Him in her womb without seed.* Therefore, mothers and daughters and Christian spouses sing with joy and say:* Rejoice, O Virgin who has passed into the heavenly kingdom.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 44 (Tone 4)
I will make your name remembered* from generation to generation.
Verse: Listen, O daughter, give ear to my words!

Gospel: Lk 1:39-49, 56.

(As on the feast of the Annunciation, p. 1045)

After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse, as on Sunday, then the following sticherion:

(Tone 6): O tabernacle all-pure, when the translation of your body took place, the apostles gathered around your bier with fear and trembling. They gazed upon you and were filled with awe. In tears, Peter cried out to you: O Virgin, I see you laid out as one dead, yet you gave birth to the Life of the universe. I am struck with amazement, for in you dwells the One Who shall be our joy in the life beyond. O pure Virgin, intercede unceasingly with your Son and God to save the Christian people.

Canon (Tone 1)

Hirmos 1: Your holy and noble death, O Virgin, is adorned with the splendid robe of divine glory. It brings all the faithful together in joy. Led by Miriam, with dances and timbrels they praise Your only-begotten Son, for He has been greatly glorified.

Hirmos 3: You are the Creator, Wisdom, and Power of God, O Christ; and You uphold all things by Your will. Make Your Church firm and faithful, for You alone are holy and dwell among the saints.

Hirmos 4: O Christ, the prophets foretold Your incarnation from a virgin, and that You would be the glory and light of revelation to the Gentiles. The abyss cries out in joy to You: Glory to Your power, for You alone love all people.

Hirmos 5: I will speak of Your divine and wondrous mysteries, O Christ. You have revealed Yourself as the divine Son, radiant with eternal brightness, Who took flesh from a virgin. You have risen as the sun, bestowing light to those who dwelt in the shadow of darkness.

Hirmos 6: Your three-day burial, O Lord, was prefigured by the sea monster, breathing forth fire; Jonah was the interpreter of this mystery; for coming forth from the monster safe and sound, he cried out: I will offer hymns of praise to You, O Lord.

Hirmos 7: Through the power of God’s love, the three youths overcame the anger and fire, extinguished the flames with dew, and scorned the anger of the tyrant. Inspired by God, they became as a three-stringed harp singing in the flaming furnace: Blessed are You, O most glorious God, for You are the God our Fathers.

Hirmos 8: The mighty angel of God showed the three holy youths a fire which was refreshing to them but destructive to the impious. He made the Theotokos a source of life gushing forth immortality to those who sing: Because we have been saved, we glorify the one and only Creator and praise Him above all forever.

Ode 9: The Magnificat is omitted; immediately after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the following hirmos with the verse:

Verse: Seeing the dormition of the most pure One, the angels were filled with awe at how the Virgin went from earth to heaven.

Hirmos (Tone 1): In you, O pure Virgin, the laws of nature were overcome: in giving birth you remained a virgin, and in your death, heralded life. You remained a virgin after giving birth and remained alive after death, always saving your descendants, O Mother of God.

Verse: O Most Holy Mother of God, save us!
The heavenly choirs were astonished as they beheld their Master in Zion holding the soul of a woman in his hands. As a Son, it was fitting that He spoke to her who had given birth to Him without stain and said: Come and share the glory of your Son and God.

Verse: O Most Holy Mother of God, save us!
The assembly of apostles gathered around your body which had contained God. Beholding it with awe, they cried out with a clear voice: Save your people as you pass over to the heavenly mansions of your Son.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Accept from us, O Mother of the living God, our farewell hymn and encompass the Church with your light-bearing divine grace, and bestow upon your Christ-loving people peace, and upon us, who extol you, forgiveness and the salvation of our souls.

Verse: O my soul, extol the holy transference of the Mother of God from earth to heaven.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 4): Let everyone on earth dance for joy in spirit.* Let the heavenly ranks celebrate in honor of the sacred feast.* O Mother of God, let them cry: Rejoice, ever-blessed Theotokos and ever-Virgin.

Exapostilarion: O holy apostles of Christ,* gathered here from the ends of the universe,* carry my body to the garden of Gethsemane and place it in the tomb.* And You, my Son and my God,* receive my breath and my spirit.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 4, Podoben – Jako dobl'a): The heavens rejoice in your glorious dormition,* and the angelic hosts are filled with joy;* all the universe is exalting as they sing hymns of farewell to you,* O Mother of the Master of the universe,* O all-holy Virgin who did not know wedlock.* You have delivered the human race from the condemnation of old.

At the divine command,* the chosen apostles hastened from the ends of the universe to bury you;* and, seeing you carried from earth to heaven,* they praised you, with the words of Gabriel: Rejoice, O bearer of the entire Divinity!* Rejoice, O Virgin, for you alone brought heaven and earth together in giving birth to your Son.

You have given birth to Life,* and now by your holy dormition you have crossed the borders into eternal life.* The angels, the principalities, and the virtues, the prophets,* the apostles, and all creation form a procession,* and your Son receives your pure soul into his immaculate hands,* O Virgin Mother and bride of God.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): For your holy dormition,* O Mother of God and Mother of Life,* the clouds carried the apostles through the air.* Those who had been scattered throughout the world were brought together in a single choir;* and, burying your most pure body with respect,* they sang the words of Gabriel: Rejoice, O Full of Grace,* O unwedded Virgin; the Lord is with you!* Intercede with your Son and our God to save our souls.

After the great doxology: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1312); the litanies; and the great dismissal.

Blessing of Herbs, Flowers or Other Plants
(usually takes place after the Divine Liturgy)

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.

The priest reads the prayer: O almighty, eternal God, by Your word alone You created out of nothing the heavens, earth, sea, and all things visible and invisible. You commanded that the earth give forth plants and trees for the needs of man and animal, each according to its need. In Your infinite goodness You ordained that these plants serve not only as food for the animals but also as medicine for the sick body. We beseech You, bless these different plants and fruits and bestow upon them Your blessing, and endow them with Your power, so that they may serve man and animal alike as a defense against all sickness and all that is impure.

Exclamation: For You are our God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

The priest then sprinkles the flowers and plants with holy water, saying:
These Flowers and Plants (or Herbs) are blessed and sanctified by the sprinkling of this holy water, in the name of the Father, † and of the Son, † and of the Holy Spirit. † Amen.
