JERUSALEM MATINS
Jerusalem Matins: First Station

(Tone 5). We extol You, O Christ, Giver of life, Who yesterday were crucified for us and placed in a tomb, gloriously granting life to those in the grave.

Verse: They are happy whose life is blameless, who follow God's law.
The tomb became Your dwelling place; how can our Life descend to death? Yet You destroyed the kingdom of death and saved the dead by raising them from Hades.

Verse: They never do anything evil, but walk in His ways.
We venerate Your burial and the passion You endured to save us, and the death which delivers us from corruption; and we praise and extol Your kingdom.

Verse: You have laid down Your precepts to be obeyed with care.
You created the earth, establishing its size and breadth; today, O King of all, You dwell in the narrow confines of the tomb, but You raise the dead from their tombs with You.

Verse: May my footsteps be firm to obey Your statutes.
O Savior of all, Christ Jesus, the King of the universe, what did You seek when You descended into Hades? It is our human race that You wished to save.

Verse: I will thank You with an upright heart as I learn Your decrees.
Today You were placed in a tomb, O Christ our Life; by death You have conquered the kingdom of Death, and You open the fountains of life for the world.

Verse: I rejoiced to do Your will as though all riches were mine.
You descended into the grave without leaving the fatherly bosom; who can grasp this dazzling mystery which surpasses our understanding?

Verse: Your will is my delight; Your statutes are my counselors.
You were placed in a new tomb, O Christ my Savior; thus You renewed the whole human race by raising them from the dead in Your divine power.

Verse: I will run the way of Your commands; You give freedom to my heart.
By entering the sepulcher and bringing His life to the bowels of Hades, Christ frees the entire human race from death and grants us the gift of life eternal.

Glory be: We praise You, O Word, the only Lord and God of the universe, and with You, we praise the Father and the Holy Spirit; at Your tomb, we sing of Your glory.

Now and for ever: Blessed are you and we extol you, O most pure Virgin Mother, as we adore your Son and our God in faith; for us He spent three days in the tomb.

Jerusalem Matins: Second Station

Tone 5. It is proper and just to extol You and praise Your glory, O Giver of life; for You stretched out Your hands on the cross and broke the power of our enemy.

Verse: It was Your hands that made me and shaped me; help me to learn Your commands.
It is proper and just to extol You and praise Your glory, O Word and Creator; for You deliver us from corruption, and by Your suffering, You quell our passions.

Verse: Your faithful will see me and rejoice, for I trust in Your word.
The earth trembled with fear and the sun was darkened, O God our Savior when it saw You, O Christ, the unsetting Light, bodily buried in the earth.

Verse: Your truth lasts from age to age, like the earth You created.
When he placed You in the new tomb, O my Savior, Joseph piously sang the dirges that flowed from his grief and the hymns that praised Your divinity.

Verse: I turn my feet from evil paths, to obey Your word.
You have gone down beneath the earth, O God and Creator, and the radiant star sets with You; every creature is seized with fear upon seeing the Creator of light grow dim.

Verse: I have sworn and have made up my mind to obey Your decrees.
Unsetting Star and Light that knows no evening, You now set bodily in the earth; unable to bear the eclipse of its God, the sun is wrapped in darkness at the height of day.

Verse: Though the wicked try to ensnare me, I do not stray from Your precepts.
In the short time You were asleep, You gave life to the dead; and, in Your resurrection, You raise those who had been asleep from all times.

Verse: I open my mouth and I sigh, as I yearn for Your commands.
With our hymns, we praise, O Christ, the divine brightness of Your precious cross and Your life-giving burial; for You redeem us from the snare of the enemy.

Glory be: O Trinity, Who reigns forever, God the Father in union with the Word and the Spirit, grant Your divine support to Your faithful and strengthen our hearts in the face of Your enemies.

Now and for ever: O holy Virgin, all-pure and immaculate, you gave birth to the Giver of life; save our Church from adversity, and in your goodness, grant that we may live in peace.

Jerusalem Matins: Third Station

(Tone 3). All peoples and nations praise Your burial, O Christ, and offer You their hymns and songs.

Verse: Turn and show me Your mercy; show justice to Your friends.
When he took You down from the cross and wrapped You in pure linen, Joseph placed You in his own tomb.

Verse: Let my steps be guided by Your promise; let no evil rule me.
The Myrrh-bearers took spices to anoint Your divine body, and hastened to offer them to You, O Christ.

Verse: Tears stream from my eyes, because Your law is disobeyed.
O thrice-blessed Joseph, you offer your respects to the most pure body of Christ the Lord and Master of life.

Verse: The justice of Your will is eternal; if You teach me I shall live.
To bury their Creator, Joseph and Nicodemus have brought a jar of myrrh and aloes.

Verse: Numberless, Lord, are Your mercies; with Your decrees give me life.
Son of God and King of all, Lord, my God and Creator, how do You deign to suffer so?

Verse: Lord, let my cry come before You: teach me by Your word.
In heaven, the angels of the Lord tremble with fear seeing Christ lying in the shadow of death.

Verse: Let my pleading come before You; save me by Your promise.
We praise You with our love; by Your passion, grant to us sinners Your grace and forgiveness.

Glory be: O Trinity, O divine majesty, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, have mercy on Your world.

Now and for ever: O Virgin Mother of God, grant that your servants may behold the resurrection of your Son.
