SEPTEMBER

✠ The Beginning of the Indiction, that is the New Liturgical Year; our Venerable Father Simeon the Stylite and his mother Martha; the Synaxis of the Mother of God at Miasenes; the Holy Martyr Aeithalas; the Forty Holy Women Martyrs and the Holy Deacon Ammon their Teacher; the Holy Martyrs Callistus, Evodius and Hermogenes; and the Just Joshua, son of Nun.

Troparion of the Indiction (Tone 2): O Lord, Maker of the universe,* Who alone has power over seasons and times,* bless this year with Your bounty,* preserve our country in safety, and keep Your people in peace.* Save us through the prayers of the Mother of God.

Kontakion of the Indiction (Tone 2): O Creator and Master of time and eternity,* God of all, O Merciful One, bless the course of this year,* and in Your boundless mercy, save all those who worship You, our one and only Master,* and who cry out to You in fear:* O Savior, grant a happy year to all people.

The Holy Martyr Mammas; and our Venerable Father John the Faster, Patriarch of Constantinople.

The Holy Hieromartyr Anthimus, Bishop of Nicomedia; and our Venerable Father Theoktistus.

The Holy Hieromartyr Babylas, Bishop of Antioch; the Holy God-Seer Moses.

The Holy Prophet Zechariah, Father of the Forerunner.

The Commemoration of the Miracle of the Holy Archangel Michael at Colossa, in Chone (The service is taken from Nov. 8, p. 1060); the Holy Martyrs Eudoxius and others with him (Common service of Martyrs); and our Venerable Father Archippus.

The Prefeast of the Nativity of the Mother of God; the Holy Martyr Sozon.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Today is born to us, from the stem of Jesse and loins of David,* Mary, the Maiden of God.* Therefore, the whole creation rejoices and is renewed.* Rejoice together heaven and earth;* and you peoples of the world,* sing to her a joyful hymn of praise.* Joachim is elated and Anne shouts for joy:* The barren one gives birth to the Mother of God,* the Sustainer of our life.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 3): Today the holy Virgin and God-bearer Mary* is born from a barren womb by divine counsel.* She is the everlasting bridal chamber of the heavenly bridegroom.* Today the chariot of the Word is adorned,* and the door for God is foretold;* she is called the Mother of Life.

⊕ The Nativity of the Mother of God.

Troparion (Tone 4): Your birth, O Virgin Mother of God,* heralded joy to the universe;* for from you rose the Sun of Justice, Christ our God.* He took away the curse,* He gave the blessing,* and by trampling Death,* He gave us everlasting life.

Kontakion (Tone 4): Through your holy birth, O Immaculate One,* Joachim and Anne were freed from the reproach of childlessness,* and Adam and Eve from the corruption of death.* Delivered from the guilt of sin,* your people celebrate this when they cry out to you:* She who is barren* gives birth to the Mother of God* and the Sustainer of our Life.

The Holy and Righteous Joachim and Anne, parents of the Mother of God; and the Holy Martyr Severian.

Troparion of the Saints (Tone 1): The just couple who lived in the state of grace,* Joachim and Anne, gave birth to this holy child for us.* The Church solemnly honors this feast in glory* and celebrates your precious memory today.* She glorifies God Who has lifted up our horn of salvation in the house of David.

Kontakion of the Saints (Tone 2): The chains of sterility are broken and Anne rejoices.* She nurses the most pure Lady and invites us to sing with her* to the virgin Mother who is born for all people.

The Holy Martyrs Menodora, Metrodora, and Nymphodora.

The Venerable Theodora of Alexandria.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Nativity of the Mother of God; and the Hieromartyr Autonomus.

The Prefeast of the Exaltation of the Precious and Life-giving Cross; the Hieromartyr Cornelius, the Centurion; the Commemoration of the Dedication of the Church of the Holy Resurrection of Christ our God.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): We offer You the life-giving Cross, O Lord,* as a means of intercession, and as a sign of Your bounty* which You have given to us in spite of our unworthiness.* Save our country and Your people* who offer You their supplications through Your Mother,* for You alone are the Lover of Mankind.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 8): Today we see the saving tree which blossomed from earthly seed.* It is lifted up in the Church by the hands of the Hierarch.* The universe adores and greets it with awe.* Save us by it, O Lord.

⊕ The Exaltation of the Holy Cross.

Troparion (Tone 1): Save Your people, O Lord, and bless Your inheritance.* Grant victory to Your faithful people against enemies,* and protect Your community by Your cross.

Kontakion (Tone 4): Willingly raised upon the cross, O Christ our God,* You bestowed Your mercies upon a new people bearing Your name.* With Your power grant joy to our Church* giving her victory over enemies,* with the invincible standard, Your weapon of peace, as an ally.

Dismissal: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, by the power of the honorable and life-giving cross, the exaltation of which we today gloriously celebrate; through the prayers of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The Holy Great-Martyr Nicetas.

The Holy Great-Martyr Euphemia.

The Holy Martyr Sophia and her three daughters, Faith, Hope and Love.

Our Venerable Father Eumenius, Bishop of Gortyna, Wonderworker.

The Holy Martyrs Trophimus, Sabbatius, and Dorymedont.

The Holy Martyrs Eustathius and those with him (Common service of Martyrs); the Holy Martyrs and Confessors Grand Prince Michael and his Nobleman Theodore, Wonderworkers of Chernihiv.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross; the Holy Apostle Codratus of Magnesia.

The Holy Hieromartyr Phocas, Bishop of Sinope; the Prophet Jonah; the Venerable Priest Jonah.

The Conception of the Honorable and Glorious Holy Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist John.

Troparion (Tone 4): Joy to you, O barren one unable to give birth.* Behold, you conceive today the one who is really a torch of the Sun* Who will enlighten the whole world that suffers from blindness.* Rejoice, O Zechariah, and cry out in all confidence:* The one who will be born is a prophet of the Most High.

Kontakion (Tone 1): Zechariah rejoices greatly with his wife Elizabeth,* for she has conceived John the Forerunner* whom the angel announced in gladness.* As for us, we honor him in witness of this blessing.

The Holy Martyr Thecla, Equal to the Apostles.

The Venerable Euphrosyna.

✠ The Falling Asleep of the Holy Apostle and Evangelist John the Theologian. (use the service of May 8, p. 892).

The Holy Martyrs Callistratus and others with him (Common service of Martyrs); and the Venerable Nilus, Founder and Hegumen of the Grottaferrata Monastery.

✠ Our Venerable Father and Confessor Chariton (Common of a Confessor); the Holy Vyacheslav, Prince of Bohemia; the Synaxis of the Venerable Fathers of the Percheska Lavra, who repose in the nearer caves to the Venerable Anthony.

Troparion of St. Chariton (Tone 8): You blended the river of your tears with the wellspring of your profession,* and in those waters you wash away the sins of those who esteem your precious memory.* You present them clean before their God and Master,* now beg Him to save our souls.

Kontakion of St. Chariton (Tone 2): O divinely-minded Chariton,* you found your delight in monastic life.* You conquered the passions of your body and increased in faith;* you blossomed forth like the Tree of Life in the midst of paradise,* O most blessed and holy father.

For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1194).

Our Venerable Father Cyriacus the Anchorite.

The Holy Hieromartyr Gregory, Bishop of Greater Armenia.
