APRIL

Our Venerable Mother Mary of Egypt.

Our Venerable Father Titus the Wonderworker; Blessed Bishop Nicholas Charnetsky, CSsR, Confessor, and Companions.

Troparion of Nicholas (Tone 4): Your martyrs, Nicholas Charnetsky and Companions, O Lord,* by their sufferings acquired crowns of incorruptibility from You, our God.* For possessing Your power they overcame the torturers* and shattered the feeble insolence of demons.* By their supplications, save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Appearing as radiant lights, O godly martyrs,* you illumine all creation with the brightness of your miracles, healing infirmities,* always dispelling deep darkness and praying unceasingly* to Christ our God for all of us.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Nicetas, Hegumen of the Medicius Monastery (Common service of a Venerable).

Our Venerable Fathers Joseph the Hymnographer and George of Maleon.

The Holy Martyrs Theodulus, Agathopodas, and Companions.

✠ The Falling Asleep of our Father Methodius, Bishop and Teacher of the Slavs; and our Holy Father Eutychius, Archbishop of Constantinople.

Troparion (Tone 4): Send Your mercy from heaven, O Christ,* to those who keep the feast of Your pastor’s death.* Through the intercession of Your holy disciple* who is truly our father in the faith,* open the gates of Your kingdom* and break the chains of our many sins.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Let us sing of the heavenly and faithful Methodius.* Let us praise with love this great pastor of the Slavs.* Truly he was a good servant of the Trinity.* He banished the wiles of heresy.* Rejoice, because he prays for all of us.

Readings at Vespers: Deut 1:8-17 (p. 720); Deut 10:14-21 (p. 900); Wis 3:1-9 (p. 744).

Our Venerable Father George, Bishop of Mitylene; Blessed Josaphata Hordashevska, SSMI.

The Holy Apostles Herodion, Agabus, Rufus, Asyncretus, Phlegontus, and Hermes.

The Holy Martyr Eupsychius.

The Holy Martyrs Terence, Pompius, and others with them.

The Holy Hieromartyr Antipas, Bishop of Pergamum in Asia.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Basil, Bishop of Parium (Common service of a Confessor).

The Holy Hieromartyr Artemon and others with him (Common service of a Hieromartyr).

Our Holy Father and Confessor Martin, Pope of Rome; and the Holy Martyrs Anthony, John, and Eustathius.

The Holy Apostles Aristarchus, Pudens, and Trophimus.

The Holy Virgins and Martyrs Agape, Irene, and Chionia.

Our Venerable Father Simeon the Persian and Acacius, Bishop of Melitene.

Our Venerable Father John, Disciple of Gregory the Decapolite.

Our Venerable Father John the Hermit.

Our Venerable Father Theodore Trichinas.

The Holy Hieromartyr Januarius and others with him (Common service of Hieromartyrs); and the Holy Martyr Theodore of Pergia.

Our Venerable Father Theodore Sykeot; and Vitalius.

✠ The Glorious Great-Martyr, and Wonder-worker George.

Troparion (Tone 4): You fought the good fight with faith,* O George, Martyr of Christ,* You exposed the perversion of the persecutors* and offered an acceptable sacrifice to God.* Therefore, you also received a crown of victory and through your prayers, O holy one,* obtained the forgiveness of sins for all.

Kontakion (Tone 4): Reared by God, you were a noble sower of piety,* harvesting sheaves of virtue.* You sowed in tears but reaped in joy;* and having honorably fought and given your blood, you were received by Christ.* Through your prayers, O holy one,* obtain the forgiveness of sins for all.

The Holy Martyr Sabbas Stratelates.

✠ The Holy Apostle and Evangelist Mark.

Troparion (Tone 3): You became an apostle of Christ through the teaching of Peter,* and you traveled like the sun over foreign lands.* You fathered the Alexandrians in Christ, O blessed saint,* and, by you, Egypt was set free from her mistakes.* You guide us all like a beacon, O Mark, voice of God.* You are a pillar of the Church by your gospel teaching.* We rejoice in this and keep your memory.* Intercede with God, Who proclaims the Gospel through you, to forgive us our many sins.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Receiving the grace of the Spirit from heaven,* you silenced the babble of the orators, O apostle.* You attracted the pagans by the preaching of the Gospel* and led them to your Master, O Blessed Mark.

Readings at Vespers: James 1:1-12; James 1:13-27; James 2:1-13.

The Holy Hieromartyr Basil, Bishop of Amasea.

The Holy Hieromartyr Simeon, Cousin of the Lord; Venerable Father Stephen, Bishop of Volodymyr in Volyn.

The Holy Apostles Jason and Sosipater; Holy Martyrs Maximus, Dadas, and Quintillianus.

The Nine Holy Martyrs of Cyzica; Venerable Father and Wonderworker Memnon.

✠ The Holy Apostle James, Brother of John the Theologian.

Troparion (Tone 3): You were an apostle of Christ and the beloved brother of John.* O praiseworthy James, obtain absolution for those who sing the praises of your memory* and find mercy for our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): O glorious James, when you heard the Divine Word calling you,* you put aside your love for your father* and hurried to Christ with your brother, John.* Therefore, both of you were made worthy to see the divine transfiguration of the Lord.

Readings at Vespers: James 1:1-12; James 1:13-27; James 2:1-13.

MAY

The Holy Prophet Jeremiah; Blessed Clement (Klymentii) Sheptytsky, Confessor.

Our Holy Father Athanasius the Great.

✠ The Falling Asleep of our Venerable Father Theodosius the Great, Hegumen of the Pecherska Lavra and organizer of the monastic life; and the Holy Martyrs Timothy and Maura.

Troparion for Theodosius (Tone 8): Loving the monastic life from your youth, you climbed the summit of virtue.* Achieving your goal, you took up life in a cave.* Perfecting your life by fasting, you became like an angel.* You have enlightened all the Slav lands like a star.* O Father Theodosius, intercede with Christ our God to save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 3): We venerate the star of all the Slav lands today,* rising in the East and traveling to the West.* The Blessed Theodosius radiated miracles and holiness* by his goodness and monastic piety.

The Holy Martyr Pelagia.

The Holy Martyr Irene; and our Venerable Father Nicephorus, Hegumen of the Medicius Monastery.

The Just and Long-suffering Job.

Troparion (Tone 1): When the enemy of the just beheld the treasures of Job’s virtues, he sought to destroy them.* He attacked his body but could not touch his spirit, for his pure soul was well-armed.* As for us, the same enemy stripped us and chained us.* Therefore, O Savior, be on our side,* protect us against the devil and save us.

Kontakion (Tone 8): O faithful Job, celebrated servant of God,* you were a deeply just man and God’s sincere worshiper.* You gave the world a stirring lesson by your patience and long-suffering.* Therefore, we sing a hymn of praise to your memory and we honor you.

The Holy Martyr Acacius; and the Commemoration of the Apparition of the Holy Cross over Jerusalem.

✠ The Holy Apostle and Evangelist John the Theologian, and Venerable Arsenius the Great.

Troparion of Saint John (Tone 2): Beloved apostle of Christ our God,* hasten to deliver a people that lacks any other defense.* He Who accepted that you lay your head on His breast* will also accept your prayer.* Pray to Christ, O theologian,* that He may overcome the darkness of pagan nations,* and beg that He grant us peace and abundant mercy.

Kontakion of Saint John (Tone 2): O man of purity, who could describe your glory?* Many are the miracles and healings you perform.* Since you are a theologian and the beloved of Christ,* intercede with Him for the salvation of our souls.

Dismissal: Christ our God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, the holy glorious and praiseworthy apostle and evangelist, virgin, and beloved disciple of Christ, who reclined upon the bosom of the Lord, John the Theologian, whose memory we gloriously celebrate today, and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

✠ The Translation of the Relics from Myra in Lycia to Bari of our Holy Father Nicholas, Archbishop; the Holy Prophet Isaiah; and the Holy Martyr Christopher.

Troparion of Saint Nicholas (Tone 4): A day of festal joy has come.* The city of Bari rejoices, and the world sings with it.* Today we celebrate the transfer of the relics of the wonderworking and holy Nicholas.* Just as the perfect Light has gleamed in glory,* so does Nicholas disperse the darkness of temptation for those who sing out:* Save us as a patron, O Nicholas.

Kontakion of Saint Nicholas (Tone 3): Like a star rising in the East, your relics have arisen and come to the West.* The waters of the sea have been hallowed by your passage,* and the city of Bari has received grace from you.* You are truly a most wonderful miracle-worker and a merciful prelate;* therefore, we praise you.

✠ The Holy Apostle Simon the Zealot.

Troparion (Tone 3): O Holy Apostle Simon, intercede with the all-merciful God* that He may grant us forgiveness of our sins.

Kontakion (Tone 2): With holy hymns we bless Simon as a preacher of God,* who rooted wisdom deeply in the hearts of the pious.* Now he stands before the throne of Glory* and rejoices in the company of angels.* He prays unceasingly for all of us.

For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1175).

✠ Cyril and Methodius, Equals to the Apostles and Teachers of the Slavs; and the Holy Hieromartyr Mocius; Blessed Basil Hopko, Auxiliary Bishop of Preshov.

Troparion of the Cyril & Methodius (Tone 4): As equals of the apostles and teachers of the Slavs,* beg the Master of all to confirm us in the faith* and in unity of heart, O Cyril and Methodius.* Beg Him for peace in the world and mercy on our souls.

Kontakion of the Cyril & Methodius (Tone 3): We honor those priests who gave us the Light;* who opened the fountain of theology for us by translating the Holy Scriptures,* thus starting a river from them that still runs today.* We glorify you, O Cyril and Methodius,* who stand in heaven before the throne of the Lord on high,* and who pray so fervently for all of us.

Our Holy Fathers Epiphanius, Bishop of Cyprus, and Germanus, Patriarch of Constantinople (Office of Hierarchs).

The Holy Martyr Glyceria.

The Holy Martyr Isidore.

Our Venerable Father Pachomius the Great.

Our Venerable Father Theodore the Sanctified, Disciple of Pachomius.

The Holy Apostles Andronicus and others with him (Common service of two or more Apostles).

The Holy Martyrs Theodotus of Ancyra; and the Holy Martyrs Peter and Dionysius, and others with them; Blessed Ivan Ziatyk, CSsR, Hieromartyr.

The Holy Hieromartyr Patrick, Bishop of Prussa (Common service of a Hieromartyr).

The Holy Martyr Thalaleus.

✠ The Holy Emperor Constantine and his Mother, Helen, Equals to the Apostles.

Troparion (Tone 8): Seeing the cross in the sky like Paul,* and like him you received a call from the Divine.* You committed the royal city into the hands of the Lord.* Save this city always in peace, O only Lover of mankind,* through the prayers of the Theotokos.

Kontakion (Tone 3): Today Constantine and his mother Helen reveal the cross,* that most precious tree which puzzles the enemies.* It is the armor of Christian authorities against enemies.* It has proved itself awesome in war by its many miracles.

The Holy Martyr Basiliscus.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Michael, Bishop of Synada (Common service of a Hierarch); the Venerable Euphrosyna of Polotsk, Hegumena of the Monastery of the Holy Savior.

Our Venerable Father Simeon of the Mountain of Wonders; and our Venerable Father Nicetas the Stylite, Wonderworker of Pereyaslav.

✠ The Third Finding of the Venerable Head of the Prophet and Forerunner John the Baptist (Take the service of the 29th of August, p. 999); Blessed Mykola Tsehelsky, Hieromartyr.

Troparion (Tone 4): Like a heavenly treasure hidden in a field,* Christ has revealed your head for us, O prophet.* Having gathered together at its discovery,* we sing hymns to the Savior Who delivers us by your prayers.

Kontakion (Tone 6): O heavenly light and divine pillar in the world, O lampstand of the sun,* the lightbearing and divine head of the Forerunner was discovered and revealed to the whole world.* It sanctifies those who in faith venerate it and who cry out:* O most wise Baptizer of Christ, save all of us.

The Holy Apostle Carpus, one of the Seventy.

The Holy Hieromartyr Therapontus.

Our Venerable Father Nicetas, Bishop of Chalcedon.

The Venerable-Martyr Theodosia, Virgin.

Our Venerable Father Isaac, Hegumen of the Dalmatia Monastery.

The Holy Apostle Hermes; the Holy Martyr Hermias.
