TROPARIA OF THE MENAION – CALENDAR
JANUARY

⊕ The Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ; our Holy Father Basil the Great, Archbishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

Troparion of the Circumcision (Tone 1): O Jesus, enthroned on high together with Your eternal Father and divine Spirit,* You condescended to be born on earth of a maiden and virgin mother.* And on the eighth day You were circumcised.* Praised be Your most noble decision;* praised be Your plan of salvation;* glory be to Your condescension, O Lord; You alone love mankind.

Troparion of St. Basil (Tone 1): Your voice resounds throughout the world* which has accepted the lessons so well taught by you.* You have clarified the nature of created things.* You have made a rule of life for men.* By your royal priesthood, O venerable Father Basil,* intercede with Christ to save our souls.

Kontakion of St. Basil (Tone 4): O venerable and heavenly inspired Basil,* you were a firm foundation of the Church* by giving to all a lasting treasure* and impressing them with your teachings.

Kontakion of the Circumcision (Tone 3): The Lord of All endures circumcision* and His goodness purifies the sins of men* and grants salvation to the world today.* Therefore, Basil the priest and torchbearer of the Creator,* the divine mystic of Christ, rejoices on high.

Dismissal: Christ our true God, Who, for our salvation, submitted to circumcision on the eighth day according to the law, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, and of our holy father Basil the Great, Archhierarch of Caesarea in Cappadocia and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The Prefeast of the Theophany of our Lord; our Holy Father Sylvester, Hierarch and Pope of Rome.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Make ready, O Zabulon,* and prepare yourself, O Nephtali;* O River Jordan, stop and receive with joy* the Master coming to be baptized.* O Adam, rejoice with the first mother, Eve,* and do not hide yourselves as before in paradise.* For, having seen you unclothed,* Christ has appeared to clothe you with the first robe:* He has appeared to renew all creation.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Today the Lord stood in Jordan’s current telling John:* Do not be afraid to baptize Me,* for I have come to save Adam, the first man.

The Holy Prophet Malachi; Holy Martyr Gordius.

The Synaxis of the Seventy Holy Disciples; our Venerable Father Theoktistos, Hegumen of the Cucume Monastery in Sicily.

The Vigil of the Theophany of our Lord; Holy Martyrs Theopemptus and Theonas; the Venerable Syncletica.

Troparion of the Vigil (Tone 4): After Elijah had gone up to heaven,* Elisha threw his mantle in the Jordan River which parted,* opening a way, a dry path between two walls of water, where he could pass,* a true symbol of our baptism by which we pass through this fleeting life.* Christ has been seen at the Jordan River to sanctify the waters.

Kontakion of the Vigil (Tone 4): O most compassionate Christ Who absolves our sins in the depth of Your mercy,* You came to be baptized with the water of the Jordan.* You robed me in splendor replacing my ancient garment of evil.

⊕ The Theophany of our Lord God and Savior, Jesus Christ.

Troparion (Tone 1): At Your baptism in the Jordan, O Lord,* worship of the Trinity was revealed,* for the Father’s voice bore witness to You,* calling You His beloved Son,* and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed the truth of these words.* O Christ God, Who appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to You!

Kontakion (Tone 4): You have revealed Yourself to the world today,* and Your light, O Lord, has shined upon us.* We recognize You and exclaim to You:* You have come and revealed Yourself, O Inaccessible Light!

Dismissal: Christ our true God, Who, for our salvation, deigned to be baptized in the Jordan by John, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, the holy, glorious and praiseworthy apostles, our venerable and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The Synaxis of John the Baptist, Prophet and Forerunner. (Take the service of the 23rd of September, p. 1036; the troparion and kontakion are taken from Tuesday, p. 1235.)

Our Venerable Father George the Chosebite; the Venerable Dominica; and the Holy Confessor Emilian.

The Holy Martyr Polyectus.

Our Holy Father Gregory of Nyssa, Hierarch; Venerable Dometian, Bishop of Melitene; Venerable Father Marcion, Presbyter.

✠ Our Venerable Father Theodosius, Founder of Monasteries.

Troparion (Tone 8): Your abundant tears made the wilderness bloom,* and your sufferings made your labors fruitful a hundredfold;* you became a shining torch over the world.* Father Theodosius,* pray to Christ our God that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 8): You were planted in the courts of your Lord* and blossomed forth with beautiful and admirable virtues,* O master of God’s holy sheepfold.* You multiplied your children in the wilderness* and quenched their thirst with your abundant tears.* Therefore, we cry out: Rejoice, O Father Theodosius!

For readings at Vespers, (see p. 1194).

The Holy Martyr Tatiana.

The Holy Martyrs Hermylus and Stratonicus.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Theophany of our Lord; Venerable Martyrs Slain at Sinai and Raltho; and the Death of the Holy Equal-to-the-Apostles Nina, Enlightener of Armenia.

Our Venerable Father Paul of Thebes and John the Hut-Dweller.

The Veneration of the Chains of the Holy Apostle Peter.

Our Venerable Father and God-bearer Anthony the Great.

Troparion (Tone 4): Father Anthony, you imitated Elijah in his zeal,* and you followed John the Baptist in his holy way of life.* You took up your abode in the desert* and strengthened the world by your prayers.* Intercede with Christ our God that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): You rejected the troubles of this world, most venerable Anthony,* and spent your life in peace by imitating John the Baptist.* With him, we exalt your name;* for you are a perfect example of good conduct.

For readings at Vespers, (see p. 1194).

Our holy Fathers Athanasius and Cyril, Archbishops of Alexandria.

Our Venerable Father Macarius of Egypt.

✠ Our Venerable Father and God-bearer Euthymius the Great.

Troparion (Tone 4): Joy to you, O barren wilderness;* rejoice, sterile desert that has never known the travail of birth;* for your spouse has multiplied your children.* He has planted them in devotion and piety,* and made them grow in detachment for the sake of perfect virtue.* Through his supplications, Christ our God, give peace to our lives.

Kontakion (Tone 8): Creation takes joy in your birth and memory.* It is delighted with the abundance of your miracles.* Enrich our souls from your treasures, O father,* and wash our defilements away so that we can sing: Alleluia!

For readings at Vespers, see p. 1194.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Maximus (Common service of a Confessor); Martyr Neophitus; Holy Martyrs Eugene, Candidus, Valerian, and Acquila.

The Holy Apostle Timothy; Venerable Martyr Anastasius the Persian.

The Holy Hieromartyr Clement, Hierarch of Ancyra; and Holy Martyr Agathangelos; Blessed Vincent Levoniuk and his twelve companions, Martyrs.

The Venerable Xenia of Rome.

✠ Our Holy Father Gregory the Theologian.

Troparion (Tone 1): The sweet melody of your theological teachings* has overcome the noisy blasts of orators.* For God has granted you the power of penetrating spiritual depths* and the gift of brilliant literary talent.* Gregory, our father, intercede with Christ our God that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 3): O glorious Gregory, your theological knowledge has solved the problems raised by orators.* You have robed the Church with true theology inspired from on high.* The Church puts on this robe and cries out with us, your children:* Rejoice, O father, whose theological knowledge is so great.

For readings at Vespers: Prov 10:6-8, 8:6-21 (p. 934); Wis 4:7-15 (p. 886); Wis 8:17-9:14.

Our Venerable Fathers Xenophon and his wife, Mary (Common service of two or more monks).

✠ The Translation of the Relics of our Holy Father John Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople.

Troparion (Tone 8): The grace that shines forth like a torch from your mouth* has enlightened the universe,* bestowed treasures of generosity upon the world,* and shown us the depth of your humility.* While you teach us by your words,* O holy father, pray to the Word, Christ our God,* that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 1): The Church rejoiced greatly* because of the transfer of your holy relics,* and she kept them as a treasure of great price.* Through your intercession, these same remains* convey the grace of healing upon those who sing to you a hymn of praise,* O most glorious John Chrysostom.

Readings at Vespers: Prov. 10:6-8, 8:6-21 (p. 934); Wis. 4:7-15 (p. 886); Wis. 8:17-9:14.

Our Venerable Father Ephrem the Syrian.

The Translation of the Relics of the Holy Hierarch and Martyr Ignatius of Antioch.

✠ The Commemoration of the Three Bishops: Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom; and Hieromartyr Hippolitus.

Troparion of the Saints (Tone 4): O teachers of the universe,* equal to the apostles,* pray to the Lord of All to grant peace to the world* and abundant mercy to our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): O Lord, You have received Your priestly and divinely inspired preachers,* the crown of Your teachers,* into the enjoyment of Your goodness and repose.* You accepted their labors and death above any other sacrifice,* for only You can glorify Your saints.

The Holy Selfless Physicians Cyrus and John.
