OCTOBER

The Protection of the Most Holy Mother of God; the Holy Apostle Ananias, one of the seventy disciples; our Venerable Father Roman the Hymnographer; Blessed Nykyta Budka, Confessor.

Troparion of the Feast (Tone 4): Protected by your coming, O Mother of God,* the faithful people solemnly celebrate today;* and gazing upon your immaculate image,* they humbly say: Watch over us with your noble protection,* and deliver us from all evil* by asking your Son, Christ our God, to save our souls.

Kontakion of the Feast (Tone 3): Today the Virgin is present in the Church* and with the armies of Saints invisibly prays to God for us.* The angels worship with the archangels* and the apostles rejoice with the prophets,* because in our behalf, the Mother of God prays to the eternal God.

Troparion of Bl. Nykyta Budka (Tone 4): O Holy Bishop and Martyr Nykyta,* you lent yourself to the apostles’ way of life* and succeeded them on their thrones.* Inspired by God, you found the way to contemplation* through the practice of virtue.* Therefore, you became a perfect teacher of truth,* fighting for the faith unto the shedding of your blood.* Intercede with Christ our God that He may save our souls.

The Holy Hieromartyr Cyprian; the Holy Martyr Justina; and St. Andrew, Fool for Christ.

The Hieromartyr Dionysius the Areopagite.

The Holy Hieromartyr Hierotheus, Bishop of Athens; and our Venerable Father Francis of Assisi.

The Holy Martyr Charitina.

✠ The Holy and Glorious Apostle Thomas.

Troparion (Tone 2): You were both a disciple of Christ and a member of the apostolic college.* Your lack of faith proved the Resurrection,* and your touch unleashed reverence.* O Thomas, ever worthy of praise, obtain peace and mercy for us.

Kontakion (Tone 4): O Thomas, full of wisdom and grace,* you were a disciple and faithful servant of Christ.* You cried out in the sincerity of your love:* You are my Lord and my God!

The readings at Vespers: 1 Jn 1:1-8; James 1:1-12; Jude 1:1-25.

The Holy Martyrs Sergius and Bacchus.

The Venerable Mother Pelagia.

✠ The Holy Apostle James Alpheus.

Troparion (Tone 3): O Holy Apostle James, intercede with the all-merciful God* that He may grant us forgiveness of our sins.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Let us extol James with praises as a herald of God,* for he implanted the true faith deeply in the souls of all.* Now he stands before the throne of the Master* and rejoices in the company of the angels, praying for all of us unceasingly.

Readings at Vespers: 1 Jn 1:1-8; James 1:1-12; Jude 1:1-25.

The Holy Martyrs Eulampius and Eulampia.

The Holy Apostle Philip, one of the seven deacons; our Venerable Father Theophane, Composer of Canons, Bishop of Nicea.

If a Sunday, we commemorate: The Holy Fathers of the Seventh Ecumenical Council. If not, then on the Sunday following.

Troparion: Resurrectional Tone.

Troparion of the Fathers (Tone 8): O Christ our God, You are above all praise,* for You established our fathers as lights to all the earth.* You led us to the true faith* through them. O most bountiful Lord, glory be to You.

Kontakion (Tone 6): How the Son proceeded from the Father our words cannot express;* but having two natures, He was born of a woman.* We do not reject His image when we behold it,* but in faith we venerate and honor it.* And the Church professes it as true belief* when she honors the image of Christ’s Incarnation.

The Holy Martyrs Probus, Tarachus, and Andronicus; our Venerable Father Cosmas, Composer of Canons, Bishop of Maium; our Holy Father Martin the Merciful, Bishop of Tours.

The Holy Martyrs Carpus, Papilus, and Agathonicus.

The Venerable Mother Paraskevia of Ternovo; the Holy Martyrs Nazarius, Gervase, Protasius, and Celsus.

Our Venerable Father Euthymius the Younger; the Venerable-Martyr Lucian, Priest of Greater Antioch.

The Holy Martyr Longinus the Centurion.

The Holy Prophet Hosea; the Venerable-Martyr Andrew of Crete.

✠ Holy Apostle and Evangelist Luke.

Troparion (Tone 5): Let us praise the Holy and Glorious Apostle Luke with sacred chants;* for he is a living doctor who heals human weakness,* the ills of souls, and the sickness of nature.* He is the awesome writer of Christ’s Gospel* and the story of the Acts of the Apostles.* He recorded for the Church what had been unwritten.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Let us praise the heavenly Luke, a star of the Church,* a preacher of true holiness, and one who clarified the ineffable mysteries.* The Word who searches all hearts* chose him and Paul to be teachers of the Gentiles.

Readings at Vespers: Jn 1:1-8; James 1:1-12; Jude 1:1-25.

The Holy Prophet Joel; the Holy Martyr Varus; and the Venerable John of Rila.

The Holy Great-Martyr Artemius.

Our Venerable Father Hilarion the Great.

The Holy Wonderworker and Equal-to-the Apostles Abercius, Bishop of Hierapolis (Common service of a Hierarch); and the Holy Seven Martyred Youths of Ephesus.

The Holy Apostle James, Brother of the Lord.

The Holy Martyrs Arethas and others with him (Common service of Martyrs).

The Holy Martyrs and Notaries Marcian and Martyrius.

✠ The Holy and Glorious Great-Martyr Demetrius the Myrrh-Yielder.

Troparion (Tone 3): O Martyr, the world has seen you a defender of those imperiled and a conqueror of the nations.* In cutting down the arrogance of Lias, you bolstered Nestor by your courage.* O Holy Demetrius, pray to Christ our God to save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): God endowed you with an invincible power* and tinged the Church with your blood, O Demetrius.* He also covers your city with love,* for you are its foundation.

The Holy Martyr Nestor; the Holy Martyr Capitolina and her servant Erotheis.

The Holy Martyrs Terentius and Neonila, our Venerable Father Stephen the Sabaite, Composer of Canons; and the Martyr Paraskevia of Iconium.

The Venerable-Martyr Anastasia; the falling asleep of our Venerable Father Abraham, Archimandrite and Wonderworker of Rostov.

The Holy Martyrs Zenobius and his sister, Zenobia; Blessed Oleksiy Zarytsky, Hieromartyr.

Holy Apostles Stachys, Amplius, and those with them; and the Holy Martyr Epimachus.

Sunday of Christ the King

Troparion (Tone 4): Your rule, O Christ our God,* saved us from the power of darkness* and brought us into the kingdom of your love.* You Who are and were from all eternity* and appeared to us as a king,* glory be to You, O Lord!

Kontakion (Tone 7): Let us fall down before Christ God,* the only wise and immortal King of ages,* and adore him, saying:* To You is given the power and the glory and the kingdom,* and all nations are subject to You.* Your power is eternal power and your kingdom is indestructible.* The Eternal King, Jesus Christ has become a king for our sake.

Dismissal: Christ our true God, Who reigns in glory and rules the universe, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother and all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
