JERUSALEM MATINS
Jerusalem Matins: First Station

(Tone 5). We extol You, O Christ, Giver of life, Who yesterday were crucified for us and placed in a tomb, gloriously granting life to those in the grave.

Verse: They are happy whose life is blameless, who follow God's law.
The tomb became Your dwelling place; how can our Life descend to death? Yet You destroyed the kingdom of death and saved the dead by raising them from Hades.

Verse: They never do anything evil, but walk in His ways.
We venerate Your burial and the passion You endured to save us, and the death which delivers us from corruption; and we praise and extol Your kingdom.

Verse: You have laid down Your precepts to be obeyed with care.
You created the earth, establishing its size and breadth; today, O King of all, You dwell in the narrow confines of the tomb, but You raise the dead from their tombs with You.

Verse: May my footsteps be firm to obey Your statutes.
O Savior of all, Christ Jesus, the King of the universe, what did You seek when You descended into Hades? It is our human race that You wished to save.

Verse: I will thank You with an upright heart as I learn your decrees.
Today You were placed in a tomb, O Christ our Life; by death You have conquered the kingdom of Death, and You open the fountains of life for the world.

Verse: I rejoiced to do Your will as though all riches were mine.
You descended into the grave without leaving the fatherly bosom; who can grasp this dazzling mystery which surpasses our understanding?

Verse: Your will is my delight; Your statutes are my counselors.
You were placed in a new tomb, O Christ my Savior; thus You renewed the whole human race by raising them from the dead in Your divine power.

Verse: I will run the way of Your commands; You give freedom to my heart.
By entering the sepulcher and bringing His life to the bowels of Hades, Christ frees the entire human race from death and grants us the gift of life eternal.

Glory be: We praise You, O Word, the only Lord and God of the universe, and with You, we praise the Father and the Holy Spirit; at your tomb, we sing of Your glory.

Now and for ever: Blessed are you and we extol you, O most pure Virgin Mother, as we adore your Son and our God in faith; for us He spent three days in the tomb.

Jerusalem Matins: Second Station

Tone 5. It is proper and just to extol You and praise Your glory, O Giver of life; for You stretched out Your hands on the cross and broke the power of our enemy.

Verse: It was Your hands that made me and shaped me; help me to learn Your commands.
It is proper and just to extol You and praise Your glory, O Word and Creator; for You deliver us from corruption, and by Your suffering, You quell our passions.

Verse: Your faithful will see me and rejoice, for I trust in Your word.
The earth trembled with fear and the sun was darkened, O God our Savior when it saw You, O Christ, the unsetting Light, bodily buried in the earth.

Verse: Your truth lasts from age to age, like the earth You created.
When he placed You in the new tomb, O my Savior, Joseph piously sang the dirges that flowed from his grief and the hymns that praised Your divinity.

Verse: I turn my feet from evil paths, to obey Your word.
You have gone down beneath the earth, O God and Creator, and the radiant star sets with You; every creature is seized with fear upon seeing the Creator of light grow dim.

Verse: I have sworn and have made up my mind to obey Your decrees.
Unsetting Star and Light that knows no evening, You now set bodily in the earth; unable to bear the eclipse of its God, the sun is wrapped in darkness at the height of day.

Verse: Though the wicked try to ensnare me, I do not stray from Your precepts.
In the short time You were asleep, You gave life to the dead; and, in your resurrection, You raise those who had been asleep from all times.

Verse: I open my mouth and I sigh, as I yearn for Your commands.
With our hymns, we praise, O Christ, the divine brightness of Your precious cross and Your life-giving burial; for You redeem us from the snare of the enemy.

Glory be: O Trinity, Who reigns forever, God the Father in union with the Word and the Spirit, grant Your divine support to Your faithful and strengthen our hearts in the face of Your enemies.

Now and for ever: O holy Virgin, all-pure and immaculate, you gave birth to the Giver of life; save our Church from adversity, and in your goodness, grant that we may live in peace.

Jerusalem Matins: Third Station

(Tone 3). All peoples and nations praise Your burial, O Christ, and offer You their hymns and songs.

Verse: Turn and show me Your mercy; show justice to Your friends.
When he took You down from the cross and wrapped You in pure linen, Joseph placed You in his own tomb.

Verse: Let my steps be guided by Your promise; let no evil rule me.
The Myrrh-bearers took spices to anoint Your divine body, and hastened to offer them to You, O Christ.

Verse: Tears stream from my eyes, because Your law is disobeyed.
O thrice-blessed Joseph, you offer your respects to the most pure body of Christ the Lord and Master of life.

Verse: The justice of Your will is eternal; if You teach me I shall live.
To bury their Creator, Joseph and Nicodemus have brought a jar of myrrh and aloes.

Verse: Numberless, Lord, are your mercies; with Your decrees give me life.
Son of God and King of all, Lord, my God and Creator, how do You deign to suffer so?

Verse: Lord, let my cry come before You: teach me by Your word.
In heaven, the angels of the Lord tremble with fear seeing Christ lying in the shadow of death.

Verse: Let my pleading come before You; save me by Your promise.
We praise You with our love; by Your passion, grant to us sinners Your grace and forgiveness.

Glory be: O Trinity, O divine majesty, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, have mercy on Your world.

Now and for ever: O Virgin Mother of God, grant that Your servants may behold the resurrection of your Son.

APPENDIX

“Sing to the Lord a new song, a hymn in the assembly of the faithful.”
Ps. 149:1

SUPPLEMENT
1. We Praise You, O God

(A Hymn of Praise and Thanksgiving of St. Ambrose)

You are God; we praise You; You are the Lord; we acclaim You;
You are the eternal Father; all creation worships You.
To You all angels, all the powers of heaven, Cherubim and Seraphim, sing in endless praise:
Holy, holy, holy Lord, God of power and might, heaven and earth are full of Your glory.
The glorious company of apostles praise You. The noble fellowship of prophets praise You.
The white-robed army of martyrs praise You. Throughout the world the holy Church acclaims You:
Father, of majesty unbounded, Your true and only Son, worthy of all worship, and the Holy Spirit, advocate and guide.
You, Christ are the King of glory, eternal Son of the Father.
When You became man to set us free, You did not disdain the Virgin’s womb.
You overcame the sting of Death, and opened the kingdom of heaven to all believers.
You are seated at God’s right hand in glory. We believe that You will come, and be our judge.
Come then, Lord, sustain Your people, bought with the price of Your own blood,
And bring us with Your saints, to Your everlasting glory.

2. Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament and the Hymn of Supplication

The priest takes the Blessed Sacrament from the tabernacle and, facing the people, intones:

Priest: O saving Victim!
Choir: Open to us the gate of heaven; our enemies press us from every side; give us strength and help.
Priest: Praise be to You, Lord, one God in the Holy Trinity. (The priest then places the Holy Sacrament on the altar).
Choir: To You be endless praise, Who gives everlasting life in Your kingdom.

The priest then sings the following supplications:

Holy God, Holy Mighty One, Holy and Immortal One, have mercy on us (3x).
From pestilence, hunger, fire and war, deliver us, O Lord.
From sudden and unexpected death, deliver us, O Lord.
As sinners, we beseech You, our God, hear us, O Lord.
O Jesus, O Jesus, O Jesus, Son of God on high, have mercy on us sinners.
O Mary, O Mary, O Mary, Virgin Mother of God, intercede for us sinners.
O Saint Joseph, patron of the Catholic Church, pray for us sinners.
O Saint Josaphat, priest and martyr for Christ, pray for us sinners.
O Saint (name of the patron of the church), pray for us sinners.

The priest then blesses the people with the Blessed Sacrament, making the sign of the cross with it, intoning:

Save Your people, O Lord (2x).
The choir repeats this verse twice.
Priest (sings the third time): Save Your people, O Lord, and bless Your inheritance.
Choir: Rule them and exalt them forever. We bless You always, and we praise Your name, forever and ever. Grant that this day be without sin. Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us. May Your mercy be upon us, O Lord, since our trust is in You. In You, O Lord, we have placed our trust, let us not be condemned forever. Amen.

3. Panakhyda

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Then: Holy God, Holy and Mighty..., (and the usual beginning, p. 10).

Then troparia (Tone 4):
With the just spirits who have reached their end,* give repose to the soul(s) of Your servant(s), O Savior,* keeping them (him, her) in the happiness of life in Your presence,* O You Who love mankind.

In Your abode, O Lord,* where all Your saints repose,* give rest also to the soul(s) of Your servant(s),* for You alone love mankind.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
You are the God Who went down into Hades* and loosed the chains of those in bondage:* also to the soul(s) of Your servant(s), O Savior, give repose.

Now and for ever and ever. Amen.
Only chaste and immaculate Virgin,* who gave birth to God without seed,* intercede before Him for the salvation of their (his, her) soul(s).

Then the litany and dismissal (p. 447).

Panakhyda during Bright Week

Blessed be our God.... Amen and Christ is risen... (3x). Then the paschal verses: Let God arise... (p. 636); the litany for the deceased (see above); Wisdom! Shine O new Jerusalem... and the dismissal. Instead of Eternal memory: Christ is risen ...(3x).

Panakhyda from Thomas Sunday to the leave-taking of the Pasch

(dark or red vestments)

Everything as on ordinary Panakhyda, except that after Blessed be our God... and at the end, instead of Glory be: Now and for ever: and Eternal memory...we sing Christ is risen...; and instead of More honorable... Shine, in splendor, O New Jerusalem.... (see p. 648).

4. Short Typicon

Note: The hymn Blessed is the man... is sung every Saturday evening and on holydays, as well as on Polyeleos feasts; however, on the feasts of our Lord, it is sung only when these feasts occur on a Sunday or on a Monday. If a feast of our Lord falls on a Sunday, then the resurrectional service is omitted.

Abbreviations: theot. = theotokion; resur. = resurrectional; Gosp. Stich. = Gospel Stichera; St. = Saint; Gl. = Glory be; NF = Now and for ever; GN = Glory be: Now and for ever; t. = Tone; curr. = current.
Symbol for a Major (Solemn) Feast Day: ⊕
Symbol for a Polyeleos feast with Litiya: +
Symbol for a Polyeleos feast day: ✠

1. Non-polyeleos feast of a saint that falls on a Sunday
Vespers: At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 7 resur. stich. and 3 St., Gl.: St., NF: dogmaticon curr. t. At the Aposticha: resur. stich.; troparion: resur.; Gl.; troparion St., NF: theot. t. of Gl.
Matins: After God the Lord: troparia as on Vespers. All the rest is taken from the resurrectional service.
Liturgy: Resurrectional service according to the curr. t.
Hours: For all the Hours: resur. troparion; the Gl.: for the 3rd and 9th Hours: troparion St.; for the 6th Hour: troparion of the patron St.; kontakion for the 1st and 9th Hours: resur.; for the 3rd Hour: kontakion St.; for the 6th Hour: kontakion of the patron St.. If there are two saints, then for the 9th Hour: troparion and kontakion of the second saint.

2. Non-polyeleos feast of a saint that falls on a weekday (except Saturday)
Vespers: “O Lord, I have cried...”: 3 stich. curr. t. and 3 St.; Gl.: St., NF: theot. (on Tuesday and Thursday evenings: the staurotheot.).
Attention: On Friday evening, at “O Lord, I have cried...”: 3 stich. St. and 3 curr. t.; GN: dogmaticon curr. t. At the Aposticha: stich. curr. t. Troparion: St.; GN: theot. as the tone of the troparion.
Matins: After God the Lord and at the end of Matins: troparion St., GN: theot.; sessionals, canon, Aposticha: curr. t.
Liturgy: The troparia of the day.
Hours: For the 1st Hour: the troparion and kontakion of the day; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: the troparion and kontakion of the saint; for the 6th Hour: the troparion and kontakion of the patron saint.

3. Polyeleos feast that falls on a Sunday.
Vespers: If 10 stichera are taken at “O Lord, I have cried...”: then: 4 resur. stich. and 6 of the feast; Gl.: of the feast, NF: dogmaticon curr. t. After the prokimenon: the readings. At the Aposticha: resur. stich.; Gl.: of the feast, NF: the theot. from the resur. stich. at the Aposticha, according to the tone of the Gl. The resur. troparion, Gl.: of the feast, NF: the resur. theot. in the tone of the Gl.
Matins: The resur. sessionals are followed by the polyeleos, exaltation, and the festal sessional. Everything else is taken from the resur. service. At the Praises: 4 resur. stich. and 2 of the feast; Gl.: Gosp. Stich., NF: You are truly most blessed...
Liturgy: Resur. troparion, Gl.: the troparion of the feast, NF: the resur. kontakion. Resur. prokimenon (or of the feast); the Epistle and Gospel: resur. (or of the feast). The Communion Verse: resur. and of the feast.
Hours: For all the Hours: the resur. troparion, Gl.: of the feast. For the 1st and 6th Hours: resur. kontakion; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: the kontakion of the feast.

4. Feast with Litiya that falls on a Sunday
Vespers: Glory be to the holy... Come let us adore... and Psalm 103. After the litany: Blessed is the man... At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 4 resur. stich. and 6 of the feast. Gl.: of the feast, NF: dogmaticon curr. t., prokimenon, readings. The Litiya stich. of the feast. At the Aposticha; resur. stich., Gl.: of the feast, NF: the theot. from the resur. stich. at the Aposticha, according to the tone of Gl. Troparia: Hail, Mother of God... and the troparion of the feast. The rest of the service as on Litiya. After the dismissal: the kontakion of the feast.
Matins: After God the Lord: the resur. troparia; Gl.: of the feast, NF: the resur. theot. according to the tone of Gl. If it is the feast of the patron saint then the prokimenon and the Gospel of the feast are taken; the resur. canon; at the 9th Ode: It is truly right.... At the Praises: 4 resur. stich. and 2 of the feast; Gl.: Gosp. Stich.; (if it is the feast of the patron saint: Gl.: of the feast, Gosp. Stich. is taken at the end of Matins); NF: You are truly most blessed... After the great doxology: one of the two resur. troparia.
Liturgy: Resur. troparion, Gl.: troparion of the feast, NF: resur. kontakion. The rest is the resurrectional service or the service of the feast.
Hours: For all the Hours: the resur. troparion, Gl.: of the feast. For the 1st and 6th Hours: resur. kontakion; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: kontakion of the feast.

5. Feast of the Mother God that falls on a Sunday
Vespers with Litiya: Glory be to the holy... Come let us adore... and Psalm 103. After the litany: Blessed is the man.... At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 4 resur. stich., 6 of the feast. GN: of the feast; prokimenon: The Lord reigns... and the readings. Litiya of the feast. At the Aposticha: resur. stich. GN: of the feast; troparion of the feast. Resur. dismissal with the commemoration of the feast of the Mother of God.
Matins: Resur. troparion; GN: of the feast; first and second resur. sessionals; the polyeleos, the exaltation, the third sessional of the feast; the gradual of curr. t., prokimenon, Gospel; after Psalm 50: stich. of the feast. At the 9th Ode: It is truly right... (the festal verses are omitted on Sunday); resur. canon and of the feast and the resur. exapostilarion. GN: of the feast. At the Praises: 3 resur. stich. and 3 stich. of the feast, Gl.: of the feast, NF: You are truly most blessed.... After the great doxology: one of the two resur. troparia is taken. After the dismissal: GN: Gosp. Stich.
Liturgy: Resur. troparion; Gl.: of the feast; NF: kontakion of the feast. All the rest is the resur. service or the service of the feast. Instead of It is truly right...: the hirmos of the feast is taken.
Hours: For all the Hours: the resur. troparion, Gl.: troparion of the feast. For the 1st and 6th Hours: the resur. kontakion; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: the kontakion of the feast.

6. Feast with Litiya (or polyeleos) that falls on a week day.
Vespers with Litiya: Glory be to the holy... Come, let us adore..., Psalm 103, Blessed is the man.... At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 6 stich. of the feast, Gl.: of the feast, NF: the dogmaticon according to the tone of the Gl. The entrance, readings; stich. of Litiya; at the Aposticha: the stich. of the feast. Troparion of the feast, and Hail, Mother of God.... After the dismissal: the kontakion of the feast.
Matins: After God the Lord...: the troparion of the feast. GN: resur. theot. of the tone of the troparion. Sessionals of the feast, polyeleos, exaltation, gradual of the feast, the Gospel and stich. of the feast. At the 9th Ode: It is truly right... (except on Jan. 30, June 24, and June 29), canon, the Exapostilarion and the stichera. At the Praises: of the feast, after the great doxology: troparion of the feast, GN: resur. theot. in the tone of the troparion.
Liturgy: Troparion and kontakion: of the feast, NF: theot.; prokimenon, Communion Verse, Epistle and Gospel: of the feast.
Note: The order of the service of a polyeleos feast on a week day is the same as that of the order of the service of a feast with a Litiya on a week day, with only this exception, that there is no Litiya, and that Vespers begins with: Blessed be our God..., Heavenly King..., etc. After NF: You shall dismiss...: the troparion of the feast, GN: the resur. theot. according to the tone of the troparion, and then immediately the great dismissal.
Hours: For all the Hours: the troparion and kontakion of the feast.

7. Feasts of the Lord and of the Theotokos on a week day.
Vespers: Glory be to the holy..., Come, let us adore..., Psalm 103. Blessed is the man... is taken only on the feasts of the Theotokos and on the feasts of our Lord, but only when they fall on a Sunday or on a Monday. At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 6 stich., GN: of the feast. Readings, stich. of Litiya, Aposticha: of the feast. Troparion of the feast. After the dismissal: kontakion of the feast.
Matins, Hours, and Liturgy: Everything of the feast.

8. Postfeast that falls on a Sunday
Vespers: At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 4 resur. stich., 3 of the feast and 3 of the saint; Gl.: of the feast, NF: the dogmaticon of curr. t. Aposticha: resur.; GN: of the feast. Resur. troparion, Gl.: St., NF: of the feast.
Matins: After the troparia and the exapostilaria: NF: of the feast. Canon: resur. At the Praises: 4 resur. stich., 2 of the feast, Gl.: Gosp. Stich., NF: You are truly most blessed.... After the great doxology: one of the two resur. troparia is taken.
Liturgy: If it is a postfeast of the feast of our Lord: 1st antiphon: of the feast, the 3rd antiphon with verses: of the feast. The resur. troparia and of the feast, Gl.: resur. kontakion, NF: the kontakion of the feast. All the rest as on Sunday. Instead of It is truly right... the hirmos of the feast. The Communion Verse: of Sunday and of the feast.
Hours: For all the Hours: resur. troparion; Gl. for 1st and 6th Hours: the troparion of the feast; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: troparion of the saint. The kontakion for the 1st and 6th Hours: of the feast; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: resur. kontakion.

9. Postfeast with Litiya or Polyeleos that falls on a week day.
Vespers: At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 3 stich.: of the feast 3 of the saint Gl.: St., NF: of the feast (on Friday evenings: dogmaticon of curr. t.); readings. Aposticha: stich. of the saint, GN: of the feast. Troparion of the saint; GN: of the feast. Dismissal of the feast with the commemoration of the saint.
Matins: After God the Lord... and at the end of Matins: the troparion of the saint, GN: of the feast. Sessionals and exapostilarion of the saint; GN: of the feast. At the Praises: 2 stich. of the feast and 2 of the saint, Gl.: St., NF: of the feast. The great doxology.
Liturgy: If it is a postfeast of our Lord’s feast: the first and third antiphons: of the feast (on the postfeast of the Theotokos: daily antiphons). Troparion and kontakion of the saint, NF: of the feast. The prokimenon, Alleluia, Epistle, and Gospel: of the saint. Instead of It is truly right...: the hirmos of the feast. Communion Verse of the feast and of the saint.
Hours: For all the Hours: the troparion of the feast, Gl.: St. For the 1st and 6th Hours: kontakion of the feast; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: the kontakion of the saint.

10. The leave-taking of a feast that falls on a Sunday
Vespers: The service of the saint of the day is transferred to another day. At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 4 resur. stich., 6 of the feast, Gl.: of the feast, NF: dogmaticon. At the Aposticha: resur. stich., GN: of the feast. Resur. troparion, GN: of the feast. The great dismissal with the resur. commemoration and of the saint.
Matins: After God the Lord...: the resur. troparion, GN: of the feast. Everything else is from the resurrectional service. It is truly right..., is taken. The resur. exapostilarion; GN: of the feast. At the Praises: 4 resur. stich. and 2 stich. of the feast, Gl.: Gosp. Stich.; NF: You are truly most blessed.... After the great doxology: one of the two resur. troparia.
Liturgy: Antiphons: of the feast. Resur. troparion; Gl.: troparion of the feast, NF: kontakion of the feast. Resur. prokimenon and Alleluia; Epistle and Gospel: resur. Instead of It is truly right...: the hirmos of the feast. Communion Verse: resur. and of the feast.
Hours: For all the Hours: the resur. troparion, Gl.: of the feast. The kontakion for the 1st and 6th Hours: resur.; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: of the feast.

11. Leave-taking of a feast that falls on a week day.
Vespers: At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 6 stich. of the feast, GN: of the feast. (On Friday evenings: NF: dogmaticon of the curr. t. There is no entrance or readings. At the Aposticha: stich. of the feast. The troparion of the feast (once). The small dismissal with the commemoration of the feast and of the saint.
Matins: The troparion of the feast (once). Sessionals of the feast, Psalm 50; the 9th Ode with verses and the exapostilarion as on the feast. At the Praises: the stich. of the feast. After the great doxology: the troparion of the feast (once). The great dismissal.
Liturgy: The Epistle and Gospel: of the day; the rest as on the feast.
Hours: For all the Hours: the troparion and kontakion of the feast.

5. The Metanias – Bows

The small metania is made:

when entering or leaving the church;

when passing before the iconostasis or before the altar;

when approaching or leaving the altar;

upon entering or leaving the sanctuary;

when one comes before the holy doors for reading, and when one departs from this place after this reading;

at Come let us adore....

as often as prescribed by the rubrics.

During the Great Fast the small metania is made:

at Holy God..., Alleluia, Glory be to You, O God;

after each verse of the Beatitudes;

at God be merciful to me... (12x), after the Prayer of St. Ephrem;

at Vespers: after “Deign, O Lord...” (3x);

at Great Compline: at O Most Holy Lady... (after each verse);

at Matins: after every verse of Beyond compare more glorious... at the 9th Ode.

after It is truly right...; and after the Small Doxology (3x);

at the First Hour: after “In the morning...” (after each time);

at the Third Hour: after “At the third hour, O Lord...” (after each time);

at the Sixth Hour: after “O Lord, on the sixth day...” (after each time);

at the Ninth Hour: after “O Lord, Who, for our sake...” (after each time).

During the Great Fast we make the great metanias, that is, we make the sign of the cross on our persons, kneel down and touch the forehead to the ground at: the Prayer of St. Ephrem; the lenten hymn: Having suffered the passion... (preterpivij za nas strasty...), and on other occasions where indicated.

6. Podobens

Tone One

At Vespers:
Nebesnykh chynov – Nebesnykh khoriv (p. 193).
Prekhvalnij muchenici – Preslavni muchenyky (p. 203).
O, dyvnoe chudo – O, dyvne chudo (p. 982).

At the sessionals:
Hrob tvoj, Spase – Vojny, jaki sterehly (p. 187).
Zheny ko hrobu – Zhinky, shcho vdosvita (p. 188).

At Litiya (Bolharskyj):
Podobashe samovydtsem – Hodylosija, shchob ochevydtsi (p. 985).

Tone Two

At Vespers:
Jehda ot dreva – Koly z dereva (p. 599).
Dome Ephratov – Dome Ephrativ (p. 1113).
Kijmy pokhvalnymy – Jakymy pokhval’nymy (p. 922).

At the sessionals:
Blahoobraznyj Josyf (p. 216).

At Litiya (Bolharskyj):
Jiazhe nebec vyshshaja – Ty vyshcha vid neba (p. 985).

Tone Three

At the sessionals:
Krasoti divstva tvojeho – Krasotoju tvoho (p. 254).
Khrystos ot mertvykh – Chrystos iz mertvykh (p. 244).

At Litiya (Bolharskyj):
Pryjdite vsi kontsi – Pryjdite usi (p. 985).

Tone Four

At Vespers:
Jako dobl’a vo muchenicikh – Jak khorobroho (p. 883).
Dal jesy znamenije – Dav ty jak znameno (p. 294).
Zvanyj svyshe byv – Poklykanyj buv ty (p. 923).

At the sessionals:
Udyvysia Josyf – Zdyvuvavsia Josyf (p. 273).
Skoro predvary – Nehajno pospishy (p. 154).

At Litiya (Bolharskyj):
Odivajajsia svitom – Toj, shcho zodjahajetsia (p. 824).

Tone Five

At Vespers:
Radujsia zhyvonosnyj Khreste – Radujsia (p. 1023).

At the sessionals:
Sobeznachalnoje Slovo – Spivbeznachalne Slovo (below).

At Litiya (Bolharskyj):
Nyni otpushchajeshy – Nyni vidpuskajesh (p. 34).

Tone Six

At Vespers:
Anhelskija prididite syly – Anhelski khory (below).
Vse otlozhyvshe – Poklavshy vsiu nadiju (below).
Tredneven voskres jesy – Tretjoho dnja (p. 336).

At Litiya (Bolharskyj):
Blahyj rabe i virnyj – Dobryj sluho i virnyj (below).

Tone Eight

At Vespers:
O preslavnoho chudese – O preslavne chudo (p. 1029).
Chto vy narechem – Jak nazvemo vas (p. 411).

At the sessionals:
Vozleh na persy – Ty, shcho prypav (p. 895).
Povelinnoje tajno – Zrozumivshy (p. 391).

At Litiya (Bolharskyj):
Na khvalu potekl – Na khvalu Hospodnju (below).

Tone Five – Podoben: “Sobeznachalne Slovo”
Having preached the Word co-eternal and consubstantial with the Father and the Holy Spirit, you, O Roman, truly enlightened the faithful, and destroyed godless heresies. Now you stand before the Lord, and pray for those who honor you.

Tone Six – Podoben: “Anhelski Khory”
Choirs of angels hasten, and you, who are in Bethlehem: prepare the cave, for the Word is being born; Wisdom is coming; and the Church welcomes Him; for the joy of the Mother of God, let us also sing: Blessed is He, Who appeared, our God, – glory be to You!

Tone Six – Podoben: “Poklavshy vsju nadiu”
Setting their hopes upon heaven, the saints acquired for themselves a treasure which cannot be stolen. Having received freely, freely they have bestowed healing upon the sick. According to the Gospel, they received neither gold nor silver; they bestowed good upon people and animals alike. Having obeyed Christ in all things, they, with confidence, pray for our souls.

Tone Six – Bolharskyj: “Dobryj sluho i virnyj”
Good servant and faithful worker in the vineyard of Christ! You endured the burden of the day, and have increased the talent given to you, not envying those who came after you. Therefore, the heavenly gates opened to you. Enter into the joy of your Lord and pray for us, O holy Nicholas.

Tone Eight – Bolharskyj: “Na khvalu Hospodnju”
O Nicholas, having dedicated yourself to the glory of the Lord in this life, He glorified you in the heavenly and true life. Therefore, having confidence in Him, pray that our souls may be saved.

7. The Paschalia

According to the New (Gregorian) Calendar

YEAR	Sunday of Pharisee & Publican	EASTER SUNDAY	Sunday of PENTECOST
2012*	Jan. 29	April 8	May 27
2013	Jan. 20	March 31	May 19
2014	Feb. 9	April 20	June 8
2015	Jan. 25	April 5	May 24
2016*	Jan. 17	March 27	May 15
2017	Feb. 5	April 16	June 4
2018	Jan. 21	April 1	May 20
2019	Feb. 10	April 21	June 9
2020*	Feb. 2	April 12	May 31
2021	Jan. 24	April 4	May 23
2022	Feb. 6	April 17	June 5
2023	Jan. 29	April 9	May 28
2024*	Jan. 21	March 31	May 19
2025	Feb. 9	April 20	June 8
2026	Jan. 25	April 5	May 24
2027	Jan. 17	March 28	May 16
2028*	Feb. 6	April 16	June 4
2029	Jan. 21	April 1	May 20
2030	Feb. 10	April 21	June 9

According to the Old (Julian) Calendar

YEAR	Sunday of the Pharisee & Publican	EASTER SUNDAY	Sunday of PENTECOST
2012*	Feb. 5	April 15	June 3
2013	Feb. 24	May 5	June 23
2014	Feb. 9	April 20	June 8
2015	Feb. 1	April 12	May 31
2016*	Feb. 21	May 1	June 19
2017	Feb. 5	April 16	June 4
2018	Jan. 28	April 8	May 27
2019	Feb. 17	April 28	June 16
2020*	Feb. 9	April 19	June 7
2021	Feb. 21	May 2	June 20
2022	Feb. 13	April 24	June 12
2023	Feb. 5	April 16	June 4
2024*	Feb. 25	May 5	June 23
2025	Feb. 9	April 20	June 8
2026	Feb. 1	April 12	May 31
2027	Feb. 21	May 2	June 20
2028*	Feb. 6	April 16	June 4
2029	Jan. 28	April 8	May 27
2030	Feb. 17	April 28	June 16
PREFACE to the First Edition

I will call upon God and the Lord will save me. In the evening and at dawn and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall hear my voice.
Psalm 54:17-18

In order to satisfy the ever-increasing desire of non-Ukrainian-speaking Catholics to access the spiritual riches of the Byzantine Church, we are pleased to offer this English translation of the Divine Office. In it are contained the Horologion and the prescribed liturgical services of the Octoechos for every day of the year, as well as the Lenten and Floral Triodions and the Menaion.

In line with the wish of Vatican Council II, the Generalate of the Order of St. Basil the Great took the initiative to translate the Typical Edition of the Old Slavonic Text of the Horologion (Vatican, 1950) and other liturgical texts into the vernacular. The translation into Ukrainian was made by the now-deceased Fathers Athanasius Velykyj, Mykhaylo Wawryk, and Rodion Holowacky, and appeared in two volumes, one in 1975 and another in 1978.

Originally intended for the use of the Basilian Community, this mimeographed edition of 5,000 copies was quickly adopted by other Ukrainian clergy, both Catholic and Orthodox.

Over the years, the Basilian Liturgical Commission improved upon their text based on solicited critical input. Eventually, many of the proposed suggestions were incorporated into a revised edition published in 1988, under the aegis of Protoarchimandrite Isidore Patrylo, O.S.B.M. to commemorate the millennium of Christianity in Ukraine.

This English translation and compilation is the work of Rev. Demetrius Wysochansky, O.S.B.M. who prepared it at my behest. It is commended to all Catholic faithful in the hope that it will bring them closer to God. We ask those who use this humble volume to remember in their prayers all those who have made it a reality.

Most Reverend Basil H. Losten, D.D.
Bishop Emeritus of Stamford

October 1, 2002
Feast of the Protection of the Holy Theotokos

8. Church Calendar
JANUARY

1 ⊕ Circumcision of Our Lord and St. Basil the Great.
2 Prefeast of Theophany; St. Sylvester, pope.
3 St. Malachi, prophet; St. Gordius, martyr.
4 Synaxis of the 70 Holy Apostles; Theoktistus, venerable.
5 Eve of Theophany; Theopemptus and Theona, martyrs.
6 ⊕ Theophany of our Lord Jesus Christ.
7 Synaxis of St. John the Baptist.
8 St. George, venerable; St. Emilian, confessor; St. Dominica, venerable.
9 St. Polyeuctus, martyr.
10 St. Gregory of Nyssa, Bishop; St. Dometian and St. Marcion, venerables.
11 ✠ St. Theodosius the Great, venerable.
12 St. Tatiana, martyr.
13 Sts. Hermylus and Stratonicus.
14 Leave-taking of Theophany; Venerable Martyrs of Sinai and Raitho.
15 Sts. Paul of Thebes and John the Hermit, venerables.
16 Veneration of the Chains of St. Apostle Peter.
17 + St. Anthony the Great, venerable.
18 Sts. Athanasius and Cyril, Archbishops of Alexandria.
19 St. Macarius of Egypt, venerable.
20 + St. Euthymius the Great, venerable.
21 St. Maximus the Confessor; St. Neophyte, martyr.
22 St. Timothy, apostle; St. Anastasius the Persian, venerable-martyr.
23 St. Clement, hieromartyr; Bl. Vincent Lewoniuk of Pratulyn, Martyr, and 12 with him; Bl. Olimpia Bida, martyr.
24 St. Xenia of Rome, venerable.
25 + St. Gregory the Theologian, Archbishop.
26 ✠ St. Xenophon and his wife, Mary, venerables.
27 ✠ Translation of the Relics of St. John Chrysostom.
28 St. Ephrem the Syrian, venerable.
29 Translation of the Relics of St. Ignatius of Antioch, hieromartyr.
30 + The Three Hierarchs: Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom.
31 Sts. Cyrus and John, selfless physicians.

FEBRUARY

1 Prefeast of the Meeting; St. Tryphon, martyr.
2 ⊕ The Presentation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
3 Synaxis of St. Simeon and St. Anna, prophets.
4 St. Isidore, venerable.
5 St. Agatha, martyr.
6 St. Bukolus, Bishop; St. Silvanus, hieromartyr.
7 St. Parthenius, Bishop; Peter Verhun, hieromartyr.
8 St. Theodore, soldier, martyr; St. Zechariah, prophet.
9 Leave-taking of Presentation; St. Nicephorus, martyr.
10 St. Charalampius, martyr.
11 St. Blaise, hieromartyr.
12 St. Meletius, archbishop.
13 St. Martinian, venerable.
14 ✠ St. Cyril, Teacher of the Slavs, venerable.
15 St. Onesimus, apostle.
16 Sts. Pamphilus and Porphyrius, martyrs.
17 St. Theodore of Tyre, great-martyr.
18 St. Leo the Great, Pope, confessor.
19 St. Archippus, apostle.
20 St. Leo, Bishop of Catania.
21 St. Timothy, venerable; St. Eustathius, archbishop.
22 Finding of the Relics of the Martyrs at Eugenia.
23 St. Polycarp, hieromartyr.
24 ✠ First and Second Finding of the Head of Prophet, John the Baptist.
25 St. Tarasius, archbishop.
26 St. Porphyrius, Bishop of Gaza.
27 St. Procopius, confessor.
28 St. Basil, confessor.
29 St. Cassian, venerable.

MARCH

1 St. Eudoxia, venerable-martyr.
2 St. Theodotus, hieromartyr.
3 Sts. Eutropius and companions, martyrs.
4 St. Gerasimus, venerable.
5 St. Conon, martyr.
6 Forty-two martyrs of Ammorium.
7 Sts. Basil, Ephrem, and other hieromartyrs.
8 St. Theophylactus, Bishop-confessor.
9 ✠ Holy Forty Martyrs of Sebastea.
10 St. Codratus and companions, martyrs.
11 St. Sophronius, Patriarch of Jerusalem.
12 St. Theophane, confessor; St. Gregory the Great, Pope.
13 Transition of the Relics of St. Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople.
14 St. Benedict, venerable.
15 Sts. Agapius and companions, martyrs.
16 Sts. Sabina and Papas, martyrs.
17 St. Alexis, venerable.
18 St. Cyril, archbishop of Jerusalem.
19 Sts. Chrysanthus and Daria, martyrs.
20 Venerable Martyrs of the Monastery of St. Sabbas.
21 St. James, Bishop-confessor.
22 St. Basil, hieromartyr.
23 Sts. Nicon and companions, martyrs.
24 Prefeast of the Annunciation; St. Zacharius, venerable.
25 ⊕ Annunciation of the Mother of God; Bl. Omelian Kovch, hieromartyr.
26 Leave-taking of the Annunciation and the Synaxis of St. Gabriel Archangel.
27 St. Matrona of Thessalonica, venerable-martyr.
28 St. Hilarion the Younger, venerable; St. Stephen the Wonder-worker, venerable.
29 Sts. Mark and Cyril, hieromartyrs.
30 St. John Climacus, venerable.
31 St. Hypatius, hierarch.

APRIL

1 St. Mary of Egypt, venerable.
2 St. Titus the Wonderworker, and Blessed Bishop Nicholas Charnetsky, CSsR, confessor, Exarch of Volhynia.
3 St. Nicetas, venerable.
4 Sts. Joseph the Hymnographer and George of Maleon, venerables.
5 Sts. Theodulus and Agathopodus and companions, martyrs.
6 ✠ St. Methodius, Teacher of the Slavs, Bishop; St. Eutychius, archbishop.
7 St. George, Bishop of Metylene; Bl. Josaphata Hordashevska, SSMI.
8 Sts. Herodion, Agabus, Rufus and others, apostles.
9 St. Eupsychius, martyr.
10 Sts. Terence, Pompius, and others, martyrs.
11 St. Antipas, hieromartyr.
12 St. Basil of Parium, Bishop-confessor.
13 St. Artemon, hieromartyr, and others.
14 Sts. Martin, Pope and confessor, and other martyrs.
15 Sts. Aristarchus, Pudens and Trophimus, apostles.
16 Sts. Agape, Irene, and Chionia, martyrs.
17 Sts. Simeon and Acacius, Bishops.
18 St. John, venerable.
19 St. John the Hermit.
20 St. Theodore Trichinas, venerable.
21 Sts. Januarius and Theodore, martyrs.
22 St. Theodore Sykeot, venerable.
23 + St. George, Great-Martyr and Wonderworker.
24 St. Sabbas Stratelates, martyr.
25 ✠ St. Mark, Apostle and Evangelist.
26 St. Basil, hieromartyr.
27 St. Simeon, Cousin of the Lord, hieromartyr.
28 Sts. Jason and Sosipater, apostles.
29 Nine Holy Martyrs of Cyzica; St. Memnon, wonderworker.
30 ✠ St. James, apostle, brother of St. John the Thеologian.

MAY

1 St. Jeremiah, prophet; Bl. Klymentii Sheptysky, confessor.
2 St. Athanasius the Great, Patriarch of Alexandria.
3 ✠ St. Theodosius of the caves of Pecherska Lavra; venerable.
4 St. Pelagia, venerable-martyr.
5 St. Irene, venerable-martyr; St. Nicephorus, venerable.
6 Holy and Righteous Job the Longsuffering.
7 St. Acacius, martyr; and the Commemoration of the Apparition of the Holy Cross over Jerusalem.
8 + St. John, Apostle, Evangelist; St. Arsenius the Great, venerable.
9 ✠ Translation of the Relics to Bari of St. Nicholas of Myra; prophet Isaiah; and St. Christopher, martyr.
10 ✠ St. Simon the Zealot, apostle.
11 + Sts. Cyril & Methodius, Equals to the Apostles, Teachers of the Slavs; & Bl. Vasyl Hopko, Aux. Bishop of Preshov.
12 Sts. Epiphanius, Bishop; St. Germanus, Patriarch of Constantinople.
13 St. Glyceria, venerable-martyr.
14 St. Isidore, martyr.
15 St. Pachomius the Great, venerable; Sts. Vitus, Modestus, and others.
16 St. Theodore the Sanctified, venerable.
17 St. Andronicus and companions, apostles; Bl. Ivan Ziatyk, CSsR, hieromartyr.
18 Sts. Theodotus, Peter, Dionysius, Andrew and companions, martyrs.
19 St. Patrick, Bishop of Prussa, hieromartyr.
20 St. Thaleleus, martyr.
21 ✠ Sts. Constantine and Helen, Equals to the Apostles.
22 St. Basiliscus, martyr.
23 St. Michael, Bishop-confessor; St. Euphrosine of Polotsk, venerable.
24 St. Simeon of the Wondrous Mountain, venerable; St. Nicetas of Pereyaslav, venerable.
25 ✠ The 3rd Finding of the Head of St. John the Baptist; Bl. Mykola Tsehelsky, hieromartyr.
26 St. Carpus, apostle, one of the Seventy Apostles.
27 St. Therapontus, hieromartyr, Bishop of Sardinia.
28 St. Nicetas, Bishop of Chalcedon.
29 St. Theodosia, virgin-martyr.
30 St. Isaac of Dalmatia, venerable.
31 St. Hermes, apostle; St. Hermeas, martyr.

JUNE

1 Sts. Justin the Philosopher and those with him, martyrs.
2 St. Nicephorus, patriarch of Constantinople.
3 Sts. Lucillian and companions, martyrs.
4 St. Metrophanes, Patriarch of Constantinople.
5 St. Dorotheus of Tyre, hieromartyr.
6 Sts. Bessarion and Hilarion, venerables.
7 St. Theodotus, hieromartyr, Bishop of Ancyra.
8 Translation of the Relics of Theodore of Tyre, great-martyr.
9 St. Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria.
10 St. Timothy, hieromartyr, Bishop of Prusa.
11 ✠ Sts. Bartholomew and Barnabas, Apostles.
12 Sts. Onufrius the Great and Peter of Athos, venerables.
13 St. Aquilina, martyr; St. Triphylius, Bishop of Leucosia.
14 St. Elisha, prophet; St. Methodius, Patriarch of Constantinople.
15 St. Amos, prophet; St. Jerome of Stridonium, venerable.
16 St. Tychon, Bishop of Amathus.
17 Sts. Manuel, Sabel and Ishmael, martyrs.
18 St. Leontius, martyr.
19 ✠ St. Jude, Brother of the Lord, Apostle.
20 St. Methodius, hieromartyr, Bishop of Patara.
21 St. Julian of Tarsus, martyr.
22 St. Eusebius, hieromartyr, Bishop of Samosata.
23 St. Agrippina, martyr.
24 ⊕ Nativity of St. John the Baptist.
25 St. Febronia, venerable-martyr.
26 St. David of Thessalonica, venerable; Bl. Mykola Konrad, hieromartyr, Bl. Volodymyr Pryjma, (cantor) martyr; Bl. Andrij Ishchuk, martyr.
27 St. Sampson the Hospitaller, ven. Bishop Nicholas Charnetsky, CSsR, hieromartyr and twenty-four others, (Bl. Severian Baranyk, OSBM, and Bl. Zynoviy Kovalyk, CSsR, hieromartyrs.)
28 Translation of the Relics of the Selfless Physicians Cyrus and John.
29 ⊕ Sts. Peter and Paul, Apostles; Bl. Joachim Senkivsky, OSBM, hieromartyr.
30 ✠ Synaxis of the Twelve Apostles.

JULY

1 Sts. Cosmas and Damian, selfless physicians.
2 ✠ Deposition of the Garment of the Theotokos at Blachernae.
3 St. Hyacinth, martyr; St. Anatolius, Patriarch of Constantinople.
4 St. Andrew of Crete, hieromartyr; St. Martha, venerable.
5 ✠ St. Athanasius of Athos, venerable.
6 St. Sisoes the Great, venerable.
7 Sts. Thomas and Acacius, venerables.
8 St. Procopius, Great-Martyr.
9 St. Pancratius, hieromartyr, Bishop of Taormina.
10 ✠ St. Anthony of the Caves of Pecherska Lavra, venerable.
11 Bl. Olga, Princess of Rus’ Ukraine, equal to the apostles; St. Euphemia, martyr.
12 Sts. Proclus and Hilarion, martyrs; St. Michael of Malein, venerable.
13 St. Stephen the Sabbaite, venerable; Synaxis of Archangel Gabriel.
14 St. Aquila, apostle.
15 + St. Volodymyr the Great, Prince of Rus’ Ukraine, equal to the apostles.
16 Sts. Athenogenes, hieromartyr, and his 10 disciples.
17 St. Marina, great-martyr. Bl. Paul Gojdych, OSBM, bishop of Preshov, confessor; Bl. Tarsykia Matskiv, SSMI, martyr.
18 Sts. Hyacinth and Emilian, martyrs.
19 St. Macrina, venerable, sister of St. Basil; St. Dia, venerable.
20 + St. Elijah (Elias), prophet.
21 Sts. Simeon and John, venerables; St. Ezekiel, prophet.
22 St. Mary Magdalene, Equal to the Apostles.
23 Sts. Trophimus, Theophilus, and companions, martyrs; Blessed Bishop Basil Hopko.
24 ✠ Sts. Borys and Hlib, martyrs; St. Christina, great-martyr.
25 ✠ Dormition of St. Anne, Mother of the Theotokos.
26 Sts. Hermolaus and companions, martyrs.
27 ✠ St. Panteleimon, Great-Martyr.
28 Sts. Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, Apostles.
29 St. Callinicus, martyr.
30 Sts. Silas and Silvanus and companions, Apostles.
31 St. Eudocimus, venerable.

AUGUST

1 Feast of the Procession of the Holy Cross, and the Holy Seven Maccabees, martyrs.
2 Translation of the Relics of St. Stephen, Protomartyr.
3 Sts. Isaac, Dalmatus, and Faustus, venerables.
4 The Seven Youth Martyrs of Ephesus; St. Eudocia, venerable-martyr.
5 Prefeast of the Transfiguration; St. Eusignius, martyr.
6 ⊕ Transfiguration of Our Lord Jesus Christ.
7 St. Dometius, venerable-martyr.
8 St. Emilian, Bishop-confessor; Sts. Eleutherius and Leonidas, martyrs.
9 ✠ St. Matthias, Apostle.
10 St. Lawrence, archdeacon, martyr.
11 St. Euplus, martyr.
12 St. Photius and Anicetus, martyrs.
13 Leave-taking of Transfiguration; St. Maximus, venerable-confessor.
14 ✠ Trans. of Relics of St. Theodosius of the Kyivan Caves, venerable; Prefeast of Dormition.
15 ⊕ Dormition of the Mother of God.
16 Translation of the Icon of Our Lord; St. Diomedes, martyr.
17 St. Myron, martyr.
18 Sts. Florus and Laurus, martyrs.
19 St. Andrew the Centurion and companions, martyrs.
20 St. Samuel, prophet.
21 St. Jude Thaddeus, apostle; St. Bassa; Bl. Bishop Symeon Lukach, confessor.
22 St. Agathonicus, Severian and others, martyrs.
23 Leave-taking of Dormition; St. Lupus, martyr; St. Ireneus of Lyons, hieromartyr.
24 St. Eutyches, hieromartyr.
25 Sts. Bartholomew and Titus, apostles.
26 St. Adrian and Natalia, martyrs.
27 St. Pimen, venerable.
28 St. Moses the Ethiopian, venerable; St. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo.
29 ⊕ Beheading of St. John the Baptist.
30 Sts. Alexander, John and Paul, Patriarchs of Constantinople.
31 ✠ Deposition of the Cincture of the Mother of God.

SEPTEMBER

1 ✠ Beginning of the Church Year, St. Simeon the Stylite, ven.
2 St. Mammas, martyr; St. John the Faster, Patriarch of Constantinople.
3 St. Anthimus, hieromartyr, Bishop of Nicomedia; St. Theoktistus, venerable-martyr.
4 St. Babylas, hieromartyr, Bishop of Antioch; St. Moses, prophet and God-seer.
5 St. Zachariah, father of John the Baptist, prophet.
6 Commemoration of the Miracle of St. Michael the Archangel at Colossa; Sts. Eudoxius and companions, martyrs.
7 Prefeast of the Nativity of the Mother of God; St. Sozon, martyr.
8 ⊕ Nativity of the Mother of God.
9 Sts. Joachim and Anne, venerables; St. Severian, martyr.
10 Sts. Menodora, Metrodora, and Nymphodora, martyrs.
11 St. Theodora of Alexandria, venerable.
12 Leave-taking of the Nativity of the Mother of God; St. Autonomus, hieromartyr.
13 Prefeast of the Exaltation; St. Cornelius, hieromartyr.
14 ⊕ Exaltation of the Holy Cross.
15 St. Nicetas, great-martyr.
16 St. Euphemia, great-martyr.
17 Sts. Sophia and her three daughters, Faith, Hope, and Charity, martyrs.
18 St. Eumenius, venerable, Bishop of Gortyn.
19 Sts. Trophimus, Sabbatius, and Dorymedontus, martyrs.
20 Sts. Eustathius and companions, martyrs; Sts. Michael and Theodore of Chernihiv, martyrs.
21 Leave-taking of the Exaltation; St. Codratus, apostle.
22 St. Phocas, Bishop of Sinope, hieromartyr; St. Jonas, prophet.
23 Conception of St. John the Baptist.
24 St. Thecla, first-martyr, equal to the apostles.
25 St. Euphrosina, venerable.
26 + The Falling Asleep of St. John, Apostle and Evangelist.
27 Sts. Calistratus and companions, martyrs; St. Nilus of Grottaferrata.
28 ✠ St. Chariton, confessor.
29 St. Cyriacus the Anchorite, venerable.
30 St. Gregory, Bishop of Greater Armenia, hieromartyr.

OCTOBER

1 ⊕ Protection of the Mother of God; Blessed Bishop Nykyta Budka, confessor of Karaganda.
2 St. Cyprian, hieromartyr; St. Justina, martyr; Andrew, venerable.
3 St. Dionysius the Areopagite, hieromartyr.
4 St. Hierotheus, hieromartyr, Bishop of Athens; St. Francis of Assisi, venerable.
5 St. Charitina, martyr.
6 ✠ St. Thomas, apostle.
7 Sts. Sergius and Bacchus, martyrs.
8 St. Pelagia, venerable.
9 ✠ St. James, apostle.
10 St. Eulampius and Eulampia, his sister, martyrs.
11 St. Philip, apostle and deacon; St. Theophane, Bishop of Nicea, venerable.
12 Sts. Probus, Tarachus and Andronicus, martyrs; St. Cosmas, Bishop.
13 Sts. Carpus, Papilus and Agathonica, martyrs.
14 St. Paraskevia of Ternovo; St. Nazarius, martyr; Bl. Roman Lysko, martyr of L’viv.
15 St. Euthymius the Younger, venerable; Lucian, venerable-martyr.
16 St. Longinus the Centurion, martyr.
17 St. Hosea, prophet; St. Andrew of Crete, venerable-martyr.
18 ✠ St. Luke, apostle and evangelist.
19 St. Joel, prophet; St. Varus, martyr.
20 St. Artemis, Great-Martyr.
21 St. Hilarion the Great, venerable.
22 St. Abercius, Bishop of Hierapolis.
23 St. James, brother of the Lord, Apostle.
24 Sts. Aretas and companions, martyrs.
25 Sts. Marcian and Martyrius, martyrs.
26 + St. Demetrius the Myrrh-yielder, Great-Martyr.
27 St. Nestor, martyr; Sts. Capitolina and Erotheides, martyrs.
28 Sts. Terence and Neonila, martyrs; St. Parascevia of Iconium, martyr.
29 St. Anastasia, venerable; St. Abraham of Rostov, venerable.
30 Sts. Zenobius and Zenobia, martyrs; Bl. Oleksy Zarytskyj, priest-martyr, pastor of Strutyn.
31 Sts. Stachys, Amplius, apostles, and others; St. Epimachus, martyr.

NOVEMBER

1 Sts. Cosmas and Damian, selfless physicians; Bl. Theodore Romzha, Bishop of Mukachevo, hieromartyr.
2 Sts. Acindynus, Pegasus, Aphtonicus, Elpidephorus & others, martyrs.
3 Sts. Acepsimas, Joseph, Aithalis and companions, martyrs.
4 St. Joannicius the Great, venerable; Sts. Nicander and Hermas, martyrs.
5 Sts. Galaction and Epistemis, martyrs.
6 St. Paul, confessor, Archbishop of Constantinople.
7 The 33 Holy Martyrs of Melitene; St. Lazarus, venerable.
8 + St. Michael and all the Heavenly Hosts.
9 Sts. Matrona and Theoctista, venerables.
10 Sts. Erastes, Olympas, Rodion, apostles, and others with them.
11 Sts. Menas, Victor, Vincent, martyrs; St. Theodore the Studite, venerable.
12 + St. Josaphat, Hieromartyr, Archbishop of Polotsk; Bl. Conf. Hryhoriy Lakota, Auxiliary Bishop of Peremyshil’.
13 + St. John Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople.
14 ✠ St. Philip, apostle.
15 Sts. Gurias, Samonas and Habib, confessors.
16 ✠ St. Matthew, apostle and evangelist.
17 St. Gregory, Bishop of Neocaesarea; Blessed Josaphat Kotsylovsky, OSBM, Bishop of Peremyshl’, confessor.
18 Sts. Platon and Roman, martyrs.
19 St. Obadiah, prophet; St. Barlaam, martyr.
20 Prefeast of the Entrance of the Theotokos into the Temple; St. Gregory of Decapolis, venerable; and Blessed Josaphata Hordashevska, SSMI., venerable.
21 ⊕ Entrance of the Theotokos into the Temple.
22 Sts. Philemon and companions, Apostles.
23 Sts. Amphilochius and Gregory, Bishops.
24 St. Catherine, great-martyr; St. Mercurius, great-martyr.
25 Leave-taking of the Entrance of the Theotokos; St. Clement, Pope and hieromartyr.
26 St. Alypius the Stylite, venerable.
27 St. James the Persian, martyr; St. Paladius, venerable.
28 Sts. Stephen the Younger, martyr; St. Irenarchus, martyr.
29 Sts. Paramon and Philomenus, martyrs.
30 ✠ St. Andrew the First-called, Apostle.

DECEMBER

1 St. Nahum, prophet.
2 St. Habakkuk, prophet; Blessed Ivan Sleziuk, confessor Bishop of Ivano-Frankivs’k.
3 St. Zephaniah, prophet.
4 St. Barbara, Great-Martyr; St. John Damascene, venerable.
5 + St. Sabbas the Consecrated, venerable.
6 + St. Nicholas, Wonder-Worker, Archbishop of Myra.
7 St. Ambrose, Bishop of Milan.
8 Prefeast of the Immaculate Conception; St. Patapius, venerable.
9 + Immaculate Conception of the Mother of God.
10 Sts. Menas, Hermogenes, and Eugraphus, martyrs.
11 St. Daniel the Stylite, venerable.
12 St. Spiridon, Bishop of Tremithus.
13 ✠ Sts. Eustratius, Eugenius, Auxentius, Orestes, martyrs.
14 Sts. Thyrsus, Leucius, Philemon, Appolonius, Callinicus, martyrs.
15 Sts. Eleutherius, hieromartyr; St. Paul, venerable.
16 Leave-taking of the Immaculate Conception; St. Haggai, prophet.
17 St. Daniel, prophet, and Ananiah, Azariah and Mishael.
18 Sts. Sebastian and companions, martyrs.
19 St. Boniface, martyr.
20 Prefeast of the Nativity of Our Lord; St. Ignatius the God-Bearer, hieromartyr.
21 St. Juliana, martyr.
22 St. Anastasia, Great-Martyr.
23 Ten Holy Martyrs of Crete.
24 Eve of the Nativity of our Lord; St. Eugenia, venerable-martyr.
25 ⊕ Nativity of Our Lord Jesus Christ.
26 Synaxis of the Mother of God.
27 St. Stephen the First Martyr and Archdeacon.
28 Holy Martyrs Burned at Nicomedia; Blessed Hryhoriy Khomyshyn, Bishop of Stanyslaviv, hieromartyr.
29 The Holy Innocents killed by Herod in Bethlehem.
30 St. Anysia, martyr; St. Zoticus, venerable-priest.
31 Leave-taking of the Nativity of Our Lord; St. Melania the Roman, venerable.