TROPARIA OF THE MENAION – CALENDAR
JANUARY

⊕ The Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ; our Holy Father Basil the Great, Archbishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

Troparion of the Circumcision (Tone 1): O Jesus, enthroned on high together with Your eternal Father and divine Spirit,* You condescended to be born on earth of a maiden and virgin mother.* And on the eighth day You were circumcised.* Praised be Your most noble decision;* praised be Your plan of salvation;* glory be to Your condescension, O Lord; You alone love mankind.

Troparion of St. Basil (Tone 1): Your voice resounds throughout the world* which has accepted the lessons so well taught by you.* You have clarified the nature of created things.* You have made a rule of life for men.* By your royal priesthood, O venerable Father Basil,* intercede with Christ to save our souls.

Kontakion of St. Basil (Tone 4): O venerable and heavenly inspired Basil,* you were a firm foundation of the Church* by giving to all a lasting treasure* and impressing them with your teachings.

Kontakion of the Circumcision (Tone 3): The Lord of All endures circumcision* and His goodness purifies the sins of men* and grants salvation to the world today.* Therefore, Basil the priest and torchbearer of the Creator,* the divine mystic of Christ, rejoices on high.

Dismissal: Christ our true God, Who, for our salvation, submitted to circumcision on the eighth day according to the law, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, and of our holy father Basil the Great, Archhierarch of Caesarea in Cappadocia and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The Prefeast of the Theophany of our Lord; our Holy Father Sylvester, Hierarch and Pope of Rome.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Make ready, O Zabulon,* and prepare yourself, O Nephtali;* O River Jordan, stop and receive with joy* the Master coming to be baptized.* O Adam, rejoice with the first mother, Eve,* and do not hide yourselves as before in paradise.* For, having seen you unclothed,* Christ has appeared to clothe you with the first robe:* He has appeared to renew all creation.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Today the Lord stood in Jordan’s current telling John:* Do not be afraid to baptize Me,* for I have come to save Adam, the first man.

The Holy Prophet Malachi; Holy Martyr Gordius.

The Synaxis of the Seventy Holy Disciples; our Venerable Father Theoktistos, Hegumen of the Cucume Monastery in Sicily.

The Vigil of the Theophany of our Lord; Holy Martyrs Theopemptus and Theonas; the Venerable Syncletica.

Troparion of the Vigil (Tone 4): After Elijah had gone up to heaven,* Elisha threw his mantle in the Jordan River which parted,* opening a way, a dry path between two walls of water, where he could pass,* a true symbol of our baptism by which we pass through this fleeting life.* Christ has been seen at the Jordan River to sanctify the waters.

Kontakion of the Vigil (Tone 4): O most compassionate Christ Who absolves our sins in the depth of Your mercy,* You came to be baptized with the water of the Jordan.* You robed me in splendor replacing my ancient garment of evil.

⊕ The Theophany of our Lord God and Savior, Jesus Christ.

Troparion (Tone 1): At Your baptism in the Jordan, O Lord,* worship of the Trinity was revealed,* for the Father’s voice bore witness to You,* calling You His beloved Son,* and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed the truth of these words.* O Christ God, Who appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to You!

Kontakion (Tone 4): You have revealed Yourself to the world today,* and Your light, O Lord, has shined upon us.* We recognize You and exclaim to You:* You have come and revealed Yourself, O Inaccessible Light!

Dismissal: Christ our true God, Who, for our salvation, deigned to be baptized in the Jordan by John, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, the holy, glorious and praiseworthy apostles, our venerable and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The Synaxis of John the Baptist, Prophet and Forerunner. (Take the service of the 23rd of September, p. 1036; the troparion and kontakion are taken from Tuesday, p. 1235.)

Our Venerable Father George the Chosebite; the Venerable Dominica; and the Holy Confessor Emilian.

The Holy Martyr Polyectus.

Our Holy Father Gregory of Nyssa, Hierarch; Venerable Dometian, Bishop of Melitene; Venerable Father Marcion, Presbyter.

✠ Our Venerable Father Theodosius, Founder of Monasteries.

Troparion (Tone 8): Your abundant tears made the wilderness bloom,* and your sufferings made your labors fruitful a hundredfold;* you became a shining torch over the world.* Father Theodosius,* pray to Christ our God that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 8): You were planted in the courts of your Lord* and blossomed forth with beautiful and admirable virtues,* O master of God’s holy sheepfold.* You multiplied your children in the wilderness* and quenched their thirst with your abundant tears.* Therefore, we cry out: Rejoice, O Father Theodosius!

For readings at Vespers, (see p. 1194).

The Holy Martyr Tatiana.

The Holy Martyrs Hermylus and Stratonicus.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Theophany of our Lord; Venerable Martyrs Slain at Sinai and Raltho; and the Death of the Holy Equal-to-the-Apostles Nina, Enlightener of Armenia.

Our Venerable Father Paul of Thebes and John the Hut-Dweller.

The Veneration of the Chains of the Holy Apostle Peter.

Our Venerable Father and God-bearer Anthony the Great.

Troparion (Tone 4): Father Anthony, you imitated Elijah in his zeal,* and you followed John the Baptist in his holy way of life.* You took up your abode in the desert* and strengthened the world by your prayers.* Intercede with Christ our God that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): You rejected the troubles of this world, most venerable Anthony,* and spent your life in peace by imitating John the Baptist.* With him, we exalt your name;* for you are a perfect example of good conduct.

For readings at Vespers, (see p. 1194).

Our holy Fathers Athanasius and Cyril, Archbishops of Alexandria.

Our Venerable Father Macarius of Egypt.

✠ Our Venerable Father and God-bearer Euthymius the Great.

Troparion (Tone 4): Joy to you, O barren wilderness;* rejoice, sterile desert that has never known the travail of birth;* for your spouse has multiplied your children.* He has planted them in devotion and piety,* and made them grow in detachment for the sake of perfect virtue.* Through his supplications, Christ our God, give peace to our lives.

Kontakion (Tone 8): Creation takes joy in your birth and memory.* It is delighted with the abundance of your miracles.* Enrich our souls from your treasures, O father,* and wash our defilements away so that we can sing: Alleluia!

For readings at Vespers, see p. 1194.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Maximus (Common service of a Confessor); Martyr Neophitus; Holy Martyrs Eugene, Candidus, Valerian, and Acquila.

The Holy Apostle Timothy; Venerable Martyr Anastasius the Persian.

The Holy Hieromartyr Clement, Hierarch of Ancyra; and Holy Martyr Agathangelos; Blessed Vincent Levoniuk and his twelve companions, Martyrs.

The Venerable Xenia of Rome.

✠ Our Holy Father Gregory the Theologian.

Troparion (Tone 1): The sweet melody of your theological teachings* has overcome the noisy blasts of orators.* For God has granted you the power of penetrating spiritual depths* and the gift of brilliant literary talent.* Gregory, our father, intercede with Christ our God that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 3): O glorious Gregory, your theological knowledge has solved the problems raised by orators.* You have robed the Church with true theology inspired from on high.* The Church puts on this robe and cries out with us, your children:* Rejoice, O father, whose theological knowledge is so great.

For readings at Vespers: Prov 10:6-8, 8:6-21 (p. 934); Wis 4:7-15 (p. 886); Wis 8:17-9:14.

Our Venerable Fathers Xenophon and his wife, Mary (Common service of two or more monks).

✠ The Translation of the Relics of our Holy Father John Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople.

Troparion (Tone 8): The grace that shines forth like a torch from your mouth* has enlightened the universe,* bestowed treasures of generosity upon the world,* and shown us the depth of your humility.* While you teach us by your words,* O holy father, pray to the Word, Christ our God,* that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 1): The Church rejoiced greatly* because of the transfer of your holy relics,* and she kept them as a treasure of great price.* Through your intercession, these same remains* convey the grace of healing upon those who sing to you a hymn of praise,* O most glorious John Chrysostom.

Readings at Vespers: Prov. 10:6-8, 8:6-21 (p. 934); Wis. 4:7-15 (p. 886); Wis. 8:17-9:14.

Our Venerable Father Ephrem the Syrian.

The Translation of the Relics of the Holy Hierarch and Martyr Ignatius of Antioch.

✠ The Commemoration of the Three Bishops: Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom; and Hieromartyr Hippolitus.

Troparion of the Saints (Tone 4): O teachers of the universe,* equal to the apostles,* pray to the Lord of All to grant peace to the world* and abundant mercy to our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): O Lord, You have received Your priestly and divinely inspired preachers,* the crown of Your teachers,* into the enjoyment of Your goodness and repose.* You accepted their labors and death above any other sacrifice,* for only You can glorify Your saints.

The Holy Selfless Physicians Cyrus and John.

FEBRUARY

The Prefeast of the Meeting of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; the Holy Martyr Tryphon.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 1): Hail, Mother of God, Virgin full of grace.* From you has shown forth the Sun of Justice, Christ our God,* shining upon those who are in darkness.* Rejoice also, you just elder, Simeon,* for you received in your arms the Redeemer of our souls* Who has given us resurrection.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 6): O Christ our God, through Your birth You sanctified the Virgin’s womb,* and blessed, as it was proper, the hands of Simeon.* Today, You have come to bring us deliverance.* Give peace to nations at war and strengthen our civil authorities,* for You alone love mankind.

⊕ The Presentation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Troparion (Tone 1): Hail, Mother of God, Virgin full of grace.* From you has shown forth the Sun of Justice, Christ our God,* shining upon those who are in darkness.* Rejoice also, you just elder, Simeon;* for you received in your arms the Redeemer of our souls,* Who has given us resurrection.

Kontakion (Tone 1): O Christ our God, through Your birth You sanctified the Virgin’s womb;* and blessed, as it was proper, the hands of Simeon.* Today, You have come to bring us deliverance.* Give peace to nations at war, and strengthen our civil authorities,* for You alone love mankind.

Dismissal: Christ our true God, Who, for our salvation, deigned to be held in the embrace of the righteous Simeon, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, the holy, glorious and praiseworthy apostles, and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The Holy and Just Simeon the God-receiver and the Prophetess Anna.

Troparion (Tone 4): The elderly Simeon is filled with happiness today,* receiving the eternal God as an infant into his arms.* He begs to be released from the bonds of the flesh,* for he cries: My eyes have seen your salvation for the world.

Kontakion (Tone 4): The elderly Simeon prayed to be released from the bonds of this passing life.* He received the Creator and Lord of all into his arms.* He found release and departed to life everlasting.

Our Venerable Father Isidore of Pelusium.

The Holy Martyr Agatha.

Our Venerable Father Boukolus, Hierarch of Smyrna (Common service of a Hierarch); and the Holy Hieromartyr Sylvanus, Bishop of Emessa and those with him.

Our Venerable Father Parthenius, Bishop of Lampsacus (Common service of a Hierarch); Blessed Peter Verhun, Hieromartyr.

The Holy Great-Martyr Theodore of Tyre; and the Holy Prophet Zechariah.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Meeting of our Lord Jesus Christ; and the Holy Martyr Nicephorus.

The Holy Martyr Charalampius.

The Holy Hieromartyr Blaise, Bishop of Sebastea.

Our Holy Father Meletius, Archbishop of Antioch.

Our Venerable Father Martinian.

✠ The Falling Asleep of our Venerable Father Cyril, Teacher of the Slavs; the Venerable Father Auxentius; and the Venerable Maron, the Wonderworker and Hermit.

Troparion of St. Cyril (Tone 4): From your childhood you made wisdom your sister,* and you took her to wife as a radiant virgin.* You adorned your mind and soul with it like gold.* You became a second great Cyril, O Voice of God.* You became a marvel by name and a blessed thinker.

Kontakion of St. Cyril (Tone 2): Enlightening the world by your divinely inspired teachings,* you have extended your sway like lightning over the world.* You sow the brilliant Word of God everywhere you go;* all the corners of the world shine with your miracles,* the north, south, east, and west, O Blessed Cyril.

For reading at Vespers: Deut 1:8-17 (p. 720); Deut 10:14-21 (p. 900); Wis 3:1-9 (p. 744).

The Holy Apostle Onesimus.

The Holy Martyrs Pamphilus, Porphyrius, Valentius, Paul, and others.

The Holy Great-Martyr Theodore of Tyre. Troparion and Kontakion: from the First Saturday of the Great Fast (p. 1247).

Our Holy Father Leo, Pope of Rome.

The Holy Apostle Archippus.

Our Venerable Father Leo, Bishop of Catania.

Our Venerable Father Timothy of Symbola; Holy Father Eustathius, Archbishop of Antioch.

The Finding of the Relics of the Martyrs at Eugenia.

The Holy Hieromartyr Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna.

✠ The First and Second Finding of the Head of the Prophet and Forerunner, John the Baptist. Necessary propers and readings: see August 29 (p. 999).

Troparion (Tone 4): The head of the Forerunner arose from the earth like a star,* sending out rays of healing and immortality;* in heaven, it gathers together the choirs of angels,* while on earth it assembles the human race in a single voice* to sing the glory of Christ our God.

Kontakion (Tone 2): O prophet of God and forerunner of grace,* within the earth we have discovered your head,* a rose of great holiness from which healing always comes to us.* As you did of old, now also preach repentance to the world.

For the service and readings, see the 29th of August, (p. 999).

Our Holy Father Tarasius, Archbishop of Constantinople.

Our Holy Father Porphyrius, Bishop of Gaza.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Procopius the Decapolitan (Common service of a Confessor).

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Basil (Common service of a Confessor).

Our Venerable Father Cassian.

MARCH

The Holy Venerable Martyr Eudoxia.

The Holy Hieromartyr Theodotus, Bishop of Cyrene (Common service of a Hieromartyr).

The Holy Martyrs Eutropius, Cleonicus and Basiliscus.

Our Venerable Father Gerasimus of the Jordan.

The Holy Martyr Conon.

The Holy Forty-two Martyrs of Ammorium.

The Holy Hieromartyrs and Bishops of Cherson: Basil, Ephrem, Capiton, Eugene and others; Bl. Leonid Fedorov, Exarch of the Russian Catholic Church, Hieromartyr.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Theophylactus, Hierarch of Nicomedia (Common service of a Hierarch).

✠ The Holy Forty Martyrs of Sebastea.

Troparion (Tone 1): O forty soldiers of Christ and honorable martyrs,* you went through fire and water; O mighty warriors,* you have come to live with the angels.* Join them in praying to Christ for those who praise you.* Glory to Him Who strengthened you!* Glory to Him Who crowned you!* Glory to Him Who heals us through you!

Kontakion (Tone 6): You left the crowds of this world* and joined the Master in heaven, O forty martyrs.* Passing through fire and water,* you reaped glory and honor in heaven, O blessed saints.

For readings at Vespers, (p. 1202).

The Holy Martyr Codratus, Cyprian, Anectus and Chryscentus.

Our Venerable Father Sophronius, Patriarch of Jerusalem.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Theophane of Mt. Sigriana (Common service of a Confessor); and our Holy Father Gregory Dialogus, Pope of Rome.

The Translation of the Relics of our Holy Father Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople.

Our Venerable Father Benedict.

The Holy Martyrs Agapius and six others with him.

The Holy Martyrs Sabinus and Papas.

Our Venerable Father Alexis, Man of God.

Our Holy Father Cyril, Archbishop of Jerusalem.

The Holy Martyrs Chrysanthus and Daria.

Our Venerable Fathers Martyred by the Saracens in the Monastery of Saint Sabbas (Office of Venerable Martyrs).

Our Venerable Father and Confessor James, Bishop of Catania (Common service of a Confessor).

The Holy Hieromartyr Basil, Presbyter of Ancyra.

Our Venerable-Martyr Nicon and his students martyred with him (Common service of Martyrs).

The Prefeast of the Annunciation of Our Most Holy Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary; Venerable Zacharius; our Holy Father Artemon, Bishop of Seleucia in Pisidia.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Today is the prelude of joy for the whole world.* Let us then anticipate the feast and celebrate,* for, behold, Gabriel is on his way with the glad tidings for the Virgin.* He is about to cry out in fear and amazement:* Rejoice, O Woman Full of Grace; the Lord is with you!

Kontakion (Tone 8): You are the beginning of salvation* for all those born on earth, O Virgin Theotokos.* The prince of the heavenly legions has been sent* to stand before you with a message of joy.* We join the chorus and call out to you:* Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever pure.

⊕ The Feast of the Annunciation of the Mother of God; Blessed Omelian (Emil) Kovch, Hieromartyr.

Troparion (Tone 4): Today is the fountainhead of our salvation* and the revelation of an eternal mystery:* the Son of God becomes a virgin’s Son,* and Gabriel announces this grace.* Therefore, let us exclaim with him to the Mother of God: Hail, O Woman Full of Grace, the Lord is with you.

Kontakion (Tone 8): O Mother of God,* we your servants sing a hymn of thanks to you,* a hymn of triumph to a valiant leader;* for you have delivered us from all peril.* We now exclaim to you:* Hail, O Bride and Virgin ever-pure.

The Leave-taking of the Feast and the Synaxis of the Archangel Gabriel.

The Venerable Matrona of Thessalonica.

Our Venerable Fathers Hilarion the Younger and the Holy Stephen the Wonderworker.

Our Venerable Fathers Mark, Bishop of Arethusa, and the Deacon Cyril, and others martyred by the persecutor Julian (Common service of Hieromartyrs).

Our Venerable Father John Climacus, Author of the “Divine Ladder.”

Our Venerable Father Hypatius, Bishop of Gangra (Common service of a Hierarch).

APRIL

Our Venerable Mother Mary of Egypt.

Our Venerable Father Titus the Wonderworker; Blessed Bishop Nicholas Charnetsky, CSsR, Confessor, and Companions.

Troparion of Nicholas (Tone 4): Your martyrs, Nicholas Charnetsky and Companions, O Lord,* by their sufferings acquired crowns of incorruptibility from You, our God.* For possessing Your power they overcame the torturers* and shattered the feeble insolence of demons.* By their supplications, save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Appearing as radiant lights, O godly martyrs,* you illumine all creation with the brightness of your miracles, healing infirmities,* always dispelling deep darkness and praying unceasingly* to Christ our God for all of us.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Nicetas, Hegumen of the Medicius Monastery (Common service of a Venerable).

Our Venerable Fathers Joseph the Hymnographer and George of Maleon.

The Holy Martyrs Theodulus, Agathopodas, and Companions.

✠ The Falling Asleep of our Father Methodius, Bishop and Teacher of the Slavs; and our Holy Father Eutychius, Archbishop of Constantinople.

Troparion (Tone 4): Send Your mercy from heaven, O Christ,* to those who keep the feast of Your pastor’s death.* Through the intercession of Your holy disciple* who is truly our father in the faith,* open the gates of Your kingdom* and break the chains of our many sins.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Let us sing of the heavenly and faithful Methodius.* Let us praise with love this great pastor of the Slavs.* Truly he was a good servant of the Trinity.* He banished the wiles of heresy.* Rejoice, because he prays for all of us.

Readings at Vespers: Deut 1:8-17 (p. 720); Deut 10:14-21 (p. 900); Wis 3:1-9 (p. 744).

Our Venerable Father George, Bishop of Mitylene; Blessed Josaphata Hordashevska, SSMI.

The Holy Apostles Herodion, Agabus, Rufus, Asyncretus, Phlegontus, and Hermes.

The Holy Martyr Eupsychius.

The Holy Martyrs Terence, Pompius, and others with them.

The Holy Hieromartyr Antipas, Bishop of Pergamum in Asia.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Basil, Bishop of Parium (Common service of a Confessor).

The Holy Hieromartyr Artemon and others with him (Common service of a Hieromartyr).

Our Holy Father and Confessor Martin, Pope of Rome; and the Holy Martyrs Anthony, John, and Eustathius.

The Holy Apostles Aristarchus, Pudens, and Trophimus.

The Holy Virgins and Martyrs Agape, Irene, and Chionia.

Our Venerable Father Simeon the Persian and Acacius, Bishop of Melitene.

Our Venerable Father John, Disciple of Gregory the Decapolite.

Our Venerable Father John the Hermit.

Our Venerable Father Theodore Trichinas.

The Holy Hieromartyr Januarius and others with him (Common service of Hieromartyrs); and the Holy Martyr Theodore of Pergia.

Our Venerable Father Theodore Sykeot; and Vitalius.

✠ The Glorious Great-Martyr, and Wonder-worker George.

Troparion (Tone 4): You fought the good fight with faith,* O George, Martyr of Christ,* You exposed the perversion of the persecutors* and offered an acceptable sacrifice to God.* Therefore, you also received a crown of victory and through your prayers, O holy one,* obtained the forgiveness of sins for all.

Kontakion (Tone 4): Reared by God, you were a noble sower of piety,* harvesting sheaves of virtue.* You sowed in tears but reaped in joy;* and having honorably fought and given your blood, you were received by Christ.* Through your prayers, O holy one,* obtain the forgiveness of sins for all.

The Holy Martyr Sabbas Stratelates.

✠ The Holy Apostle and Evangelist Mark.

Troparion (Tone 3): You became an apostle of Christ through the teaching of Peter,* and you traveled like the sun over foreign lands.* You fathered the Alexandrians in Christ, O blessed saint,* and, by you, Egypt was set free from her mistakes.* You guide us all like a beacon, O Mark, voice of God.* You are a pillar of the Church by your gospel teaching.* We rejoice in this and keep your memory.* Intercede with God, Who proclaims the Gospel through you, to forgive us our many sins.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Receiving the grace of the Spirit from heaven,* you silenced the babble of the orators, O apostle.* You attracted the pagans by the preaching of the Gospel* and led them to your Master, O Blessed Mark.

Readings at Vespers: James 1:1-12; James 1:13-27; James 2:1-13.

The Holy Hieromartyr Basil, Bishop of Amasea.

The Holy Hieromartyr Simeon, Cousin of the Lord; Venerable Father Stephen, Bishop of Volodymyr in Volyn.

The Holy Apostles Jason and Sosipater; Holy Martyrs Maximus, Dadas, and Quintillianus.

The Nine Holy Martyrs of Cyzica; Venerable Father and Wonderworker Memnon.

✠ The Holy Apostle James, Brother of John the Theologian.

Troparion (Tone 3): You were an apostle of Christ and the beloved brother of John.* O praiseworthy James, obtain absolution for those who sing the praises of your memory* and find mercy for our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): O glorious James, when you heard the Divine Word calling you,* you put aside your love for your father* and hurried to Christ with your brother, John.* Therefore, both of you were made worthy to see the divine transfiguration of the Lord.

Readings at Vespers: James 1:1-12; James 1:13-27; James 2:1-13.

MAY

The Holy Prophet Jeremiah; Blessed Clement (Klymentii) Sheptytsky, Confessor.

Our Holy Father Athanasius the Great.

✠ The Falling Asleep of our Venerable Father Theodosius the Great, Hegumen of the Pecherska Lavra and organizer of the monastic life; and the Holy Martyrs Timothy and Maura.

Troparion for Theodosius (Tone 8): Loving the monastic life from your youth, you climbed the summit of virtue.* Achieving your goal, you took up life in a cave.* Perfecting your life by fasting, you became like an angel.* You have enlightened all the Slav lands like a star.* O Father Theodosius, intercede with Christ our God to save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 3): We venerate the star of all the Slav lands today,* rising in the East and traveling to the West.* The Blessed Theodosius radiated miracles and holiness* by his goodness and monastic piety.

The Holy Martyr Pelagia.

The Holy Martyr Irene; and our Venerable Father Nicephorus, Hegumen of the Medicius Monastery.

The Just and Long-suffering Job.

Troparion (Tone 1): When the enemy of the just beheld the treasures of Job’s virtues, he sought to destroy them.* He attacked his body but could not touch his spirit, for his pure soul was well-armed.* As for us, the same enemy stripped us and chained us.* Therefore, O Savior, be on our side,* protect us against the devil and save us.

Kontakion (Tone 8): O faithful Job, celebrated servant of God,* you were a deeply just man and God’s sincere worshiper.* You gave the world a stirring lesson by your patience and long-suffering.* Therefore, we sing a hymn of praise to your memory and we honor you.

The Holy Martyr Acacius; and the Commemoration of the Apparition of the Holy Cross over Jerusalem.

✠ The Holy Apostle and Evangelist John the Theologian, and Venerable Arsenius the Great.

Troparion of Saint John (Tone 2): Beloved apostle of Christ our God,* hasten to deliver a people that lacks any other defense.* He Who accepted that you lay your head on His breast* will also accept your prayer.* Pray to Christ, O theologian,* that He may overcome the darkness of pagan nations,* and beg that He grant us peace and abundant mercy.

Kontakion of Saint John (Tone 2): O man of purity, who could describe your glory?* Many are the miracles and healings you perform.* Since you are a theologian and the beloved of Christ,* intercede with Him for the salvation of our souls.

Dismissal: Christ our God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, the holy glorious and praiseworthy apostle and evangelist, virgin, and beloved disciple of Christ, who reclined upon the bosom of the Lord, John the Theologian, whose memory we gloriously celebrate today, and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

✠ The Translation of the Relics from Myra in Lycia to Bari of our Holy Father Nicholas, Archbishop; the Holy Prophet Isaiah; and the Holy Martyr Christopher.

Troparion of Saint Nicholas (Tone 4): A day of festal joy has come.* The city of Bari rejoices, and the world sings with it.* Today we celebrate the transfer of the relics of the wonderworking and holy Nicholas.* Just as the perfect Light has gleamed in glory,* so does Nicholas disperse the darkness of temptation for those who sing out:* Save us as a patron, O Nicholas.

Kontakion of Saint Nicholas (Tone 3): Like a star rising in the East, your relics have arisen and come to the West.* The waters of the sea have been hallowed by your passage,* and the city of Bari has received grace from you.* You are truly a most wonderful miracle-worker and a merciful prelate;* therefore, we praise you.

✠ The Holy Apostle Simon the Zealot.

Troparion (Tone 3): O Holy Apostle Simon, intercede with the all-merciful God* that He may grant us forgiveness of our sins.

Kontakion (Tone 2): With holy hymns we bless Simon as a preacher of God,* who rooted wisdom deeply in the hearts of the pious.* Now he stands before the throne of Glory* and rejoices in the company of angels.* He prays unceasingly for all of us.

For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1175).

✠ Cyril and Methodius, Equals to the Apostles and Teachers of the Slavs; and the Holy Hieromartyr Mocius; Blessed Basil Hopko, Auxiliary Bishop of Preshov.

Troparion of the Cyril & Methodius (Tone 4): As equals of the apostles and teachers of the Slavs,* beg the Master of all to confirm us in the faith* and in unity of heart, O Cyril and Methodius.* Beg Him for peace in the world and mercy on our souls.

Kontakion of the Cyril & Methodius (Tone 3): We honor those priests who gave us the Light;* who opened the fountain of theology for us by translating the Holy Scriptures,* thus starting a river from them that still runs today.* We glorify you, O Cyril and Methodius,* who stand in heaven before the throne of the Lord on high,* and who pray so fervently for all of us.

Our Holy Fathers Epiphanius, Bishop of Cyprus, and Germanus, Patriarch of Constantinople (Office of Hierarchs).

The Holy Martyr Glyceria.

The Holy Martyr Isidore.

Our Venerable Father Pachomius the Great.

Our Venerable Father Theodore the Sanctified, Disciple of Pachomius.

The Holy Apostles Andronicus and others with him (Common service of two or more Apostles).

The Holy Martyrs Theodotus of Ancyra; and the Holy Martyrs Peter and Dionysius, and others with them; Blessed Ivan Ziatyk, CSsR, Hieromartyr.

The Holy Hieromartyr Patrick, Bishop of Prussa (Common service of a Hieromartyr).

The Holy Martyr Thalaleus.

✠ The Holy Emperor Constantine and his Mother, Helen, Equals to the Apostles.

Troparion (Tone 8): Seeing the cross in the sky like Paul,* and like him you received a call from the Divine.* You committed the royal city into the hands of the Lord.* Save this city always in peace, O only Lover of mankind,* through the prayers of the Theotokos.

Kontakion (Tone 3): Today Constantine and his mother Helen reveal the cross,* that most precious tree which puzzles the enemies.* It is the armor of Christian authorities against enemies.* It has proved itself awesome in war by its many miracles.

The Holy Martyr Basiliscus.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Michael, Bishop of Synada (Common service of a Hierarch); the Venerable Euphrosyna of Polotsk, Hegumena of the Monastery of the Holy Savior.

Our Venerable Father Simeon of the Mountain of Wonders; and our Venerable Father Nicetas the Stylite, Wonderworker of Pereyaslav.

✠ The Third Finding of the Venerable Head of the Prophet and Forerunner John the Baptist (Take the service of the 29th of August, p. 999); Blessed Mykola Tsehelsky, Hieromartyr.

Troparion (Tone 4): Like a heavenly treasure hidden in a field,* Christ has revealed your head for us, O prophet.* Having gathered together at its discovery,* we sing hymns to the Savior Who delivers us by your prayers.

Kontakion (Tone 6): O heavenly light and divine pillar in the world, O lampstand of the sun,* the lightbearing and divine head of the Forerunner was discovered and revealed to the whole world.* It sanctifies those who in faith venerate it and who cry out:* O most wise Baptizer of Christ, save all of us.

The Holy Apostle Carpus, one of the Seventy.

The Holy Hieromartyr Therapontus.

Our Venerable Father Nicetas, Bishop of Chalcedon.

The Venerable-Martyr Theodosia, Virgin.

Our Venerable Father Isaac, Hegumen of the Dalmatia Monastery.

The Holy Apostle Hermes; the Holy Martyr Hermias.

JUNE

The Holy Martyrs Justin and others with him (Common service of Martyrs).

The Holy Father Nicephorus, Confessor (Common service of a Hierarch).

The Holy Martyrs Lucillian and others with him (Common service of Martyrs).

The Holy Father Metrophanes, Patriarch of Constantinople.

The Holy Hieromartyr Dorotheus, Bishop of Tyre; and Cosmas, Presbyter of Armenia.

Our Venerable Fathers Bessarion, Wonderworker; and the Venerable Hilarion the Younger.

The Holy Hieromartyr Theodotus, Bishop of Ancyra.

The Translation of the Relics of the Great-Martyr Theodore of Tyre. Take the Troparion and Kontakion of the First Saturday of the Great Fast, (p. 1247).

Our Holy Father Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria.

The Holy Hieromartyr Timothy, Bishop of Prussa.

✠ Holy Apostles Bartholomew and Barnabas.

Troparion (Tone 1): Receiving the Spirit as He came in fiery tongues,* you preached the coming of the Word in the flesh.* While one of you was beheaded for the Gospel,* the other endured stoning for the sake of the faith.* You have been sent to adorn the choirs of heaven, O Bartholomew and Barnabas.* We honor your memory and ask that you intercede with God to forgive our sins.

Kontakion of St. Bartholomew (Tone 4): O Bartholomew, Apostle of the Lord,* you appeared to the world as a shining star.* You enlightened with the splendor of your teachings and the wonder of your miracles* all those who honor you.

Kontakion of St. Barnabas (Tone 3): O Barnabas, you became a perfect and faithful servant of the Lord.* You were the first of the seventy disciples,* worthy to be the companion of Paul in his preaching.* You proclaimed to all that Christ is the Savior.* Therefore, we celebrate your holy memory with hymns and songs.

Readings at Vespers: see p. 1181.

Our Venerable Fathers Onufrius the Great and Peter of Athos.

The Holy Martyr Aquilina; and our Holy Father Triphyllius, Bishop of Leucosia, on Cyprus.

The Holy Prophet Elisha; and our Holy Father Methodius, Patriarch of Constantinople.

The Holy Prophet Amos; the Venerable Jerome, Priest of Stridonium.

Our Holy Father and Wonderworker Tychon, Hierarch of Amanthus (Common service of a Hierarch).

The Holy Martyrs Manuel, Sabel, and Ishmael; and the Venerable Hypatius, Hegumen of Ruphenia Monastery.

The Holy Martyr Leontius.

✠ Holy Apostle Jude, Brother of the Lord.

Troparion (Tone 1): We recognize that you are one of the Lord’s relatives* and a strong martyr who for the faith trampled on lies.* We have come to praise you in a sacred manner, O Jude,* as we celebrate your holy memory and make our plea:* Forgive our sins by the might of your prayers.

Kontakion (Tone 2): You were a chosen disciple with a firm purpose,* an invincible pillar of the Church of Christ.* You preached the word about Christ to the pagans,* telling them to believe in one God.* Therefore, you have been exalted by Him* and graced with the gift of healing.* You cure the ills of those who hasten to you, O praiseworthy apostle Jude.

For the readings at Vespers see: Jude 1:1-10; Jude 1:11-16; Jude 1:17-25.

The Holy Hieromartyr Methodius, Bishop of Patara.

The Holy Martyr Julian of Tarsus.

The Holy Hieromartyr Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.

The Holy Martyr Agrippina.

⊕ The Nativity of the Honorable, Glorious Prophet, Forerunner, and Baptist John.

Troparion (Tone 4): O Prophet and Forerunner of the coming of Christ,* in spite of our honor and devotion,* we are unable to give you worthy praise.* Through your glorious and noble birth* your mother’s childlessness was ended,* your father’s tongue was freed,* and the Incarnation of the Son of God* was proclaimed to the world.

Kontakion (Tone 3): Today, she who was once barren* gives birth to the Forerunner of Christ,* the fulfillment of all prophecy.* In the Jordan, John laid his hand upon Him Whom the prophets foretold,* showing himself to be the prophet, the herald, and forerunner of the Word of God.

The Venerable Martyr Febronia.

The Venerable Father David of Thessalonica; Bl. Mykola Konrad, Hieromartyr, Bl. Mykola Pryjma, Hieromartyr; Blessed Andrij Ishchak, Hieromartyr.

The Venerable Father Sampson the Hospitaller; Blessed Bishop Vasyl Velychovsky, CSsR and 27 other Blesseds of the Church of Rus’ Ukraine including Bl. Severian Baranyk, OSBM and Bl. Zynoviy Kovalyk, CSsR, Hieromartyrs, and others.

Troparion of Blessed Vasyl (Tone 4): O holy Priest-Martyr Vasyl, You lent yourself to the apostles’ way of life* and succeeded them on their throne.* Inspired by God, you found the way to contemplation through the practice of virtue.* Therefore, you became a perfect teacher of truth,* fighting for the faith unto the shedding of your blood.* Intercede with Christ our God that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): We all sing a hymn of praise to you, O Holy One,* splendor of bishops and an example of victory.* We beseech you, O priest-martyr Vasyl,* to deliver from danger all those who celebrate your memory with fervor.* Intercede unceasingly for us all.

The Translation of the Relics of Cyrus and John, Wonderworkers and Unmercenaries.

⊕ The Holy, Glorious and Illustrious Apostles, Peter and Paul; Bl. Joachim Senkivsky, OSBM, Hieromartyr.

Troparion (Tone 4): O leaders of apostles and teachers of the world,* pray to the Lord of all* to grant peace to the world* and abundant mercy to our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Lord, You have received the steadfast preachers of the good news,* the leaders of Your apostles, into the enjoyment of Your goodness and repose.* You have accepted their labors and death before any other sacrifice,* for only You know the secrets of our heart.

✠ The Synaxis of the Holy, Glorious Twelve Apostles. For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1181).

JULY

The Holy Selfless Physicians Cosmas and Damian.

✠ The Deposition of the Venerable Robes of the Mother of God at Blachernae.

Troparion (Tone 8): Ever-virgin Mother of God and protection of the human race,* you gave the robe and cincture of your most pure body to your city as a powerful protection.* These garments remained incorrupt because of your virginal childbirth.* For in you, both time and nature have been renewed.* Therefore, we pray that you grant peace to the universe and great mercy to our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 4): As a mantle of immortality* you have given to the faithful the garment that covered your most pure body,* O Virgin whom God Himself has blessed and divine protection of the human race.* With love we celebrate the feast of the deposition of your mantle,* and we sing with faith:* Rejoice, O Virgin, for you are the pride of Christians.

For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1167).

The Holy Martyr Hyacinth; and Anatolius, Patriarch of Constantinople.

Our Holy Father Andrew, Archbishop of Crete; the Venerable Martha, Mother of St. Simeon of the Wonderful Mountain.

✠ Our Venerable Father Athanasius of Mt. Athos.

Troparion (Tone 3): The angels in heaven marvelled at your life on earth,* for you occupied your flesh as a spirit from on high.* You disarmed legions of demons, O glorious saint,* and Christ rewarded you with bountiful gifts.* Because of this, O Father, we ask you now to pray for the salvation of all.

Kontakion (Tone 8): Your flock invokes you as a man of special sight* and a zealous preacher of God, O inspired saint.* Do not cease praying for your servants* that they may be delivered from attacks and assaults.* We cry to you: Rejoice, O Father Athanasius.

For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1194).

Our Venerable Father Sisoes the Great.

Our Venerable Fathers Thomas of Maleum and Acacius, mentioned in the “Ladder” of St. John Climacus.

The Holy Great-martyr Procopius.

The Holy Hieromartyr Pancratius, Bishop of Taormina.

✠ Our Venerable Father Anthony of Kyiv; the Forty-five Martyrs of Nicopolis in Armenia; and the Holy Brothers Francis, Mutius and Raphael, and others with them, martyred in Dalmatia.

Troparion of St. Anthony (Tone 4): You renounced and left the world* following Christ in the spirit of the Gospel.* Living a life of an angel, you settled in the peaceful shelter of Mount Athos.* After that you came to the mountains of Kyiv with the blessing of the fathers.* You ended your life of labor there, casting light over all your homeland.* Showing the path of the kingdom to all monks, you led them on to Christ.* Now beg Him to save our souls, O Venerable Anthony.

Kontakion of Anthony (Tone 8): From childhood you loved God with all your heart* and lovingly followed Him, O venerable father.* Scorning this passing world as a trifle,* you took up residence in a cave.* There you fought the army of invisible demons,* and you were like the sun over the world.* Now you stand before the throne with the angels,* so remember us who honor you that we may sing: Rejoice, O Father Anthony.

The Falling Asleep of the Blessed Olha, Princess of Kyiv, named Helena at Holy Baptism; Holy and Praiseworthy Martyr Euphemia.

Troparion of Blessed Olha (Tone 1): Raising your mind on the wings of theology, you soared far above visible creation.* Seeking the God and Creator of all things and being rewarded by finding Him,* you were born again to Christ in Baptism.* Receiving delight from the Tree of life,* you remain incorrupt for all ages, O glorious Olha.

Kontakion of Blessed Olha (Tone 4): Let us sing hymns to the Benefactor of the world* Who exalted the God-wise Olha in the land of Rus’.* May He forgive our sins by her prayers.

The Holy Martyrs Proclus and Hilarion; and the Venerable Father Michael of Maleon.

Our Venerable Father Stephen the Sabaite; our Holy Father Julian, Hierarch of Kenoman; and the Synaxis of the Holy Archangel Gabriel.

The Holy Apostle Acquila.

✠ The Holy Great Prince Volodymyr, Equal to the Apostles, named Basil at Holy Baptism; and the Holy Martyrs Cyricus and Julitta his Mother.

Troparion of St. Volodymyr (Tone 4): O glorious ruler, Volodymyr, seated on the high throne of the mother of cities,* the God-protected Kyiv, like a merchant seeking a precious pearl,* you sent emissaries to find the true faith.* When you found the precious pearl, Christ,* He chose you to be a second Paul* and removed your spiritual and physical blindness in the holy bath.* And so, we your people commemorate your falling asleep* and seek your intercession for the governing authorities of Rus’* and for their whole domain.

Kontakion of St. Volodymyr (Tone 8): In your older years, venerable Volodymyr,* you became like the great apostle Paul,* rejecting idolatrous ways as childhood phantasies,* and as a mature man robed yourself in the royal garment of holy baptism.* Now in the joyous company of Christ our Savior,* intercede for the salvation of the governing authorities of Rus’* and their whole domain.

The Holy Hieromartyr Athenogenes and his Ten Disciples (Common service of Hieromartyrs); and the Remembrance of the Fathers of the Six Ecumenical Councils.

The Holy Great-Martyr Marina, and our Venerable Father and Confessor Paul Gojdich, OSBM., Bishop of Preshov.

Troparion of Confessor Paul (Tone 4): From your youth you loved Christ, the eternal Word.* You desired to serve Him quietly and in simplicity of heart,* but the right hand of the Most High chose you for the bishop’s throne,* and made you a steadfast shepherd of His people.* For the sake of faith and the unity of the Church,* you offered yourself to God as a perfect sacrifice.* O Father and priest-martyr Paul,* pray to Christ our God for the salvation of our souls.

Kontakion of Confessor Paul (Tone 2): Divine thunder, spiritual trumpet, sower of faith, and destroyer of heresies,* servant of the Trinity, O great bishop Paul,* you stand forever with the angels.* Pray without ceasing for all of us.

The Holy Martyr Hyacinth of Amastris; and the Holy Martyr Emilian.

Our Venerable Mother Macrina, Sister of St. Basil the Great; and the Venerable Dia.

Troparion of St. Macrina (Tone 2): You saw your bridegroom die and were struck by the vanity of this world and its fleeting life.* Taking purpose in your life, you were betrothed to the immortal One.* You drew His love with fasting and humility.* Now your spirit rejoices with the angels, O venerable Macrina.

Kontakion of St. Macrina (Tone 4): You loved the good God with all your heart, O Macrina.* You shouldered your cross and sincerely followed Him.* You found the total remission of your sins in Him.

✠ The Holy and Glorious Prophet Elijah (Elias).

Troparion (Tone 4): The glorious Elijah, incarnate messenger of God,* pillar of prophets, and second forerunner of the coming of Christ,* sent graces from on high in Elisha* that he might cleanse lepers and heal sickness* for all those who honor him.

Kontakion (Tone 2): O prophet, who foresaw the mighty deeds of our God,* O great Elijah, who through your prayers stopped rain,* intercede for us with the only One Who loves mankind.

Dismissal: Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, of the holy, glorious and illustrious prophet Elijah the Thesbite, whose fiery ascent to the heavens we gloriously celebrate today; through the prayers of the holy, glorious and praiseworthy apostles, our venerable and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

Our Venerable Fathers Simeon Fool for Christ and John, who fasted with him; and the Holy Prophet Ezekiel.

The Holy Myrrh-bearer and Equal to the Apostles Mary Magdalene.

Troparion (Tone 1): You followed Christ who was born of a virgin for us,* keeping His laws and observing His decrees, O Mary.* In return we observe your holy memory* that our sins might be forgiven through your prayers.

Kontakion (Tone 3): You stood before the cross with the others, O glorious Mary,* and you cried as you suffered there with the Theotokos.* You opened your mouth in praise, saying:* How strange this is that He who upholds all creation has deigned to suffer.* Glory to your power!

The Holy Martyrs Trophimus, Theophilus and others with them; Bl. Confessor Basil Hopko, Bishop of Medila.

Troparion of Basil Hopko (Tone 8): Guide to orthodoxy, teacher of piety and holiness,* luminary for the world, inspired adornment of bishops,* O Wise Basil, Harp of the Spirit,* you enlightened all by your teachings;* intercede with Christ our God to save our souls.

Kontakion of Basil Hopko (Tone 2): Divinely wise Basil,* you practiced self-control* and stilled the desires of the flesh, O holy father.* You flourished in faith* and flowered like the tree of life in Paradise.

✠ The Holy Martyrs Borys and Hlib, named Roman and David at Holy Baptism; the great martyr Christina.

Troparion of the Saints (Tone 2): Innocent Roman and guileless David, genuine martyrs,* who truly heard Christ’s gospel,* you did not resist the enemy, your own brother,* who killed your body, but could not touch your spirit.* Now let your evil, power-hungry brother weep* while you rejoice with angels in the presence of the Trinity.* Pray for the nation of your kinsmen to be pleasing to God,* and for the salvation of the sons of Rus.

Kontakion of the Saints (Tone 3): Roman and David, noble Christian martyrs,* today your glorious feast day invites us to praise Christ our God.* And so we hasten to the shrine of your relics* for you are divine healers.

✠ The Dormition of St. Anne, Mother of the Theotokos; and the Holy Women Olympiada and Eupraxia.

Troparion (Tone 4): O Holy Anne, you are filled with the wisdom of God* and you gave birth to the most pure Mother,* the one who gave birth to Life.* Therefore, you have been carried up in glory on this day* to the blessedness of heaven,* to the abode of those who exult with joy.* And now you pray, O ever-blessed one,* for all those who honor you with all their heart.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Let us celebrate the memory of the ancestors of Christ* and fervently ask for their help* so that, delivered from all affliction, we may cry out:* O God Who glorified them according to Your good will,* remain always with us.

The Holy Hieromartyr Hermolaus and others with him (Common service of Martyrs); the Venerable Martyr Paraskevia.

✠ The Holy Great-Martyr and Healer Panteleimon; our Holy Father Clement the Wonderworker, Archbishop of Ohryd.

Troparion of St. Panteleimon (Tone 8): You received an invitation through the lips of Hermolaus which came from heaven itself.* You embraced the faith of your mother,* and you rejoiced when you were killed for it.* In return you received the grace to heal sickness,* so heal our infirmities that we may honor you, O Great-Martyr Panteleimon.

Kontakion of St. Panteleimon (Tone 5): You imitated the merciful Lord.* By the grace to heal which He gave to you,* heal our souls through your effective prayers, O martyr of Christ our God.* Drive away the demon from those who honor you* and who sing in their faith: Save us, O Lord.

For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1202).

The Holy Apostles and Deacons Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, and Parmenas.

The Holy Martyr Callinicus.

The Holy Apostles Silas, Silvanus, and others.

The Holy and Just Father Eudocimus.

AUGUST

The Procession of the Venerable Cross; the Holy Seven Maccabees, their Mother Solome, and the elder Eleazar, Martyrs.

The Translation of the Holy Relics of the Apostle, Protomartyr and Archdeacon Stephen. Troparion of Dec. 27, (p. 1336).

Our Venerable Fathers Isaac, Dalmatus, and Faustus.

The Seven Holy Youths of Ephesus, Martyrs; and the Venerable-Martyr Eudocia.

The Prefeast of the Transfiguration of our Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ; and the Holy Martyr Eusignius.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): O faithful, let us celebrate in advance* the joy of the transfiguration of Christ.* Let us rejoice in this prefestive time and cry out:* Behold the day of heavenly joy draws near,* for the Lord goes up to Mount Tabor to shine with the light of his divinity.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Today the whole human race prepares* to reflect the radiance of divine splendor* brought about in the transfiguration of Christ;* and it cries out with joy:* Christ is transfigured in order to save all of us.

⊕ The Holy Transfiguration of our Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ.

Troparion (Tone 7): You were transfigured on the mountain, O Christ our God,* revealing as much of Your glory to Your disciples as they could behold.* Through the prayers of the Mother of God,* let Your everlasting light also shine upon us sinners.* O Giver of light, glory be to You.

Kontakion (Tone 7): You were transfigured on the mountain, O Christ our God,* and Your disciples beheld as much as they could of Your glory,* so that when they would see You crucified,* they would understand that You suffered willingly;* and they would preach to the world* that You are truly the reflection of the Father.

Dismissal: Christ our true God, Who was transfigured in glory in the presence of His holy disciples and apostles on Mount Tabor, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, and of our holy father John Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople, and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The Venerable-Martyr Dometius.

The Holy Confessor Emilian, Bishop of Cyzicus (Common of a Hierarch).

✠ The Holy Apostle Matthias.

Troparion (Tone 3): O Holy Apostle Matthias, intercede with the all-merciful God* that He may grant us forgiveness of our sins.

Kontakion (Tone 4): Your good tidings were more brilliant than the sun,* and they have spread all over the world;* they illumine the Church of the Gentiles with grace.* Rejoice, O miracle-working Matthias.

For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1175).

The Holy Martyr and Archdeacon Lawrence.

The Holy Martyr Euplus.

The Holy Martyrs Photius and Anicetus.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Transfiguration of our Lord; and our Venerable Father Maximus the Confessor.

✠ The Translation of the Precious Relics of our Venerable Father Theodosius, Hegumen of the Pecherska Lavra, in Kyiv (take service of May 3rd, p. 1293); the Holy Prophet Micheas; and the Prefeast of the Dormition of the Mother of God.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): O peoples, dance with joy and clap your hands in fervor.* Gather today in eagerness and jubilation, and with glee;* for the Mother of God is about to rise in glory,* going up from the earth into heaven.* It is to her we always sing hymns of praise,* for she is the Mother of God.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Today the whole universe dances with joy* at your glorious memory, O Mother of God,* and it cries out to you;* Rejoice, O Virgin, pride of Christians.

⊕ The Dormition of our Most Holy Lady and Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary.

Troparion (Tone 1): O Mother of God, in giving birth You still preserved virginity;* and in your falling-asleep you did not forsake the world.* You are the Mother of Life and have been transferred to life,* and through your prayers have delivered our souls from death.

Kontakion (Tone 2): The grave and death did not detain the Mother of God.* She prays perpetually and is our unfailing hope of intercession;* for He Who dwelt in the womb of the ever-Virgin,* transferred to life the Mother of Life.

The Translation from Edessa to Constantinople of the Holy “Icon of Our Lord Painted without Hands”, also called the Holy Veil (troparion and kontakion of the First Sunday of the Great Fast, p. 1248); the Holy Martyr Diomedes.

The Holy Martyr Myron.

The Holy Martyrs Florus and Laurus.

The Holy Martyrs Andrew the Centurion and others with him (Common service of Martyrs).

The Holy Prophet Samuel.

The Holy Apostle Thaddeus; the Holy Woman-Martyr Bassa.

The Holy Martyrs Agathonicus, Severian and others.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Dormition of the Mother of God; and the Holy Martyr Lupus; and the Holy Hieromartyr Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons.

The Holy Hieromartyr Eutyches.

The Holy Apostle Titus; and the Return of the Holy Relics of the Holy Apostle Bartholomew.

The Holy Martyrs Adrian and Natalia.

Our Venerable Father Pimen.

Our Venerable Father Moses the Black; our Holy Father Augustine, Bishop of Hippo; the Holy Martyr Michael Gebre, Priest of Ethiopia; and the Synaxis of our Venerable Fathers of the Pecherska Lavra, who repose in the further caves.

⊕ The Beheading of the Honorable and Glorious Prophet and Forerunner, and Baptist John.

Troparion (Tone 2): The remembrance of the just is worthy of praise,* but the Lord’s testimony is sufficient for you, O Forerunner;* for it has shown that you are indeed more worthy of honor than the Prophets.* You were found worthy to baptize the Lord Whom you foretold.* Thereafter, you suffered for the truth* and, rejoicing, also announced the good news to those in the Abyss* that God had appeared as man,* taking away the sins of the world* and granting to all of us the abundance of mercy.

Kontakion (Tone 5): The glorious beheading of the Forerunner* was part of God’s saving plan* that the coming of the Savior might be announced even to those in the Abyss.* Weep then, Herodias, that you asked for a wicked murder,* because you loved neither God’s law nor eternal life,* but only the passing pleasure of life.

Our Holy Fathers and Patriarchs Alexander of Constantinople, John, and Paul the Younger.

✠ The Deposition of the Cincture of our Most Holy Lady the Mother of God. For the Troparion and Kontakion, (see July 2, p. 1302).

SEPTEMBER

✠ The Beginning of the Indiction, that is the New Liturgical Year; our Venerable Father Simeon the Stylite and his mother Martha; the Synaxis of the Mother of God at Miasenes; the Holy Martyr Aeithalas; the Forty Holy Women Martyrs and the Holy Deacon Ammon their Teacher; the Holy Martyrs Callistus, Evodius and Hermogenes; and the Just Joshua, son of Nun.

Troparion of the Indiction (Tone 2): O Lord, Maker of the universe,* Who alone has power over seasons and times,* bless this year with Your bounty,* preserve our country in safety, and keep Your people in peace.* Save us through the prayers of the Mother of God.

Kontakion of the Indiction (Tone 2): O Creator and Master of time and eternity,* God of all, O Merciful One, bless the course of this year,* and in Your boundless mercy, save all those who worship You, our one and only Master,* and who cry out to You in fear:* O Savior, grant a happy year to all people.

The Holy Martyr Mammas; and our Venerable Father John the Faster, Patriarch of Constantinople.

The Holy Hieromartyr Anthimus, Bishop of Nicomedia; and our Venerable Father Theoktistus.

The Holy Hieromartyr Babylas, Bishop of Antioch; the Holy God-Seer Moses.

The Holy Prophet Zechariah, Father of the Forerunner.

The Commemoration of the Miracle of the Holy Archangel Michael at Colossa, in Chone (The service is taken from Nov. 8, p. 1060); the Holy Martyrs Eudoxius and others with him (Common service of Martyrs); and our Venerable Father Archippus.

The Prefeast of the Nativity of the Mother of God; the Holy Martyr Sozon.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Today is born to us, from the stem of Jesse and loins of David,* Mary, the Maiden of God.* Therefore, the whole creation rejoices and is renewed.* Rejoice together heaven and earth;* and you peoples of the world,* sing to her a joyful hymn of praise.* Joachim is elated and Anne shouts for joy:* The barren one gives birth to the Mother of God,* the Sustainer of our life.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 3): Today the holy Virgin and God-bearer Mary* is born from a barren womb by divine counsel.* She is the everlasting bridal chamber of the heavenly bridegroom.* Today the chariot of the Word is adorned,* and the door for God is foretold;* she is called the Mother of Life.

⊕ The Nativity of the Mother of God.

Troparion (Tone 4): Your birth, O Virgin Mother of God,* heralded joy to the universe;* for from you rose the Sun of Justice, Christ our God.* He took away the curse,* He gave the blessing,* and by trampling Death,* He gave us everlasting life.

Kontakion (Tone 4): Through your holy birth, O Immaculate One,* Joachim and Anne were freed from the reproach of childlessness,* and Adam and Eve from the corruption of death.* Delivered from the guilt of sin,* your people celebrate this when they cry out to you:* She who is barren* gives birth to the Mother of God* and the Sustainer of our Life.

The Holy and Righteous Joachim and Anne, parents of the Mother of God; and the Holy Martyr Severian.

Troparion of the Saints (Tone 1): The just couple who lived in the state of grace,* Joachim and Anne, gave birth to this holy child for us.* The Church solemnly honors this feast in glory* and celebrates your precious memory today.* She glorifies God Who has lifted up our horn of salvation in the house of David.

Kontakion of the Saints (Tone 2): The chains of sterility are broken and Anne rejoices.* She nurses the most pure Lady and invites us to sing with her* to the virgin Mother who is born for all people.

The Holy Martyrs Menodora, Metrodora, and Nymphodora.

The Venerable Theodora of Alexandria.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Nativity of the Mother of God; and the Hieromartyr Autonomus.

The Prefeast of the Exaltation of the Precious and Life-giving Cross; the Hieromartyr Cornelius, the Centurion; the Commemoration of the Dedication of the Church of the Holy Resurrection of Christ our God.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): We offer You the life-giving Cross, O Lord,* as a means of intercession, and as a sign of Your bounty* which You have given to us in spite of our unworthiness.* Save our country and Your people* who offer You their supplications through Your Mother,* for You alone are the Lover of Mankind.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 8): Today we see the saving tree which blossomed from earthly seed.* It is lifted up in the Church by the hands of the Hierarch.* The universe adores and greets it with awe.* Save us by it, O Lord.

⊕ The Exaltation of the Holy Cross.

Troparion (Tone 1): Save Your people, O Lord, and bless Your inheritance.* Grant victory to Your faithful people against enemies,* and protect Your community by Your cross.

Kontakion (Tone 4): Willingly raised upon the cross, O Christ our God,* You bestowed Your mercies upon a new people bearing Your name.* With Your power grant joy to our Church* giving her victory over enemies,* with the invincible standard, Your weapon of peace, as an ally.

Dismissal: Christ our true God, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, by the power of the honorable and life-giving cross, the exaltation of which we today gloriously celebrate; through the prayers of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The Holy Great-Martyr Nicetas.

The Holy Great-Martyr Euphemia.

The Holy Martyr Sophia and her three daughters, Faith, Hope and Love.

Our Venerable Father Eumenius, Bishop of Gortyna, Wonderworker.

The Holy Martyrs Trophimus, Sabbatius, and Dorymedont.

The Holy Martyrs Eustathius and those with him (Common service of Martyrs); the Holy Martyrs and Confessors Grand Prince Michael and his Nobleman Theodore, Wonderworkers of Chernihiv.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross; the Holy Apostle Codratus of Magnesia.

The Holy Hieromartyr Phocas, Bishop of Sinope; the Prophet Jonah; the Venerable Priest Jonah.

The Conception of the Honorable and Glorious Holy Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist John.

Troparion (Tone 4): Joy to you, O barren one unable to give birth.* Behold, you conceive today the one who is really a torch of the Sun* Who will enlighten the whole world that suffers from blindness.* Rejoice, O Zechariah, and cry out in all confidence:* The one who will be born is a prophet of the Most High.

Kontakion (Tone 1): Zechariah rejoices greatly with his wife Elizabeth,* for she has conceived John the Forerunner* whom the angel announced in gladness.* As for us, we honor him in witness of this blessing.

The Holy Martyr Thecla, Equal to the Apostles.

The Venerable Euphrosyna.

✠ The Falling Asleep of the Holy Apostle and Evangelist John the Theologian. (use the service of May 8, p. 892).

The Holy Martyrs Callistratus and others with him (Common service of Martyrs); and the Venerable Nilus, Founder and Hegumen of the Grottaferrata Monastery.

✠ Our Venerable Father and Confessor Chariton (Common of a Confessor); the Holy Vyacheslav, Prince of Bohemia; the Synaxis of the Venerable Fathers of the Percheska Lavra, who repose in the nearer caves to the Venerable Anthony.

Troparion of St. Chariton (Tone 8): You blended the river of your tears with the wellspring of your profession,* and in those waters you wash away the sins of those who esteem your precious memory.* You present them clean before their God and Master,* now beg Him to save our souls.

Kontakion of St. Chariton (Tone 2): O divinely-minded Chariton,* you found your delight in monastic life.* You conquered the passions of your body and increased in faith;* you blossomed forth like the Tree of Life in the midst of paradise,* O most blessed and holy father.

For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1194).

Our Venerable Father Cyriacus the Anchorite.

The Holy Hieromartyr Gregory, Bishop of Greater Armenia.

OCTOBER

The Protection of the Most Holy Mother of God; the Holy Apostle Ananias, one of the seventy disciples; our Venerable Father Roman the Hymnographer; Blessed Nykyta Budka, Confessor.

Troparion of the Feast (Tone 4): Protected by your coming, O Mother of God,* the faithful people solemnly celebrate today;* and gazing upon your immaculate image,* they humbly say: Watch over us with your noble protection,* and deliver us from all evil* by asking your Son, Christ our God, to save our souls.

Kontakion of the Feast (Tone 3): Today the Virgin is present in the Church* and with the armies of Saints invisibly prays to God for us.* The angels worship with the archangels* and the apostles rejoice with the prophets,* because in our behalf, the Mother of God prays to the eternal God.

Troparion of Bl. Nykyta Budka (Tone 4): O Holy Bishop and Martyr Nykyta,* you lent yourself to the apostles’ way of life* and succeeded them on their thrones.* Inspired by God, you found the way to contemplation* through the practice of virtue.* Therefore, you became a perfect teacher of truth,* fighting for the faith unto the shedding of your blood.* Intercede with Christ our God that He may save our souls.

The Holy Hieromartyr Cyprian; the Holy Martyr Justina; and St. Andrew, Fool for Christ.

The Hieromartyr Dionysius the Areopagite.

The Holy Hieromartyr Hierotheus, Bishop of Athens; and our Venerable Father Francis of Assisi.

The Holy Martyr Charitina.

✠ The Holy and Glorious Apostle Thomas.

Troparion (Tone 2): You were both a disciple of Christ and a member of the apostolic college.* Your lack of faith proved the Resurrection,* and your touch unleashed reverence.* O Thomas, ever worthy of praise, obtain peace and mercy for us.

Kontakion (Tone 4): O Thomas, full of wisdom and grace,* you were a disciple and faithful servant of Christ.* You cried out in the sincerity of your love:* You are my Lord and my God!

The readings at Vespers: 1 Jn 1:1-8; James 1:1-12; Jude 1:1-25.

The Holy Martyrs Sergius and Bacchus.

The Venerable Mother Pelagia.

✠ The Holy Apostle James Alpheus.

Troparion (Tone 3): O Holy Apostle James, intercede with the all-merciful God* that He may grant us forgiveness of our sins.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Let us extol James with praises as a herald of God,* for he implanted the true faith deeply in the souls of all.* Now he stands before the throne of the Master* and rejoices in the company of the angels, praying for all of us unceasingly.

Readings at Vespers: 1 Jn 1:1-8; James 1:1-12; Jude 1:1-25.

The Holy Martyrs Eulampius and Eulampia.

The Holy Apostle Philip, one of the seven deacons; our Venerable Father Theophane, Composer of Canons, Bishop of Nicea.

If a Sunday, we commemorate: The Holy Fathers of the Seventh Ecumenical Council. If not, then on the Sunday following.

Troparion: Resurrectional Tone.

Troparion of the Fathers (Tone 8): O Christ our God, You are above all praise,* for You established our fathers as lights to all the earth.* You led us to the true faith* through them. O most bountiful Lord, glory be to You.

Kontakion (Tone 6): How the Son proceeded from the Father our words cannot express;* but having two natures, He was born of a woman.* We do not reject His image when we behold it,* but in faith we venerate and honor it.* And the Church professes it as true belief* when she honors the image of Christ’s Incarnation.

The Holy Martyrs Probus, Tarachus, and Andronicus; our Venerable Father Cosmas, Composer of Canons, Bishop of Maium; our Holy Father Martin the Merciful, Bishop of Tours.

The Holy Martyrs Carpus, Papilus, and Agathonicus.

The Venerable Mother Paraskevia of Ternovo; the Holy Martyrs Nazarius, Gervase, Protasius, and Celsus.

Our Venerable Father Euthymius the Younger; the Venerable-Martyr Lucian, Priest of Greater Antioch.

The Holy Martyr Longinus the Centurion.

The Holy Prophet Hosea; the Venerable-Martyr Andrew of Crete.

✠ Holy Apostle and Evangelist Luke.

Troparion (Tone 5): Let us praise the Holy and Glorious Apostle Luke with sacred chants;* for he is a living doctor who heals human weakness,* the ills of souls, and the sickness of nature.* He is the awesome writer of Christ’s Gospel* and the story of the Acts of the Apostles.* He recorded for the Church what had been unwritten.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Let us praise the heavenly Luke, a star of the Church,* a preacher of true holiness, and one who clarified the ineffable mysteries.* The Word who searches all hearts* chose him and Paul to be teachers of the Gentiles.

Readings at Vespers: Jn 1:1-8; James 1:1-12; Jude 1:1-25.

The Holy Prophet Joel; the Holy Martyr Varus; and the Venerable John of Rila.

The Holy Great-Martyr Artemius.

Our Venerable Father Hilarion the Great.

The Holy Wonderworker and Equal-to-the Apostles Abercius, Bishop of Hierapolis (Common service of a Hierarch); and the Holy Seven Martyred Youths of Ephesus.

The Holy Apostle James, Brother of the Lord.

The Holy Martyrs Arethas and others with him (Common service of Martyrs).

The Holy Martyrs and Notaries Marcian and Martyrius.

✠ The Holy and Glorious Great-Martyr Demetrius the Myrrh-Yielder.

Troparion (Tone 3): O Martyr, the world has seen you a defender of those imperiled and a conqueror of the nations.* In cutting down the arrogance of Lias, you bolstered Nestor by your courage.* O Holy Demetrius, pray to Christ our God to save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): God endowed you with an invincible power* and tinged the Church with your blood, O Demetrius.* He also covers your city with love,* for you are its foundation.

The Holy Martyr Nestor; the Holy Martyr Capitolina and her servant Erotheis.

The Holy Martyrs Terentius and Neonila, our Venerable Father Stephen the Sabaite, Composer of Canons; and the Martyr Paraskevia of Iconium.

The Venerable-Martyr Anastasia; the falling asleep of our Venerable Father Abraham, Archimandrite and Wonderworker of Rostov.

The Holy Martyrs Zenobius and his sister, Zenobia; Blessed Oleksiy Zarytsky, Hieromartyr.

Holy Apostles Stachys, Amplius, and those with them; and the Holy Martyr Epimachus.

Sunday of Christ the King

Troparion (Tone 4): Your rule, O Christ our God,* saved us from the power of darkness* and brought us into the kingdom of your love.* You Who are and were from all eternity* and appeared to us as a king,* glory be to You, O Lord!

Kontakion (Tone 7): Let us fall down before Christ God,* the only wise and immortal King of ages,* and adore him, saying:* To You is given the power and the glory and the kingdom,* and all nations are subject to You.* Your power is eternal power and your kingdom is indestructible.* The Eternal King, Jesus Christ has become a king for our sake.

Dismissal: Christ our true God, Who reigns in glory and rules the universe, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother and all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

NOVEMBER

The Holy Selfless Physicians Cosmas and Damian.

The Holy Martyrs Acindynos, Pegasius, Aphtonius, Elpidephorus, and Anempodistus.

The Holy Martyrs Bishop Acepsimas, Priest Joseph, and Aeithalis, Deacon.

Our Venerable Father Joannicius the Great; and the Holy Martyrs Nicander, Bishop of Myra, Hermas, Priest, and Blessed Confessor Paul Gojdich, OSBM, Bishop of Preshov. (see July 17, p. 1306)

The Holy Martyrs Galaction and Epistemis.

The Holy Confessor Paul, Archbishop of Constantinople.

The Thirty-three Holy Martyrs of Melitene; and Venerable Father and Wonderworker Lazarus, who fasted on Mt. Gelesius.

✠ The Synaxis of the Archangel Michael and the Hosts of Incorporeal Powers.

For the Troparion and Kontakion, see Monday, p. 1235.

Dismissal: May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us, through the prayers of His most pure Mother, through the intercession of the honorable heavenly powers whose feast we gloriously celebrate today, the holy, glorious and praiseworthy apostles, and of all the saints, for He is gracious and loves mankind.

The Venerable Mother Matrona; the Venerable Theoktista of Lesbos.

The Holy Apostles Erastus, Olympus, Rodion and others with them.

The Holy Martyrs Mennas, Victor, and Vincent; Venerable Father and Confessor Theodore the Studite (Common service of a Confessor).

✠ The Holy Hieromartyr Josaphat, Archbishop of Polotsk; our Holy Father John the Merciful, Patriarch of Alexandria; our Venerable Father Nilus, and Bl. Gregory Lakota, Auxiliary Bishop of Peremyshil, Confessor.

Troparion of St. Josaphat (Tone 4): You have become a brilliant light, O Hieromartyr Josaphat.* You gave up your life for your sheep like the Good Shepherd.* You were slain by the lovers of heresy,* and you have walked into the Holy of Holies to rest in the company of the angels.* O long-suffering saint, we make this petition to you:* Beg Christ, the Prince of Shepherds, to save our souls* and to number us among the sheep on his right hand.

Kontakion of St. Josaphat (Tone 4): You were enlightened by a spark from the crucified Christ* from the time that you were a child.* You were like an angel in monastic life,* living in it with true holiness.* You openly preached unity, and with your martyr’s blood,* you calmed the hearts of those who had been tossed about by schism.* Christ has crowned you, and we sing to you:* Rejoice, unshatterable pillar of unity.

✠ Our Holy Father John Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople.

Troparion (Tone 8): The grace that shines like a torch from your mouth has enlightened the universe,* bestowed treasures of generosity upon the world,* and shown us the depth of your humility.* While you teach us by your words, O holy Father,* pray to the Word, Christ our God, that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 6): O Blessed and Holy John Chrysostom,* from heaven you received divine grace,* and from your lips we all learn to worship one God in the Trinity.* It is proper that we praise you,* for you are indeed a teacher revealing the things of God.

Readings at Vespers: Prov 10:6-8, 8:6-21 (p. 934); Wis 4: 7-15 (p. 886); Wis 8:17-9:14.

✠ The Holy and Glorious Apostle Philip, and St. Gregory Palamas (see p. 1374 ff.)

Troparion (Tone 3): The whole world is adorned, and Ethiopia sings for joy at her crown.* She received light from you, O divine preacher Philip, and she celebrates your memory.* You taught everyone to believe in Christ, and you completed the course of the Gospel.* Therefore, Ethiopia has come to serve God. Beg Him to have mercy on us.

Kontakion (Tone 8): O Lord, Your disciple Philip was inspired by God,* Your beloved one and the imitator of Your passion* has preached Your divinity to the world.* Through his intercession and for the sake of the Mother of God,* guard Your Church and Your flock from their enemies,* O most merciful Christ our God.

Readings at Vespers: 1Pt 1:1-25, 2:1-6; 1Pt 2:21-25, 3:1-9; 1Pt 4:1-11.

The Holy Martyrs and Confessors Gurias, Samonas, and Abibus (Common service of a Confessor).

✠ The Holy Apostle and Evangelist Matthew.

Troparion (Tone 3): You rose from the tax collector’s booth and you followed Christ in all earnestness.* He made you a blessing for all, a chosen apostle and evangelist for the world.* Therefore, we honor your sacred memory* and we ask you to beg God to forgive our sins.

Kontakion (Tone 4): You cast off the yoke of gathering taxes,* and you put on the yoke of justice.* You became a shrewd merchant,* obtaining a wealth of wisdom from heaven itself.* When you preached the word of truth, you lifted up depressed spirits.* You wrote of the coming hour of judgment.

Our Holy Father Gregory the Wonderworker, Bishop of Neocaesarea.

The Holy Martyrs Plato and Roman.

The Holy Prophet Obadiah; and the Holy Martyr Barlaam the Elder.

The Prefeast of the Entrance of the Mother of God into the Temple; the Venerable Father Gregory of Decapolis; our Holy Father Proclus, Archbishop of Constantinople, and Bl. Josaphata Hordashevska, SSMI.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Anne is now preparing a great joy for all of us,* for she has given birth to the only ever-Virgin* who is a joy that dispels all sadness.* Today Anne fulfills her vow with gladness,* presenting to the Temple of the Lord* the One Who is the true temple of God’s Word and His pure Mother.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Filled with joy today* because of the happy feast of the Mother of God,* the universe cries out:* This is the holy tabernacle!

Troparion of Blessed Josaphata (Tone 4): O Blessed Josaphata,* you inspire us through our spirit of service and love.* Teach us to uplift and renew the heart of our people,* wherever we are sent to minister,* to serve where the need is the greatest,* all for the glory of God.

Kontakion of Blessed Josaphata (Tone 4): O blessed Josaphata,* Co-foundress of the Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate;* you began your mission in Ukraine for your entire nation,* bringing light into the darkness of their suffering.* By educating and caring for youth and children,* you gave parents strength and renewed hope.* Your healing touch reached the sick and the dying,* the poor found a place in your heart.* For you saw in them the image of God.* You cared for the beauty of churches,* giving people an opportunity to experience the beauty of worship.* The Lord led you to sanctify through great suffering,* thus you became a woman for all times.

⊕ The Entrance into the Temple of Our Most Holy Lady, the Mother of God, and Ever-Virgin Mary.

Troparion (Tone 4): Today is the prelude of the benevolence of God* and the herald of the salvation of mankind;* for the Virgin openly appears in the temple of God and foretells Christ to all. Let us also with full voice exclaim to her: Hail, fulfillment of the Creator’s plan.

Kontakion (Tone 4): The most pure temple of the Savior, the richest palace, and the treasury of the glory of God today enters into the house of the Lord,* bringing grace which is in the spirit of God.* The angels of God sing to her:* This is the heavenly tabernacle!

The Holy Apostle Philemon and others with him.

Our Holy Fathers Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium and Gregory, Bishop of Agrigentum (Common service of Hierarchs).

The Holy Great-Martyr Catherine; and the Holy Great-Martyr Mercurius.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Entrance of the Mother of God into the Temple; our Holy Father and Hieromartyr Clement, Pope of Rome; and Peter, Bishop of Alexandria.

Our Venerable Father Alypius the Stylite; Dedication of the Church of the Holy Great-martyr George which is in Kyiv, before the gates of the Holy Wisdom.

The Holy Martyr James the Persian; and our Venerable Father Palladius.

Venerable-Martyr Stephen the Younger; and the Holy Martyr Irenarchus.

The Holy Martyrs Paramon and Philomenus; and the Venerable Acacius.

✠ The Holy and Glorious Apostle Andrew, the First-called.

Troparion (Tone 4): Andrew, first-called of the apostles and brother of Peter their leader,* intercede with the Master of all* that He may grant peace to the world* and great mercy to our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Let us praise Andrew the theologian for his courage,* the first apostle of the Savior and brother of Peter.* In like manner he drew his brother to Christ.* He is now crying out to us:* Come and see, for we have found the One Whom the world desires.

Readings at Vespers: 1 Pt 1:1-15, 2:1-6; 1 Pt 2:21-25, 3:1-9; 1 Pt 4:1-11.

DECEMBER

The Holy Prophet Nahum.

The Holy Prophet Habakkuk.

The Holy Prophet Zephaniah.

The Holy Great-Martyr Barbara; our Venerable Father John Damascene.

✠ Our Venerable God-bearing Father Sabbas the Sanctified.

Troparion (Tone 8): Your abundant tears made the wilderness bloom,* and your sufferings made your labors fruitful a hundredfold;* you became a shining torch over the world.* O Venerable Father Sabbas, pray to Christ our God that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 8): From your youth, O glorious Sabbas,* you have been like an offering of incense in God’s presence.* You were called the adornment of hermits* and a true ascetic.* Therefore, we cry out to you:* Joy to you, O Father, worthy of all praise.

For the readings at Vespers, see the Common service of a Venerable.

✠ Our Holy Father Nicholas, Wonderworker, Archbishop of Myra. For the Troparion and the Kontakion, see Thursday, p. 1236.

Our Holy Father Ambrose, Bishop of Milan.

The Prefeast of the Immaculate Conception; and our Venerable Father Patapius.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Today the beginning of our salvation is conceived in a barren womb,* and Anna rejoices with Joachim,* Adam rejoices to be freed,* and with them we also begin our hymn:* Rejoice, O Full of Grace, the Lord is with you.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 8): Today the holy Virgin and God-bearer Mary* is conceived in a barren womb by divine counsel.* She is the everlasting bridal chamber of the heavenly bridegroom.* Today the chariot of the Word is adorned,* and the door for God is foretold;* she is called the Mother of Life.

✠ The Immaculate Conception of the Mother of God (Conception of St. Anne).

Troparion (Tone 6): Rejoice, O peoples, and be glad,* for today the morning star of the mystical day has shone forth to us, the most Blessed Virgin Mary,* who in the womb of the wonderful Anne is immaculately conceived.* Falling down with the heavenly choirs, let us honor her, crying aloud:* Rejoice, O Mother of the neversetting Light,* the Orient from on high Christ our God,* Who illumines us who dwell in the shadow of death* and directs our steps along the path of peace.

Kontakion (Tone 7): Today, by the hand of the Holy Spirit,* the precious icon of the glory of God* is being painted in the womb of the wonderful Anne.* Today, by the power of the Most High,* a powerful weapon has been raised up against the devil the most Blessed Virgin Mary.* With the choir of angels let us cry out as we admire her:* Rejoice, for you have become worthy of a special redemption by the Lord.* You were not cleansed of original sin,* but were preserved from it in advance, the only one of the human race.

Troparion Conception of St. Anne (Tone 4): Today the bonds of childlessness are loosened* for God has heard the prayers of Anne and Joachim.* He promised against all hope that they would give birth* to a divine virgin* from whom the Indescribable would be born as a man,* the Same Who ordered the Angels to sing to her:* “Hail O woman full of grace;* the Lord is with you.”

Kontakion, Conception of St. Anne (Tone 4): Today the universe rejoices,* for Anne conceived in a manner caused by God,* and because the one born to her* will give birth to the Word.

The Holy Martyrs Mennas, Hermogenes, and Eugraphus.

Our Venerable Father Daniel the Stylite.

Sunday of the Holy Forefathers (Sunday after December 11)

Troparion (Tone 2): Through faith, O Christ, You justified the patriarchs,* for through them you made a commitment to a church with Gentiles.* These saints are glorified because from them* descends the Virgin who gave You birth.* Through their prayers, O Christ our God, have mercy on us.

For the Kontakion, (see December 17).

Our Venerable Father and Wonderworker Spiridon, Bishop of Tremithus (Common service of a Hierarch).

✠ The Holy Martyrs Eustratius, Auxentius, Eugenius, Mardarius, and Orestes; and the Venerable-martyr Lucy, Virgin.

Troparion (Tone 4): O Lord our God, Your holy martyrs* have deserved the crown of immortality* on account of their good fight.* Armed with Your strength, they have vanquished their persecutors* and crushed Satan’s dreadful might.* Through their supplications, O Christ our God, save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): O victorious one, you have been like a bright star* enlightening those who stand in the darkness of ignorance.* Your faith, as a lance in your hand, armed you with courage* against the haughtiness of your enemies.* O Eustratius, you were the most eloquent of orators.

For readings at Vespers, (see p. 1209).

The Holy Martyrs Thyrsus, Leucius, Philemon, Appollonius, and Callinicus.

The Holy Hieromartyr Eleutherius; our Venerable Father Paul of Latra; and our Holy Father Stephen the Confessor, Archbishop of Surozh.

The Holy Prophet Haggai. Leave-taking of the Immaculate Conception.

The Holy Prophet Daniel and the Holy Youths, Ananiah, Azariah, and Mishael.

Troparion (Tone 2): Great are the deeds performed with faith:* three youths rejoiced in the flaming furnace* as if they stood in refreshing waters;* and Daniel the Prophet faced lions as though they were sheep.* Through their prayers, O Christ our God, save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 6): You did not worship a man-made image, O Thrice-blessed Youths,* but were glorified in the test of fire,* protected by a power beyond description.* From the searing flames you cried out to God, saying:* “Hasten to help us, O Merciful Lord,* for in Your greatness You can do whatever You will.”

The Holy Martyrs Sebastian and his companions (Common service of Martyrs).

Sunday following Dec. 18 - is the Sunday before the Nativity of our Lord.
Troparion and Kontakion of the Holy Fathers, (see Dec. 17).
Troparion and Kontakion of the Prefeast, (see Dec. 20).
Troparion and Kontakion of the Eve of the Nativity, (see Dec. 24).

The Holy Martyr Boniface.

The Prefeast of the Nativity of our Lord; the Holy Hieromartyr Ignatius, the God-bearer.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Bethlehem, make ready, for Eden has been opened for all.* Ephrathah, be alert, for the Tree of Life has blossomed forth from the Virgin in the cave.* Her womb has become a spiritual paradise* wherein the divine Fruit was planted,* and if we eat of it we shall live and not die like Adam.* Christ is coming forth to bring back to life* the likeness that had been lost in the beginning.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 3): Today the Virgin is on her way to the cave* where she will give birth in a manner beyond understanding* to the Word Who is in all eternity.* Rejoice, therefore, universe, when you hear it heralded.* With the angels and the shepherds, glorify Him Who chose to be seen as a newborn babe* while remaining God in all eternity.

The Holy Martyr Juliana.

The Holy Great-Martyr Anastasia.

The Ten Holy Martyrs of Crete.

The Eve of the Nativity of our Lord; and the Venerable-Martyr Eugenia.

Troparion of Christmas Eve (Tone 4): At that time Mary registered with the venerable Joseph in Bethlehem* since she was of the house of David.* She was with child, having conceived without seed.* When the time for her delivery drew near,* they could find no room in the inn,* but the cave seemed a joyful palace for the Queen.* Christ is born to renew the likeness that had been lost of old.

Kontakion (Tone 3): Today the Virgin... (see above).

⊕ The Nativity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Troparion (Tone 4): Your birth, O Christ our God,* has shed upon the world the light of knowledge;* for through it, those who worshiped the stars* have learned from a star to worship You, the Sun of Justice,* and to recognize You as the Orient from on high.* Glory be to You, O Lord.

Kontakion (Tone 3): Today the Virgin gives birth to Perfect Essence* and the earth offers a cave to the Inaccessible One.* The angels sing His glory with the shepherds;* the wise men journey with the star,* for there is born for us an Infant Child, God Eternal.

Dismissal: Christ our true God, Who, for our salvation, was born in a cave in Bethlehem of Judea and lay in a manger, through the prayers of His Immaculate Mother, the holy, glorious and praiseworthy apostles, our venerable and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The Synaxis of the Blessed Mother of God and St. Joseph, Spouse of the Mother of God; and the Holy Hieromartyr Euthymius, Bishop of Sardonica.

Troparion of St. Joseph (Tone 6): The whole assembly of angels and saints* in amazement glorify in heaven your greatness,* O God-chosen spouse.* Having you as such a great intercessor in heaven,* we confidently hasten to your protection, and with devotion cry out:* Save us from the deceit of the Evil One,* O glorious protector of the Church of Christ.

Kontakion of St. Joseph (Tone 5): By fleeing to Egypt with your Most Holy Spouse and Child Jesus,* you saved them from the sword of Herod.* Also save us who are persecuted by Satan* and are wandering in the desert of life from his deceit* and protect us from eternal damnation.

Kontakion of the Theotokos (Tone 6): Before the dawn of time* He was begotten of the Father and without a mother.* Now on earth He becomes man without a father,* being virgin-born from you, O Mother of God.* Therefore, a star announces the good news to wise men,* while the angels and shepherds sing the glory of your giving birth,* O Woman Full of Grace.

Dismissal: Christ our true God, Who, for our salvation, was born in a cave in Bethlehem of Judea and lay in a manger, through the prayers of His Immaculate Mother and her spouse St. Joseph, whose Synaxis we solemnly celebrate today, and through the prayers of holy, glorious and praiseworthy apostles, and of our venerable God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

Sunday after the Nativity of our Lord – commemoration of the Holy and Just Joseph, King David, and James, brother of the Lord.

Troparion of the Saints (Tone 2): O Joseph, announce to David, ancestor of Christ,* the good news of these wonders you have seen: a virgin giving birth to a child.* With the shepherds you have glorified Him; with the wise men you have worshiped Him; and an angel appeared to you.* Ask Christ to save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 3): Today, David, beloved of God, is filled with joy;* Joseph and James offer hymns of praise;* their joy is the crown of relationship with Christ.* They sing praise to Him Who was wondrously born;* and they cry out: O merciful Lord, save those who honor You.

The Holy First Martyr and Archdeacon Stephen; and our Venerable Father Theodore.

Troparion of Stephen (Tone 4): O first-martyr and apostle of Christ,* you fought the good fight.* You exposed the perversion of the persecutors;* for when you were killed by stoning at the hands of wicked men* you received a crown from the right Hand on high,* while you cried out to God, saying:* O Lord, do not charge this sin against them.

Kontakion of Stephen (Tone 3): Yesterday the Master came to us as a man* and today His servant departs from life.* Yesterday the King was born as a man* and today His servant is stoned to death.* For the sake of Christ, holy Stephen became the first martyr.

The Holy 20,000 Martyrs Burned at Nicomedia.

The Holy Innocents Killed by Herod in Bethlehem; and our Venerable Father Marcellus, Hegumen of the Monastery of the Sleepless.

The Holy Martyr Anysia; and our Venerable Father Zoticus, Presbyter.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord; and the Venerable Melania the Roman.