NOVEMBER

The Holy Selfless Physicians Cosmas and Damian.

The Holy Martyrs Acindynos, Pegasius, Aphtonius, Elpidephorus, and Anempodistus.

The Holy Martyrs Bishop Acepsimas, Priest Joseph, and Aeithalis, Deacon.

Our Venerable Father Joannicius the Great; and the Holy Martyrs Nicander, Bishop of Myra, Hermas, Priest, and Blessed Confessor Paul Gojdich, OSBM, Bishop of Preshov. (see July 17, p. 1306)

The Holy Martyrs Galaction and Epistemis.

The Holy Confessor Paul, Archbishop of Constantinople.

The Thirty-three Holy Martyrs of Melitene; and Venerable Father and Wonderworker Lazarus, who fasted on Mt. Gelesius.

✠ The Synaxis of the Archangel Michael and the Hosts of Incorporeal Powers.

For the Troparion and Kontakion, see Monday, p. 1235.

Dismissal: May Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us, through the prayers of His most pure Mother, through the intercession of the honorable heavenly powers whose feast we gloriously celebrate today, the holy, glorious and praiseworthy apostles, and of all the saints, for He is gracious and loves mankind.

The Venerable Mother Matrona; the Venerable Theoktista of Lesbos.

The Holy Apostles Erastus, Olympus, Rodion and others with them.

The Holy Martyrs Mennas, Victor, and Vincent; Venerable Father and Confessor Theodore the Studite (Common service of a Confessor).

✠ The Holy Hieromartyr Josaphat, Archbishop of Polotsk; our Holy Father John the Merciful, Patriarch of Alexandria; our Venerable Father Nilus, and Bl. Gregory Lakota, Auxiliary Bishop of Peremyshil, Confessor.

Troparion of St. Josaphat (Tone 4): You have become a brilliant light, O Hieromartyr Josaphat.* You gave up your life for your sheep like the Good Shepherd.* You were slain by the lovers of heresy,* and you have walked into the Holy of Holies to rest in the company of the angels.* O long-suffering saint, we make this petition to you:* Beg Christ, the Prince of Shepherds, to save our souls* and to number us among the sheep on His right hand.

Kontakion of St. Josaphat (Tone 4): You were enlightened by a spark from the crucified Christ* from the time that you were a child.* You were like an angel in monastic life,* living in it with true holiness.* You openly preached unity, and with your martyr’s blood,* you calmed the hearts of those who had been tossed about by schism.* Christ has crowned you, and we sing to you:* Rejoice, unshatterable pillar of unity.

✠ Our Holy Father John Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople.

Troparion (Tone 8): The grace that shines like a torch from your mouth has enlightened the universe,* bestowed treasures of generosity upon the world,* and shown us the depth of your humility.* While you teach us by your words, O holy Father,* pray to the Word, Christ our God, that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 6): O Blessed and Holy John Chrysostom,* from heaven you received divine grace,* and from your lips we all learn to worship one God in the Trinity.* It is proper that we praise you,* for you are indeed a teacher revealing the things of God.

Readings at Vespers: Prov 10:6-8, 8:6-21 (p. 934); Wis 4: 7-15 (p. 886); Wis 8:17-9:14.

✠ The Holy and Glorious Apostle Philip, and St. Gregory Palamas (see p. 1374 ff.)

Troparion (Tone 3): The whole world is adorned, and Ethiopia sings for joy at her crown.* She received light from you, O divine preacher Philip, and she celebrates your memory.* You taught everyone to believe in Christ, and you completed the course of the Gospel.* Therefore, Ethiopia has come to serve God. Beg Him to have mercy on us.

Kontakion (Tone 8): O Lord, Your disciple Philip was inspired by God,* Your beloved one and the imitator of Your passion* has preached Your divinity to the world.* Through his intercession and for the sake of the Mother of God,* guard Your Church and Your flock from their enemies,* O most merciful Christ our God.

Readings at Vespers: 1Pt 1:1-25, 2:1-6; 1Pt 2:21-25, 3:1-9; 1Pt 4:1-11.

The Holy Martyrs and Confessors Gurias, Samonas, and Abibus (Common service of a Confessor).

✠ The Holy Apostle and Evangelist Matthew.

Troparion (Tone 3): You rose from the tax collector’s booth and you followed Christ in all earnestness.* He made you a blessing for all, a chosen apostle and evangelist for the world.* Therefore, we honor your sacred memory* and we ask you to beg God to forgive our sins.

Kontakion (Tone 4): You cast off the yoke of gathering taxes,* and you put on the yoke of justice.* You became a shrewd merchant,* obtaining a wealth of wisdom from heaven itself.* When you preached the word of truth, you lifted up depressed spirits.* You wrote of the coming hour of judgment.

Our Holy Father Gregory the Wonderworker, Bishop of Neocaesarea.

The Holy Martyrs Plato and Roman.

The Holy Prophet Obadiah; and the Holy Martyr Barlaam the Elder.

The Prefeast of the Entrance of the Mother of God into the Temple; the Venerable Father Gregory of Decapolis; our Holy Father Proclus, Archbishop of Constantinople, and Bl. Josaphata Hordashevska, SSMI.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Anne is now preparing a great joy for all of us,* for she has given birth to the only ever-Virgin* who is a joy that dispels all sadness.* Today Anne fulfills her vow with gladness,* presenting to the Temple of the Lord* the One Who is the true temple of God’s Word and His pure Mother.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Filled with joy today* because of the happy feast of the Mother of God,* the universe cries out:* This is the holy tabernacle!

Troparion of Blessed Josaphata (Tone 4): O Blessed Josaphata,* you inspire us through our spirit of service and love.* Teach us to uplift and renew the heart of our people,* wherever we are sent to minister,* to serve where the need is the greatest,* all for the glory of God.

Kontakion of Blessed Josaphata (Tone 4): O blessed Josaphata,* Co-foundress of the Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate;* you began your mission in Ukraine for your entire nation,* bringing light into the darkness of their suffering.* By educating and caring for youth and children,* you gave parents strength and renewed hope.* Your healing touch reached the sick and the dying,* the poor found a place in your heart.* For you saw in them the image of God.* You cared for the beauty of churches,* giving people an opportunity to experience the beauty of worship.* The Lord led you to sanctify through great suffering,* thus you became a woman for all times.

⊕ The Entrance into the Temple of Our Most Holy Lady, the Mother of God, and Ever-Virgin Mary.

Troparion (Tone 4): Today is the prelude of the benevolence of God* and the herald of the salvation of mankind;* for the Virgin openly appears in the temple of God and foretells Christ to all. Let us also with full voice exclaim to her: Hail, fulfillment of the Creator’s plan.

Kontakion (Tone 4): The most pure temple of the Savior, the richest palace, and the treasury of the glory of God today enters into the house of the Lord,* bringing grace which is in the spirit of God.* The angels of God sing to her:* This is the heavenly tabernacle!

The Holy Apostle Philemon and others with him.

Our Holy Fathers Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium and Gregory, Bishop of Agrigentum (Common service of Hierarchs).

The Holy Great-Martyr Catherine; and the Holy Great-Martyr Mercurius.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Entrance of the Mother of God into the Temple; our Holy Father and Hieromartyr Clement, Pope of Rome; and Peter, Bishop of Alexandria.

Our Venerable Father Alypius the Stylite; Dedication of the Church of the Holy Great-martyr George which is in Kyiv, before the gates of the Holy Wisdom.

The Holy Martyr James the Persian; and our Venerable Father Palladius.

Venerable-Martyr Stephen the Younger; and the Holy Martyr Irenarchus.

The Holy Martyrs Paramon and Philomenus; and the Venerable Acacius.

✠ The Holy and Glorious Apostle Andrew, the First-called.

Troparion (Tone 4): Andrew, first-called of the apostles and brother of Peter their leader,* intercede with the Master of all* that He may grant peace to the world* and great mercy to our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Let us praise Andrew the theologian for his courage,* the first apostle of the Savior and brother of Peter.* In like manner he drew his brother to Christ.* He is now crying out to us:* Come and see, for we have found the One Whom the world desires.

Readings at Vespers: 1 Pt 1:1-15, 2:1-6; 1 Pt 2:21-25, 3:1-9; 1 Pt 4:1-11.
