JUNE

The Holy Martyrs Justin and others with him (Common service of Martyrs).

The Holy Father Nicephorus, Confessor (Common service of a Hierarch).

The Holy Martyrs Lucillian and others with him (Common service of Martyrs).

The Holy Father Metrophanes, Patriarch of Constantinople.

The Holy Hieromartyr Dorotheus, Bishop of Tyre; and Cosmas, Presbyter of Armenia.

Our Venerable Fathers Bessarion, Wonderworker; and the Venerable Hilarion the Younger.

The Holy Hieromartyr Theodotus, Bishop of Ancyra.

The Translation of the Relics of the Great-Martyr Theodore of Tyre. Take the Troparion and Kontakion of the First Saturday of the Great Fast, (p. 1247).

Our Holy Father Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria.

The Holy Hieromartyr Timothy, Bishop of Prussa.

✠ Holy Apostles Bartholomew and Barnabas.

Troparion (Tone 1): Receiving the Spirit as He came in fiery tongues,* you preached the coming of the Word in the flesh.* While one of you was beheaded for the Gospel,* the other endured stoning for the sake of the faith.* You have been sent to adorn the choirs of heaven, O Bartholomew and Barnabas.* We honor your memory and ask that you intercede with God to forgive our sins.

Kontakion of St. Bartholomew (Tone 4): O Bartholomew, Apostle of the Lord,* you appeared to the world as a shining star.* You enlightened with the splendor of your teachings and the wonder of your miracles* all those who honor you.

Kontakion of St. Barnabas (Tone 3): O Barnabas, you became a perfect and faithful servant of the Lord.* You were the first of the seventy disciples,* worthy to be the companion of Paul in his preaching.* You proclaimed to all that Christ is the Savior.* Therefore, we celebrate your holy memory with hymns and songs.

Readings at Vespers: see p. 1181.

Our Venerable Fathers Onufrius the Great and Peter of Athos.

The Holy Martyr Aquilina; and our Holy Father Triphyllius, Bishop of Leucosia, on Cyprus.

The Holy Prophet Elisha; and our Holy Father Methodius, Patriarch of Constantinople.

The Holy Prophet Amos; the Venerable Jerome, Priest of Stridonium.

Our Holy Father and Wonderworker Tychon, Hierarch of Amanthus (Common service of a Hierarch).

The Holy Martyrs Manuel, Sabel, and Ishmael; and the Venerable Hypatius, Hegumen of Ruphenia Monastery.

The Holy Martyr Leontius.

✠ Holy Apostle Jude, Brother of the Lord.

Troparion (Tone 1): We recognize that you are one of the Lord’s relatives* and a strong martyr who for the faith trampled on lies.* We have come to praise you in a sacred manner, O Jude,* as we celebrate your holy memory and make our plea:* Forgive our sins by the might of your prayers.

Kontakion (Tone 2): You were a chosen disciple with a firm purpose,* an invincible pillar of the Church of Christ.* You preached the word about Christ to the pagans,* telling them to believe in one God.* Therefore, you have been exalted by Him* and graced with the gift of healing.* You cure the ills of those who hasten to you, O praiseworthy apostle Jude.

For the readings at Vespers see: Jude 1:1-10; Jude 1:11-16; Jude 1:17-25.

The Holy Hieromartyr Methodius, Bishop of Patara.

The Holy Martyr Julian of Tarsus.

The Holy Hieromartyr Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.

The Holy Martyr Agrippina.

⊕ The Nativity of the Honorable, Glorious Prophet, Forerunner, and Baptist John.

Troparion (Tone 4): O Prophet and Forerunner of the coming of Christ,* in spite of our honor and devotion,* we are unable to give you worthy praise.* Through your glorious and noble birth* your mother’s childlessness was ended,* your father’s tongue was freed,* and the Incarnation of the Son of God* was proclaimed to the world.

Kontakion (Tone 3): Today, she who was once barren* gives birth to the Forerunner of Christ,* the fulfillment of all prophecy.* In the Jordan, John laid his hand upon Him Whom the prophets foretold,* showing himself to be the prophet, the herald, and forerunner of the Word of God.

The Venerable Martyr Febronia.

The Venerable Father David of Thessalonica; Bl. Mykola Konrad, Hieromartyr, Bl. Mykola Pryjma, Hieromartyr; Blessed Andrij Ishchak, Hieromartyr.

The Venerable Father Sampson the Hospitaller; Blessed Bishop Vasyl Velychovsky, CSsR and 27 other Blesseds of the Church of Rus’ Ukraine including Bl. Severian Baranyk, OSBM and Bl. Zynoviy Kovalyk, CSsR, Hieromartyrs, and others.

Troparion of Blessed Vasyl (Tone 4): O holy Priest-Martyr Vasyl, you lent yourself to the apostles’ way of life* and succeeded them on their throne.* Inspired by God, you found the way to contemplation through the practice of virtue.* Therefore, you became a perfect teacher of truth,* fighting for the faith unto the shedding of your blood.* Intercede with Christ our God that He may save our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): We all sing a hymn of praise to you, O Holy One,* splendor of bishops and an example of victory.* We beseech you, O priest-martyr Vasyl,* to deliver from danger all those who celebrate your memory with fervor.* Intercede unceasingly for us all.

The Translation of the Relics of Cyrus and John, Wonderworkers and Unmercenaries.

⊕ The Holy, Glorious and Illustrious Apostles, Peter and Paul; Bl. Joachim Senkivsky, OSBM, Hieromartyr.

Troparion (Tone 4): O leaders of apostles and teachers of the world,* pray to the Lord of all* to grant peace to the world* and abundant mercy to our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Lord, You have received the steadfast preachers of the good news,* the leaders of Your apostles, into the enjoyment of Your goodness and repose.* You have accepted their labors and death before any other sacrifice,* for only You know the secrets of our heart.

✠ The Synaxis of the Holy, Glorious Twelve Apostles. For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1181).

JULY

The Holy Selfless Physicians Cosmas and Damian.

✠ The Deposition of the Venerable Robes of the Mother of God at Blachernae.

Troparion (Tone 8): Ever-virgin Mother of God and protection of the human race,* you gave the robe and cincture of your most pure body to your city as a powerful protection.* These garments remained incorrupt because of your virginal childbirth.* For in you, both time and nature have been renewed.* Therefore, we pray that you grant peace to the universe and great mercy to our souls.

Kontakion (Tone 4): As a mantle of immortality* you have given to the faithful the garment that covered your most pure body,* O Virgin whom God Himself has blessed and divine protection of the human race.* With love we celebrate the feast of the deposition of your mantle,* and we sing with faith:* Rejoice, O Virgin, for you are the pride of Christians.

For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1167).

The Holy Martyr Hyacinth; and Anatolius, Patriarch of Constantinople.

Our Holy Father Andrew, Archbishop of Crete; the Venerable Martha, Mother of St. Simeon of the Wonderful Mountain.

✠ Our Venerable Father Athanasius of Mt. Athos.

Troparion (Tone 3): The angels in heaven marvelled at your life on earth,* for you occupied your flesh as a spirit from on high.* You disarmed legions of demons, O glorious saint,* and Christ rewarded you with bountiful gifts.* Because of this, O Father, we ask you now to pray for the salvation of all.

Kontakion (Tone 8): Your flock invokes you as a man of special sight* and a zealous preacher of God, O inspired saint.* Do not cease praying for your servants* that they may be delivered from attacks and assaults.* We cry to you: Rejoice, O Father Athanasius.

For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1194).

Our Venerable Father Sisoes the Great.

Our Venerable Fathers Thomas of Maleum and Acacius, mentioned in the “Ladder” of St. John Climacus.

The Holy Great-martyr Procopius.

The Holy Hieromartyr Pancratius, Bishop of Taormina.

✠ Our Venerable Father Anthony of Kyiv; the Forty-five Martyrs of Nicopolis in Armenia; and the Holy Brothers Francis, Mutius and Raphael, and others with them, martyred in Dalmatia.

Troparion of St. Anthony (Tone 4): You renounced and left the world* following Christ in the spirit of the Gospel.* Living a life of an angel, you settled in the peaceful shelter of Mount Athos.* After that you came to the mountains of Kyiv with the blessing of the fathers.* You ended your life of labor there, casting light over all your homeland.* Showing the path of the kingdom to all monks, you led them on to Christ.* Now beg Him to save our souls, O Venerable Anthony.

Kontakion of Anthony (Tone 8): From childhood you loved God with all your heart* and lovingly followed Him, O venerable father.* Scorning this passing world as a trifle,* you took up residence in a cave.* There you fought the army of invisible demons,* and you were like the sun over the world.* Now you stand before the throne with the angels,* so remember us who honor you that we may sing: Rejoice, O Father Anthony.

The Falling Asleep of the Blessed Olha, Princess of Kyiv, named Helena at Holy Baptism; Holy and Praiseworthy Martyr Euphemia.

Troparion of Blessed Olha (Tone 1): Raising your mind on the wings of theology, you soared far above visible creation.* Seeking the God and Creator of all things and being rewarded by finding Him,* you were born again to Christ in Baptism.* Receiving delight from the Tree of life,* you remain incorrupt for all ages, O glorious Olha.

Kontakion of Blessed Olha (Tone 4): Let us sing hymns to the Benefactor of the world* Who exalted the God-wise Olha in the land of Rus’.* May He forgive our sins by her prayers.

The Holy Martyrs Proclus and Hilarion; and the Venerable Father Michael of Maleon.

Our Venerable Father Stephen the Sabaite; our Holy Father Julian, Hierarch of Kenoman; and the Synaxis of the Holy Archangel Gabriel.

The Holy Apostle Acquila.

✠ The Holy Great Prince Volodymyr, Equal to the Apostles, named Basil at Holy Baptism; and the Holy Martyrs Cyricus and Julitta his Mother.

Troparion of St. Volodymyr (Tone 4): O glorious ruler, Volodymyr, seated on the high throne of the mother of cities,* the God-protected Kyiv, like a merchant seeking a precious pearl,* you sent emissaries to find the true faith.* When you found the precious pearl, Christ,* He chose you to be a second Paul* and removed your spiritual and physical blindness in the holy bath.* And so, we your people commemorate your falling asleep* and seek your intercession for the governing authorities of Rus’* and for their whole domain.

Kontakion of St. Volodymyr (Tone 8): In your older years, venerable Volodymyr,* you became like the great apostle Paul,* rejecting idolatrous ways as childhood phantasies,* and as a mature man robed yourself in the royal garment of holy baptism.* Now in the joyous company of Christ our Savior,* intercede for the salvation of the governing authorities of Rus’* and their whole domain.

The Holy Hieromartyr Athenogenes and his Ten Disciples (Common service of Hieromartyrs); and the Remembrance of the Fathers of the Six Ecumenical Councils.

The Holy Great-Martyr Marina, and our Venerable Father and Confessor Paul Gojdich, OSBM., Bishop of Preshov.

Troparion of Confessor Paul (Tone 4): From your youth you loved Christ, the eternal Word.* You desired to serve Him quietly and in simplicity of heart,* but the right hand of the Most High chose you for the bishop’s throne,* and made you a steadfast shepherd of His people.* For the sake of faith and the unity of the Church,* you offered yourself to God as a perfect sacrifice.* O Father and priest-martyr Paul,* pray to Christ our God for the salvation of our souls.

Kontakion of Confessor Paul (Tone 2): Divine thunder, spiritual trumpet, sower of faith, and destroyer of heresies,* servant of the Trinity, O great bishop Paul,* you stand forever with the angels.* Pray without ceasing for all of us.

The Holy Martyr Hyacinth of Amastris; and the Holy Martyr Emilian.

Our Venerable Mother Macrina, Sister of St. Basil the Great; and the Venerable Dia.

Troparion of St. Macrina (Tone 2): You saw your bridegroom die and were struck by the vanity of this world and its fleeting life.* Taking purpose in your life, you were betrothed to the immortal One.* You drew His love with fasting and humility.* Now your spirit rejoices with the angels, O venerable Macrina.

Kontakion of St. Macrina (Tone 4): You loved the good God with all your heart, O Macrina.* You shouldered your cross and sincerely followed Him.* You found the total remission of your sins in Him.

✠ The Holy Glorious Prophet Elijah (Elias).

Troparion (Tone 4): The glorious Elijah, incarnate messenger of God,* pillar of prophets, and second forerunner of the coming of Christ,* sent graces from on high in Elisha* that he might cleanse lepers and heal sickness* for all those who honor him.

Kontakion (Tone 2): O prophet, who foresaw the mighty deeds of our God,* O great Elijah, who through your prayers stopped rain,* intercede for us with the only One Who loves mankind.

Dismissal: Christ our true God have mercy on us and save us, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, of the holy, glorious and illustrious prophet Elijah the Thesbite, whose fiery ascent to the heavens we gloriously celebrate today; through the prayers of the holy, glorious and praiseworthy apostles, our venerable and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

Our Venerable Fathers Simeon Fool for Christ and John, who fasted with him; and the Holy Prophet Ezekiel.

The Holy Myrrh-bearer and Equal to the Apostles Mary Magdalene.

Troparion (Tone 1): You followed Christ Who was born of a virgin for us,* keeping His laws and observing His decrees, O Mary.* In return we observe your holy memory* that our sins might be forgiven through your prayers.

Kontakion (Tone 3): You stood before the cross with the others, O glorious Mary,* and you cried as you suffered there with the Theotokos.* You opened your mouth in praise, saying:* How strange this is that He Who upholds all creation has deigned to suffer.* Glory to Your power!

The Holy Martyrs Trophimus, Theophilus and others with them; Bl. Confessor Basil Hopko, Bishop of Medila.

Troparion of Basil Hopko (Tone 8): Guide to orthodoxy, teacher of piety and holiness,* luminary for the world, inspired adornment of bishops,* O Wise Basil, Harp of the Spirit,* you enlightened all by your teachings;* intercede with Christ our God to save our souls.

Kontakion of Basil Hopko (Tone 2): Divinely wise Basil,* you practiced self-control* and stilled the desires of the flesh, O holy father.* You flourished in faith* and flowered like the tree of life in Paradise.

✠ The Holy Martyrs Borys and Hlib, named Roman and David at Holy Baptism; the great martyr Christina.

Troparion of the Saints (Tone 2): Innocent Roman and guileless David, genuine martyrs,* who truly heard Christ’s gospel,* you did not resist the enemy, your own brother,* who killed your body, but could not touch your spirit.* Now let your evil, power-hungry brother weep* while you rejoice with angels in the presence of the Trinity.* Pray for the nation of your kinsmen to be pleasing to God,* and for the salvation of the sons of Rus.

Kontakion of the Saints (Tone 3): Roman and David, noble Christian martyrs,* today your glorious feast day invites us to praise Christ our God.* And so we hasten to the shrine of your relics* for you are divine healers.

✠ The Dormition of St. Anne, Mother of the Theotokos; and the Holy Women Olympiada and Eupraxia.

Troparion (Tone 4): O Holy Anne, you are filled with the wisdom of God* and you gave birth to the most pure Mother,* the one who gave birth to Life.* Therefore, you have been carried up in glory on this day* to the blessedness of heaven,* to the abode of those who exult with joy.* And now you pray, O ever-blessed one,* for all those who honor you with all their heart.

Kontakion (Tone 2): Let us celebrate the memory of the ancestors of Christ* and fervently ask for their help* so that, delivered from all affliction, we may cry out:* O God Who glorified them according to Your good will,* remain always with us.

The Holy Hieromartyr Hermolaus and others with him (Common service of Martyrs); the Venerable Martyr Paraskevia.

✠ The Holy Great-Martyr and Healer Panteleimon; our Holy Father Clement the Wonderworker, Archbishop of Ohryd.

Troparion of St. Panteleimon (Tone 8): You received an invitation through the lips of Hermolaus which came from heaven itself.* You embraced the faith of your mother,* and you rejoiced when you were killed for it.* In return you received the grace to heal sickness,* so heal our infirmities that we may honor you, O Great-Martyr Panteleimon.

Kontakion of St. Panteleimon (Tone 5): You imitated the merciful Lord.* By the grace to heal which He gave to you,* heal our souls through your effective prayers, O martyr of Christ our God.* Drive away the demon from those who honor you* and who sing in their faith: Save us, O Lord.

For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1202).

The Holy Apostles and Deacons Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, and Parmenas.

The Holy Martyr Callinicus.

The Holy Apostles Silas, Silvanus, and others.

The Holy and Just Father Eudocimus.
