FEBRUARY

The Prefeast of the Meeting of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; the Holy Martyr Tryphon.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 1): Hail, Mother of God, Virgin full of grace.* From you has shown forth the Sun of Justice, Christ our God,* shining upon those who are in darkness.* Rejoice also, you just elder, Simeon,* for you received in your arms the Redeemer of our souls* Who has given us resurrection.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 6): O Christ our God, through Your birth You sanctified the Virgin’s womb,* and blessed, as it was proper, the hands of Simeon.* Today, You have come to bring us deliverance.* Give peace to nations at war and strengthen our civil authorities,* for You alone love mankind.

⊕ The Presentation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Troparion (Tone 1): Hail, Mother of God, Virgin full of grace.* From you has shown forth the Sun of Justice, Christ our God,* shining upon those who are in darkness.* Rejoice also, you just elder, Simeon;* for you received in your arms the Redeemer of our souls,* Who has given us resurrection.

Kontakion (Tone 1): O Christ our God, through Your birth You sanctified the Virgin’s womb;* and blessed, as it was proper, the hands of Simeon.* Today, You have come to bring us deliverance.* Give peace to nations at war, and strengthen our civil authorities,* for You alone love mankind.

Dismissal: Christ our true God, Who, for our salvation, deigned to be held in the embrace of the righteous Simeon, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, the holy, glorious and praiseworthy apostles, and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The Holy and Just Simeon the God-receiver and the Prophetess Anna.

Troparion (Tone 4): The elderly Simeon is filled with happiness today,* receiving the eternal God as an infant into his arms.* He begs to be released from the bonds of the flesh,* for he cries: My eyes have seen Your salvation for the world.

Kontakion (Tone 4): The elderly Simeon prayed to be released from the bonds of this passing life.* He received the Creator and Lord of all into his arms.* He found release and departed to life everlasting.

Our Venerable Father Isidore of Pelusium.

The Holy Martyr Agatha.

Our Venerable Father Boukolus, Hierarch of Smyrna (Common service of a Hierarch); and the Holy Hieromartyr Sylvanus, Bishop of Emessa and those with him.

Our Venerable Father Parthenius, Bishop of Lampsacus (Common service of a Hierarch); Blessed Peter Verhun, Hieromartyr.

The Holy Great-Martyr Theodore of Tyre; and the Holy Prophet Zechariah.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Meeting of our Lord Jesus Christ; and the Holy Martyr Nicephorus.

The Holy Martyr Charalampius.

The Holy Hieromartyr Blaise, Bishop of Sebastea.

Our Holy Father Meletius, Archbishop of Antioch.

Our Venerable Father Martinian.

✠ The Falling Asleep of our Venerable Father Cyril, Teacher of the Slavs; the Venerable Father Auxentius; and the Venerable Maron, the Wonderworker and Hermit.

Troparion of St. Cyril (Tone 4): From your childhood you made wisdom your sister,* and you took her to wife as a radiant virgin.* You adorned your mind and soul with it like gold.* You became a second great Cyril, O Voice of God.* You became a marvel by name and a blessed thinker.

Kontakion of St. Cyril (Tone 2): Enlightening the world by your divinely inspired teachings,* you have extended your sway like lightning over the world.* You sow the brilliant Word of God everywhere you go;* all the corners of the world shine with your miracles,* the north, south, east, and west, O Blessed Cyril.

For reading at Vespers: Deut 1:8-17 (p. 720); Deut 10:14-21 (p. 900); Wis 3:1-9 (p. 744).

The Holy Apostle Onesimus.

The Holy Martyrs Pamphilus, Porphyrius, Valentius, Paul, and others.

The Holy Great-Martyr Theodore of Tyre. Troparion and Kontakion: from the First Saturday of the Great Fast (p. 1247).

Our Holy Father Leo, Pope of Rome.

The Holy Apostle Archippus.

Our Venerable Father Leo, Bishop of Catania.

Our Venerable Father Timothy of Symbola; Holy Father Eustathius, Archbishop of Antioch.

The Finding of the Relics of the Martyrs at Eugenia.

The Holy Hieromartyr Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna.

✠ The First and Second Finding of the Head of the Prophet and Forerunner, John the Baptist. Necessary propers and readings: see August 29 (p. 999).

Troparion (Tone 4): The head of the Forerunner arose from the earth like a star,* sending out rays of healing and immortality;* in heaven, it gathers together the choirs of angels,* while on earth it assembles the human race in a single voice* to sing the glory of Christ our God.

Kontakion (Tone 2): O prophet of God and forerunner of grace,* within the earth we have discovered your head,* a rose of great holiness from which healing always comes to us.* As you did of old, now also preach repentance to the world.

For the service and readings, see the 29th of August, (p. 999).

Our Holy Father Tarasius, Archbishop of Constantinople.

Our Holy Father Porphyrius, Bishop of Gaza.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Procopius the Decapolitan (Common service of a Confessor).

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Basil (Common service of a Confessor).

Our Venerable Father Cassian.

MARCH

The Holy Venerable Martyr Eudoxia.

The Holy Hieromartyr Theodotus, Bishop of Cyrene (Common service of a Hieromartyr).

The Holy Martyrs Eutropius, Cleonicus and Basiliscus.

Our Venerable Father Gerasimus of the Jordan.

The Holy Martyr Conon.

The Holy Forty-two Martyrs of Ammorium.

The Holy Hieromartyrs and Bishops of Cherson: Basil, Ephrem, Capiton, Eugene and others; Bl. Leonid Fedorov, Exarch of the Russian Catholic Church, Hieromartyr.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Theophylactus, Hierarch of Nicomedia (Common service of a Hierarch).

✠ The Holy Forty Martyrs of Sebastea.

Troparion (Tone 1): O forty soldiers of Christ and honorable martyrs,* you went through fire and water; O mighty warriors,* you have come to live with the angels.* Join them in praying to Christ for those who praise you.* Glory to Him Who strengthened you!* Glory to Him Who crowned you!* Glory to Him Who heals us through you!

Kontakion (Tone 6): You left the crowds of this world* and joined the Master in heaven, O forty martyrs.* Passing through fire and water,* you reaped glory and honor in heaven, O blessed saints.

For readings at Vespers, (p. 1202).

The Holy Martyr Codratus, Cyprian, Anectus and Chryscentus.

Our Venerable Father Sophronius, Patriarch of Jerusalem.

Our Venerable Father and Confessor Theophane of Mt. Sigriana (Common service of a Confessor); and our Holy Father Gregory Dialogus, Pope of Rome.

The Translation of the Relics of our Holy Father Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople.

Our Venerable Father Benedict.

The Holy Martyrs Agapius and six others with him.

The Holy Martyrs Sabinus and Papas.

Our Venerable Father Alexis, Man of God.

Our Holy Father Cyril, Archbishop of Jerusalem.

The Holy Martyrs Chrysanthus and Daria.

Our Venerable Fathers Martyred by the Saracens in the Monastery of Saint Sabbas (Office of Venerable Martyrs).

Our Venerable Father and Confessor James, Bishop of Catania (Common service of a Confessor).

The Holy Hieromartyr Basil, Presbyter of Ancyra.

Our Venerable-Martyr Nicon and his students martyred with him (Common service of Martyrs).

The Prefeast of the Annunciation of Our Most Holy Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary; Venerable Zacharius; our Holy Father Artemon, Bishop of Seleucia in Pisidia.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Today is the prelude of joy for the whole world.* Let us then anticipate the feast and celebrate,* for, behold, Gabriel is on his way with the glad tidings for the Virgin.* He is about to cry out in fear and amazement:* Rejoice, O Woman Full of Grace; the Lord is with you!

Kontakion (Tone 8): You are the beginning of salvation* for all those born on earth, O Virgin Theotokos.* The prince of the heavenly legions has been sent* to stand before you with a message of joy.* We join the chorus and call out to you:* Rejoice, O Bride and Maiden ever pure.

⊕ The Feast of the Annunciation of the Mother of God; Blessed Omelian (Emil) Kovch, Hieromartyr.

Troparion (Tone 4): Today is the fountainhead of our salvation* and the revelation of an eternal mystery:* the Son of God becomes a virgin’s Son,* and Gabriel announces this grace.* Therefore, let us exclaim with him to the Mother of God: Hail, O Woman Full of Grace, the Lord is with you.

Kontakion (Tone 8): O Mother of God,* we your servants sing a hymn of thanks to you,* a hymn of triumph to a valiant leader;* for you have delivered us from all peril.* We now exclaim to you:* Hail, O Bride and Virgin ever-pure.

The Leave-taking of the Feast and the Synaxis of the Archangel Gabriel.

The Venerable Matrona of Thessalonica.

Our Venerable Fathers Hilarion the Younger and the Holy Stephen the Wonderworker.

Our Venerable Fathers Mark, Bishop of Arethusa, and the Deacon Cyril, and others martyred by the persecutor Julian (Common service of Hieromartyrs).

Our Venerable Father John Climacus, Author of the “Divine Ladder.”

Our Venerable Father Hypatius, Bishop of Gangra (Common service of a Hierarch).
