AUGUST

The Procession of the Venerable Cross; the Holy Seven Maccabees, their Mother Solome, and the elder Eleazar, Martyrs.

The Translation of the Holy Relics of the Apostle, Protomartyr and Archdeacon Stephen. Troparion of Dec. 27, (p. 1336).

Our Venerable Fathers Isaac, Dalmatus, and Faustus.

The Seven Holy Youths of Ephesus, Martyrs; and the Venerable-Martyr Eudocia.

The Prefeast of the Transfiguration of our Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ; and the Holy Martyr Eusignius.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): O faithful, let us celebrate in advance* the joy of the transfiguration of Christ.* Let us rejoice in this prefestive time and cry out:* Behold the day of heavenly joy draws near,* for the Lord goes up to Mount Tabor to shine with the light of His divinity.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Today the whole human race prepares* to reflect the radiance of divine splendor* brought about in the transfiguration of Christ;* and it cries out with joy:* Christ is transfigured in order to save all of us.

⊕ The Holy Transfiguration of our Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ.

Troparion (Tone 7): You were transfigured on the mountain, O Christ our God,* revealing as much of Your glory to Your disciples as they could behold.* Through the prayers of the Mother of God,* let Your everlasting light also shine upon us sinners.* O Giver of light, glory be to You.

Kontakion (Tone 7): You were transfigured on the mountain, O Christ our God,* and Your disciples beheld as much as they could of Your glory,* so that when they would see You crucified,* they would understand that You suffered willingly;* and they would preach to the world* that You are truly the reflection of the Father.

Dismissal: Christ our true God, Who was transfigured in glory in the presence of His holy disciples and apostles on Mount Tabor, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, and of our holy father John Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople, and of all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.

The Venerable-Martyr Dometius.

The Holy Confessor Emilian, Bishop of Cyzicus (Common of a Hierarch).

✠ The Holy Apostle Matthias.

Troparion (Tone 3): O Holy Apostle Matthias, intercede with the all-merciful God* that He may grant us forgiveness of our sins.

Kontakion (Tone 4): Your good tidings were more brilliant than the sun,* and they have spread all over the world;* they illumine the Church of the Gentiles with grace.* Rejoice, O miracle-working Matthias.

For the readings at Vespers, (see p. 1175).

The Holy Martyr and Archdeacon Lawrence.

The Holy Martyr Euplus.

The Holy Martyrs Photius and Anicetus.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Transfiguration of our Lord; and our Venerable Father Maximus the Confessor.

✠ The Translation of the Precious Relics of our Venerable Father Theodosius, Hegumen of the Pecherska Lavra, in Kyiv (take service of May 3rd, p. 1293); the Holy Prophet Micheas; and the Prefeast of the Dormition of the Mother of God.

Troparion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): O peoples, dance with joy and clap your hands in fervor.* Gather today in eagerness and jubilation, and with glee;* for the Mother of God is about to rise in glory,* going up from the earth into heaven.* It is to her we always sing hymns of praise,* for she is the Mother of God.

Kontakion of the Prefeast (Tone 4): Today the whole universe dances with joy* at your glorious memory, O Mother of God,* and it cries out to you;* Rejoice, O Virgin, pride of Christians.

⊕ The Dormition of our Most Holy Lady and Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary.

Troparion (Tone 1): O Mother of God, in giving birth you still preserved virginity;* and in your falling-asleep you did not forsake the world.* You are the Mother of Life and have been transferred to life,* and through your prayers have delivered our souls from death.

Kontakion (Tone 2): The grave and death did not detain the Mother of God.* She prays perpetually and is our unfailing hope of intercession;* for He Who dwelt in the womb of the ever-Virgin,* transferred to life the Mother of Life.

The Translation from Edessa to Constantinople of the Holy “Icon of Our Lord Painted without Hands”, also called the Holy Veil (troparion and kontakion of the First Sunday of the Great Fast, p. 1248); the Holy Martyr Diomedes.

The Holy Martyr Myron.

The Holy Martyrs Florus and Laurus.

The Holy Martyrs Andrew the Centurion and others with him (Common service of Martyrs).

The Holy Prophet Samuel.

The Holy Apostle Thaddeus; the Holy Woman-Martyr Bassa.

The Holy Martyrs Agathonicus, Severian and others.

The Leave-taking of the Feast of the Dormition of the Mother of God; and the Holy Martyr Lupus; and the Holy Hieromartyr Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons.

The Holy Hieromartyr Eutyches.

The Holy Apostle Titus; and the Return of the Holy Relics of the Holy Apostle Bartholomew.

The Holy Martyrs Adrian and Natalia.

Our Venerable Father Pimen.

Our Venerable Father Moses the Black; our Holy Father Augustine, Bishop of Hippo; the Holy Martyr Michael Gebre, Priest of Ethiopia; and the Synaxis of our Venerable Fathers of the Pecherska Lavra, who repose in the further caves.

⊕ The Beheading of the Honorable and Glorious Prophet and Forerunner, and Baptist John.

Troparion (Tone 2): The remembrance of the just is worthy of praise,* but the Lord’s testimony is sufficient for you, O Forerunner;* for it has shown that you are indeed more worthy of honor than the Prophets.* You were found worthy to baptize the Lord Whom you foretold.* Thereafter, you suffered for the truth* and, rejoicing, also announced the good news to those in the Abyss* that God had appeared as man,* taking away the sins of the world* and granting to all of us the abundance of mercy.

Kontakion (Tone 5): The glorious beheading of the Forerunner* was part of God’s saving plan* that the coming of the Savior might be announced even to those in the Abyss.* Weep then, Herodias, that you asked for a wicked murder,* because you loved neither God’s law nor eternal life,* but only the passing pleasure of life.

Our Holy Fathers and Patriarchs Alexander of Constantinople, John, and Paul the Younger.

✠ The Deposition of the Cincture of our Most Holy Lady the Mother of God. For the Troparion and Kontakion, (see July 2, p. 1302).
