--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 6th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
THE HOLY THEOPHANY  
OF OUR LORD, GOD & SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST  
At the fifth hour of the day (i.e. 11 o’clock in the morning), the great bell is tolled, 
and afterward all the heavy bells. And having assembled in church, we begin vespers 
and chant the usual psalm. There followeth the great litany, and after the litany, if it 
be Saturday evening, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the entire Kathisma, but if it 
be Sunday evening, we chant only the first antiphon; yet if it be any other day of the 
week, we do not chant it at all, but proceed immediately to sing “Lord, I have cried 
...,” in Tone II.  
At this time the priest performeth proskomedia, and the deacon censeth the whole 
church, as usual, while we chant the 8 Stichera of the feast, the composition of John 
the Monk: 
In Tone II: 
The forerunner, beholding our Enlightener, Who illumineth every man, coming to 
be baptized, rejoiceth in soul and trembleth. He pointeth to Him with his hand and 
saith to the people: “This is He Who delivereth Israel, Who freeth us from 
corruption! O sinless Christ our God, glory be to Thee!” (Twice)  
When our Redeemer was baptized by His servant and borne witness to by the 
coming of the Holy Spirit, the angelic armies, looking on, were stricken with awe; and 
a voice was borne down from the Father in heaven saying: “He Whom the forerunner 
baptized with his hand is My beloved Son, in Whom I have been well-pleased!” O 
Christ our God, glory be to Thee! (Twice)  
The currents of the Jordan received Thee, the Well-spring, and the Comforter 
descended upon Thee in the form of a dove. Thou Who bowed down the heavens 
dost bow Thy head, and clay crieth out to the Potter: “What dost Thou command me 
to do, O Thou Who art greater than all, It is I who must needs be baptized of Thee! 
O sinless Christ our God, glory be to Thee!” (Twice)  
Desiring to save mankind who had become lost, Thou didst deign to clothe 
Thyself in the guise of a servant; for it was fitting that Thou, our Master and God 
assume our form: for when Thou wast baptized in the flesh, O Redeemer, Thou didst 
grant forgiveness unto us. Wherefore, we cry out to Thee: O Christ our God, glory be 
to Thee! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone II: 
Thou didst bow Thy head before the Forerunner, and didst crush the heads of the 
serpents. Having come to the streams, thou didst illumine all things, that they may 
glorify Thee, O Savior, the Enlightener of our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Entrance with the Gospel. Prokeimenon of the day. And these readings: 
A READING FROM GENESIS  
In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth. But the earth was unsightly 
and unfurnished, and darkness was over the deep, and the Spirit of God moved over 
the water. And God said: “Let there be light!”, and there was light. And God saw the 
light, that it was good, and God divided between the light and the darkness. And God 
called the light day, and the darkness He called night; and there was evening and there 
was morning, the first day. And God said: “Let there be a firmament in the midst of 
the water, and let it be a division between water and water!”, and it was so. And God 
made the firmament, and God divided between the water which was under the firma-
ment and the water which was above the firmament. And God called the firmament 
heaven; and God saw that it was good: and there was evening and there was morning, 
the second day. And God said: “Let the water which is under the heaven be collected 
into one place, and let the dry land appear!”; and it was so. And the water which was 
under the heaven was collected into its places, and the dry land appeared. And God 
called the dry land earth, and the gatherings of the waters he called seas; and God saw 
that it was good. And God said: “Let the earth bring forth the herb of grass bearing 
seed, according to its kind and according to its likeness, and the fruit-trees bearing 
fruit, whose seed is in it, according to its kind on the earth!”; and it was so. And the 
earth brought forth the herb of grass bearing seed, according to its kind and 
according to its likeness, and the fruit-tree bearing fruit, whose seed is in it, according 
to its kind on the earth; and God saw that it was good. And there was evening and 
there was morning, the third day.  
A READING FROM EXODUS  
The Lord said unto Moses: “Why criest thou to Me? Speak to the children of 
Israel, and let them proceed. And do thou lift up thy rod, and stretch forth thy hand 
over the sea, and divide it, and let the children of Israel enter into the midst of the sea 
on the dry land. And lo! I will harden the heart of Pharaoh and of all the Egyptians, 
and they shall go in after them; and I will be glorified upon Pharaoh, and on all his 
host, and on his chariots and his horses. And all the Egyptians shall know that I am 
the Lord, when I am glorified upon Pharaoh and upon his chariots and his horses.” 
And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the Lord carried back the sea 
with a strong south wind all the night, and made the sea dry, and the water was 
divided. And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea on the dry land, and 
the water of it was a wall on the right hand and a wall on the left. And the Egyptians 
pursued them and went in after them, and every horse of Pharaoh, and his chariots, 
and his horsemen, into the midst of the sea. And Moses stretched forth his hand over 
the sea, and the water returned to its place toward day; and the Egyptians fled from 

--- PAGE 3 ---
the water, and the Lord shook off the Egyptians in the midst of the sea. And the 
water returned and covered the chariots and the riders, and all the forces of Pharaoh, 
who entered after them into the sea: and there was not left of them even one. But the 
children of Israel went along dry land in the midst of the sea.  
A READING FROM EXODUS  
Moses brought up the children of Israel from the Red Sea, and brought them into 
the wilderness of Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no 
water to drink. And they came to Marah, and could not drink of Marah, for it was 
bitter; therefore he named the name of that place, Bitterness. And the people 
murmured against Moses, saying: “What shall we drink?” And Moses cried to the 
Lord, and the Lord showed him a tree, and he cast it into the water, and the water 
was sweetened. There He established to him ordinances and judgments, and there He 
proved him, and said: “If thou wilt indeed hear the voice of the Lord thy God, and 
do things pleasing before Him, and wilt hearken to His commands, and keep all His 
ordinances, no disease which I have brought upon the Egyptians will I bring upon 
thee, for I am the Lord thy God, Who healeth thee.” And they came to Elim, and 
there were there twelve fountains of water, and seventy stems of palm trees; and they 
encamped there by the waters. And they departed from Elim, and all the congregation 
of the children of Israel came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and 
Sin.  
Then we rise to our feet, and the reader lifteth up his voice and chanteth this 
Troparion, in Tone V: 
O Thou Who hast created the world, * Thou hast appeared in the world, * that 
Thou mightest enlighten those in darkness. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to Thee!  
Verse: God be gracious unto us and bless us, and cause His face to shine upon 
us and have mercy on us, that we may know upon the earth Thy way, among 
the nations Thy salvation.  
That Thou mightest enlighten those in darkness, ** O Lover of mankind, glory be 
to Thee!  
Verse: Let the peoples give Thee praise, O God, let all the peoples praise Thee. 
Let the nations be glad and rejoice, for Thou shalt judge peoples with 
righteousness; and nations shalt Thou guide upon the earth.  
That Thou mightest enlighten those in darkness, ** O Lover of mankind, glory be 
to Thee!  
Verse: Let the peoples give Thee praise, O God, let all the peoples praise Thee; 
the earth hath yielded her fruit. Let God, our God, bless us; let God bless us, 
and let all the ends of the earth fear Him.  
That Thou mightest enlighten those in darkness, ** O Lover of mankind, glory be 
to Thee!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., and the reader chanteth the Troparion in its entirety:  
O Thou Who hast created the world, * Thou hast appeared in the world, * that 
Thou mightest enlighten those in darkness. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to Thee!  
And we resume the readings:  
A READING FROM JOSHUA  
The Lord said unto Joshua: “This day do I begin to exalt thee before all the 
children of Israel, that they may know that as I was with Moses, so will I also be with 
thee. And now charge the priests that bear the ark of the covenant, saying: As soon as 
ye shall enter on a part of the water of Jordan, then ye shall stand in Jordan.” And 
when the priests that bore the ark of the covenant of the Lord entered upon Jordan, 
and the feet of the priests that bore the ark of the covenant of the Lord were dipped 
in part of the water of Jordan (now Jordan overflowed all its banks about the time of 
wheat harvest), then the waters that came down from above stopped; there stood one 
solid heap very far off, as far as the region of Kariathiarim, and the lower part came 
down to the sea of Arabia, the salt sea, until it completely failed; and the people stood 
opposite Jericho. And the priests that bore the ark of the covenant of the Lord stood 
on dry land in the midst of Jordan; and all the children of Israel went through on dry 
land, until all the people had completely gone over Jordan.  
A READING FROM THE FOURTH BOOK OF KINGS  
And Elijah said to Elisha: “Stay here, I pray thee, for the Lord hath sent me to 
Jordan.” But Elisha said: “As the Lord liveth and thy soul liveth, I will not leave 
thee!” And they both went on. And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went also, 
and stood opposite afar off: and both stood on the bank of the Jordan. And Elijah 
took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the water: and the water was 
divided on this side and on that side, and they both went over on dry ground. And it 
came to pass while they were crossing over, that Elijah said to Elisha: “Ask what I 
shall do for thee before I am taken up from thee.” And Elisha said: “Let there be, I 
pray thee, a double portion of thy spirit upon me.” And Elijah said: “Thou hast asked 
a hard thing: if thou shalt see me when I am taken up from thee, then shall it be so to 
thee; and if not, it shall not be so.” And it came to pass as they were going, they went 
on talking; and, behold, a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and it separated between 
them both; and Elijah was taken up in a whirlwind as it were into heaven. And Elisha 
saw, and cried: “Father, father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof!” And 
he saw him no more; and he took hold of his garments, and rent them into two 
pieces. And Elisha took up the mantle of Elijah, which fell from off him upon Elisha; 
and Elisha returned, and stood upon the brink of Jordan; and he took the mantle of 
Elijah, which fell from off him, and smote the water, and said: “Where is the Lord 
God of Elijah?” And he smote the waters, and they were divided hither and thither; 
and he went over.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
A READING FROM THE FOURTH BOOK OF KINGS  
There came Naaman, prince of the king of Assyria, with his chariots and horses, 
and stood at the door of the house of Elisha. And Elisha sent a messenger to him, 
saying: “Go and wash seven times in Jordan, and thy flesh shall return to thee, and 
thou shalt be cleansed.” And Naaman was angry, and departed, saying: “Behold, I 
said: He will by all means come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of his 
God, and lay his hand upon the place, and recover the leper. Are not Abana and 
Pharphar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? May I not go and 
wash in them, and be cleansed?” And he turned, and went out in a rage, But his 
servant came near, and said to him: “Suppose the prophet had spoken a great thing to 
thee: wouldst thou not perform it? Yet he hath but said to thee: Wash, and be 
cleansed.” So Naaman went down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan, 
according to the word of Elisha: and his flesh returned to him as the flesh of a little 
child, and he was cleansed.  
Then the reader chanteth this Troparion, in Tone VI: 
To sinners and publicans hast Thou revealed Thyself, * in the magnitude of Thy 
mercy, O our Savior; * for where should Thy light shine save upon those who sit in 
darkness? ** Glory be to Thee!  
Verse: The Lord is King, He is clothed with majesty; the Lord is clothed with 
strength and He hath girt Himself. For He established the world which shall 
not be shaken, Thy throne is prepared of old; Thou art from everlasting.  
For where should Thy light shine save upon those who sit in darkness? ** Glory 
be to Thee!  
Verse: The rivers have lifted up, O Lord, the rivers have lifted up their voices. 
The rivers will lift up their waves, at the voices of many waters.  
For where should Thy light shine save upon those who sit in darkness? ** Glory 
be to Thee!  
Verse: Wonderful are the surgings of the sea, wonderful on high is the Lord. 
Thy testimonies are made very sure. Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, 
unto length of days.  
For where should Thy light shine save upon those who sit in darkness? ** Glory 
be to Thee!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., and the reader chanteth the Troparion again, in its entirety: 
To sinners and publicans hast Thou revealed Thyself, * in the magnitude of Thy 
mercy, O our Savior; * for where should Thy light shine save upon those who sit in 
darkness? ** Glory be to Thee!  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: Wash ye, be ye clean; remove your iniquities from your souls 
before Mine eyes; cease from your iniquities; learn to do well; diligently seek 
judgment, deliver him that is suffering wrong, plead for the orphan, and obtain justice 

--- PAGE 6 ---
for the widow. And, come, let us reason together, saith the Lord: and though your 
sins be as purple, I will make them white as snow; and though they be as scarlet, I will 
make them white as wool. And if ye be willing, and hearken to Me, ye shall eat the 
good of the land: but if ye be not willing, nor hearken to Me, a sword shall devour 
you: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken this.  
A READING FROM GENESIS  
And looking up, Jacob saw the host of the Lord encamped; and the angels of God 
met him. And Jacob said, when he saw them: “This is the camp of God.” And he 
called the name of that place Encampments. And Jacob sent messengers before him 
to Esau his brother, to the land of Seri, to the country of Edom. And he charged 
them, saying: Thus shall ye say to my lord Esau: Thus saith thy servant Jacob: I have 
sojourned with Lebam and tarried unto now. And there were born to me oxen, and 
asses, and sheep, and men-servants and women-servants; and I sent to tell my lord 
Esau, that thy servant might find grace in thy sight. And the messengers returned to 
Jacob, saying: “We came to thy brother Esau; and, lo! he cometh to meet thee, and 
four hundred men with him.” And Jacob was greatly terrified, and was perplexed; and 
he divided the people that were with him, and the cows, and the camels, and the 
sheep, into two camps. And Jacob said: “If Esau should come to one camp, and smite 
it, the other camp shall be in safety.” And Jacob said: “O Lord God of my father 
Isaac, Thou art He Who said to me: Depart quickly to the land of thy birth, and I will 
do thee good. Let there be to me a sufficiency of all the justice and all the truth which 
Thou hast wrought with Thy servant; for with this my staff I passed over this 
Jordan.”  
A READING FROM EXODUS  
The daughter of Pharaoh came down to the river to bathe; and her maids walked 
by the river’s side; and when she saw the ark in the ooze, she sent her maid, and took 
it up. And when she opened it, she saw the babe weeping in the ark; and the daughter 
of Pharaoh had compassion on it, and said: “This is one of the Hebrews’ children.” 
And his sister said to the daughter of Pharaoh: “Wilt thou that I call to thee a nurse 
of the Hebrews, and shall she suckle the child for thee?” And the daughter of 
Pharaoh said to her: “Take care of this child, and suckle it for me, and I will give thee 
the wages.” And the woman took the child, and suckled it. And when the boy was 
grown, she brought him to the daughter of Pharaoh, and he became her son; and she 
called his name, Moses, saying: “I took him out of the water.”  
A READING FROM JUDGES  
Gideon said unto God: “If Thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as Thou hast said, 
behold, I put a fleece of wool upon the threshing-floor: if there be dew on the fleece 
only, and drought on all the ground, I shall know that Thou wilt save Israel by my 
hand, as Thou hast said.” And it was so: and he rose up early in the morning, and 
wrung the fleece; and dew dropped from the fleece, a bowl full of water. And Gideon 
said unto God: “Let not, I pray Thee, Thine anger be kindled with me, and I will 

--- PAGE 7 ---
speak yet once; I will even yet make one trial more with the fleece: Let now the 
drought be upon the fleece only, and let there be dew on all the ground.” And God 
did so in that night; and there was drought on the fleece only, and on all the ground 
there was dew. 
A READING FROM THE THIRD BOOK OF KINGS  
Elijah said to the people: “Come near to me.” And all the people came near to 
him. And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of Israel, 
as the Lord spake unto him, saying: “Israel shall be thy name.” And he built up the 
stones in the name of the Lord, and repaired the altar that had been broken down; 
and he made a trench that would hold two measures of seed round about the altar. 
And he piled the cleft wood on the altar which he had made, and divided the whole-
burnt offering, and laid it on the wood, and laid it in order on the altar, and said: 
“Fetch me four pitchers of water, and pour it on the whole-burnt offering, and on the 
wood.” And they did so. And he said: “Do it yet again.” And they did it a second 
time. And he said: “Do it a third time.” And they did it a third time. And the water 
ran round about the altar, and they filled the trench with water. And Elijah cried 
aloud to heaven, and said: “Lord God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Israel: Answer me, 
O Lord, answer me this day by fire, and let all this people know that Thou art the 
Lord, the God of Israel, and I am Thy servant; and for Thy sake I have wrought these 
works. Hear me, O Lord, hear me, and let this people know that Thou art the Lord 
God, and Thou hast turned back the heart of this people.” Then fire fell from the 
Lord out of heaven, and devoured the whole-burnt offerings, and the wood and the 
water that was in the trench; and the fire licked up the stones and the earth. And all 
the people fell upon their faces, and said: “Truly the Lord is God!”  
A READING FROM THE FOURTH BOOK OF KINGS  
The men of the city said to Elisha: “Behold, the situation of the city is good, as our 
lord seeth; but the waters are bad, and the ground barren.” And Elisha said: “Bring 
me a new pitcher, and put salt in it.” And they took one, and brought it to him. And 
Elisha went out to the spring of the waters, and cast salt therein, and said: “Thus saith 
the Lord: I have healed these waters; there shall not be any longer death thence or 
barren land.” And the waters were healed until this day, according to the word of 
Elisha which he spoke.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of 
salvation have I succored thee: and I have formed thee, and given thee for a covenant 
of the nations, to establish the earth, and to cause to inherit the desert heritages; 
saying to them that are in bonds: “Go forth!”, and bidding them that are in darkness 
to show themselves. They shall be fed in all the ways, and in all the paths shall be 
their pasture. They shall not hunger, neither shall they thirst; neither shall the heat nor 
the sun smite them; but He that hath mercy on them shall comfort them, and by 

--- PAGE 8 ---
fountains of waters shall He lead them. And I will make every mountain a way, and 
every path a pasture to them. Behold, these shall come from afar: and these from the 
north and the west, and others from the land of the Persians. Rejoice, ye heavens; and 
let the earth be glad: let the mountains break forth with joy; for the Lord hath had 
mercy on His people, and hath comforted the lowly ones of His people. But Sion 
said: The Lord hath forsaken me, and, The Lord hath forgotten me. Will a woman 
forget her child, so as not to have compassion upon the offspring of her womb? But 
if a woman should even forget these, yet I will not forget thee, saith the Lord.  
Then followeth the small Litany, and the Trisagion.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: The Lord is my light and my Savior; * whom then 
shall I fear?  
Verse: The Lord is the defender of my life; of whom then shall I be afraid?  
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, § 143 (I COR. 9: 19-27)  
Brethren: Though I be free from all men, yet have I made myself servant unto all, 
that I might gain the more. And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain 
the Jews; to them that are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain them that 
are under the law; To them that are without law, as without law, (being not without 
law to God, but under the law to Christ,) that I might gain them that are without law. 
To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all 
men, that I might by all means save some. And this I do for the gospel’s sake, that I 
might be partaker thereof with you. Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, 
but one receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may obtain. And every man that striveth 
for the mastery is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible 
crown; but we an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not 
as one that beateth the air: But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: 
lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: My heart hath poured forth a good word; I speak of my 
works to the king; my tongue is the pen of a swiftly writing scribe.  
Verse: Comely art Thou in beauty more than the sons of men; grace hath been 
poured forth on Thy lips, wherefore God hath blessed Thee forever.  
Deacon: Wisdom, upright! Let us hear the Holy Gospel.  
Priest: Peace be unto all.  
People: And to thy spirit.  
Priest: The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to St. Luke, §9  
People: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee!  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 9 (LK. 3: 1-18) 
In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor 
of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of 
Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene, 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Ananias and Caiaphas being the high priests, the word of God came unto John the 
son of Zacharias in the wilderness. And he came into all the country about Jordan, 
preaching the baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins; As it is written in the 
book of the words of Isaiah the prophet, saying, The voice of one crying in the 
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. Every valley shall 
be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low; and the crooked shall be 
made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth; And all flesh shall see the 
salvation of God, then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him, 
O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring 
forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and begin not to say within yourselves, 
We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, That God is able of these stones 
to raise up children unto Abraham. And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the 
trees: every tree therefore which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast 
into the fire. And the people asked him, saying, What shall we do then? He answereth 
and saith unto them, He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none; 
and he that hath meat, let him do likewise. Then came also publicans to be baptized, 
and said unto him, Master, what shall we do? And he said unto them, Exact no more 
than that which is appointed you. And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, 
And what shall we do? And he said unto them, do violence to no man, neither accuse 
any falsely; and be content with your wages. And as the people were in expectation, 
and all men mused in their hearts of John, whether he were the Christ, or not; John 
answered, saying unto them all, I indeed baptize you with water; but One mightier 
than I cometh, the latchet of Whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose: He shall 
baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire: Whose fan is in His hand, and He will 
thoroughly purge His floor, and will gather the wheat into His garner; but the chaff 
He will burn with fire unquenchable. And many other things in his exhortation 
preached he unto the people.  
People: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee!  
Then followeth the Divine Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great. 
 Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant “In thee all creation doth rejoice ...” 
Communion Verse: Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the 
highest.  
After the Prayer beyond the Ambo, we straightway go forth, through the beautiful 
doors, to the sacred font in the exo-narthex, or to a spring of water, where the 
superior or the senior priest performeth the Great Blessing of Water, the text of 
which is set forth in the Euchologion.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
THE GREAT BLESSING OF WATERS 
After the prayer behind the ambo, a table is prepared for the great blessing of the 
waters. As the priest censeth the table, the Choir singeth these Troparia: 
Tone VIII: 
The voice of the Lord, which is upon the waters, crieth out, saying: * Come ye all, 
and receive the Spirit of wisdom, * the Spirit of understanding, * the Spirit of the fear 
of God: ** Christ Who hath appeared! (Thrice) 
Today the nature of the waters is sanctified. * Jordan is parted, and turneth back 
its streams, ** beholding the Master baptized. (Twice) 
Thou didst come to the river as a man, * O Christ our King, * and dost hasten to 
receive the baptism of a servant * at the hand of the Forerunner * for the sake of our 
sins, ** O Good One Who lovest mankind. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same tone: 
O Lord Who knowest not sin, * having assumed the appearance of a servant * 
Thou didst come unto the voice of one crying in the wilderness, * “Prepare ye the 
way of the Lord”, * asking baptism of him. * The waters saw Thee, and were afraid, * 
The Forerunner was seized with trembling, and cried aloud, saying: * “How can a 
lamp illumine the light? * How can a slave lay his hand upon his Master? * Sanctify 
me and the waters, ** O Savior Who takest away the sin of the world!” 
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: Be glad, thou thirsty desert; let the wilderness exult, and 
flower as the lily. And the desert places of Jordan shall blossom, and all shall be glad 
and rejoice; the glory of Lebanon hath been given to it, and the honor of Carmel; and 
My people shall see the glory of the Lord, and the majesty of God. Be strong, ye 
paralyzed hands, and be comforted ye palsied knees. Say ye unto the faint-hearted the 
thought: Be strong, fear not; behold, our God rendereth judgment, and He will come 
and save us. Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall 
hear. Then shall the lame man leap like a hart, and the tongue of the stammerers shall 
speak plainly; for water hath burst forth in the desert, and a channel of water in a 
thirsty land. And the waterless places shall become marshes, and a fountain of water 
shall be poured into the thirsty land. There shall there be a gladness of birds, the 
abode of ostriches, and reeds and marshes. There shall be there a pure way, and it 
shall be called a holy way; and there shall not pass by there any unclean person, 
neither shall there be there an unclean way; but the dispersed shall walk on it, and 
they shall not go astray. And there shall be no lion there, neither shall any cruel beast 
go up upon it, nor at all be found there; but those delivered and gathered together by 
the Lord shall walk it, and shall return, and come to Zion with gladness and joy, and 
everlasting gladness shall overtake them; for on their head shall be praise and 
exultation, and joy shall take possession of them: pain, grief and sighing are fled away. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: Ye that thirst, go to the water, and as many as have no silver, 
go and buy; and eat and drink wine and fat without silver or price. Wherefore do ye 
pay not silver for bread, and give your labor for that which will not satisfy? Hearken 
to Me, and ye shall eat that which is good, and your souls shall partake of good 
things. Give heed with your ears, and follow My ways: hearken to Me, and your soul 
shall live amid good things. I will make with you an everlasting covenant, the sure 
holy things of David. Behold, I have given him as a testimony among the gentiles, a 
prince and commander among the nations. Behold, nations which knew thee not, 
shall call upon thee, and peoples which are not acquainted with thee, shall flee to thee 
for refuge, for the sake of the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel; for He hath 
glorified thee. Seek ye the Lord, and when ye find Him, call upon Him; and when He 
shall draw nigh to you, let the ungodly one leave his ways, and the iniquitous man his 
counsels: and let him return to the Lord your God, and ye shall find mercy; for He 
shall abundantly pardon your sins. For My counsels are not as your counsels, nor are 
My ways as your ways, saith the Lord. But as the heaven is distant from the earth, so 
is My way distant from your ways, and your thoughts from My mind. For as rain shall 
come down, or snow, from heaven, and shall not return until it hath saturated the 
earth, and it bring forth, and bud, and give seed to the sower, and bread for food: so 
shall My word be, whatever shall proceed out of My mouth: it shall by no means turn 
back empty, until all the things which I willed shall have been accomplished; and I 
will make My ways and My commands to succeed. For ye shall go forth with gladness, 
and shall be taught with joy. For the mountains and the hills shall exult to welcome 
you with joy, and all the trees of the field shall clap with their branches. And instead 
of the bramble shall come up the cypress, and instead of the nettle shall come up the 
myrtle: and the Lord shall be for a name, and for an everlasting sign, and shall not fail. 
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: Draw ye therefore water with gladness out of the wellsprings 
of salvation. And in that day thou shalt say: Give thanks to the Lord, and call aloud 
upon His name; proclaim His glory among the gentiles; make mention that His name 
is exalted. Hymn ye the name of the Lord; for He hath done high deeds. Declare 
these things throughout all the earth. Rejoice and be glad, ye who dwell in Zion: for 
the Holy One of Israel is exalted in the midst of it. 
The Prokeimenon in Tone III:  
Prokeimenon: The Lord is my light and my Savior. * Whom then shall I fear. 
Verse: The Lord is the defender of my life. Of whom then shall I be afraid? 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
1st EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS 
Brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were 
under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were all baptized unto Moses in 
the cloud and in the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual meat; and did all drink the 
same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that 
Rock was Christ. 
Alleluia in Tone IV: The voice of the Lord is upon the waters; the God of glory 
hath thundered, the Lord is upon the many waters. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK 
At that time, Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized by John in 
Jordan. And straightway coming up out of the water, He saw the heavens opened, 
and the Spirit like a dove descending upon Him: and there came a voice from heaven, 
saying: “Thou art My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased.” 
The augmented Litany of Peace: 
Priest/Deacon: In peace let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For the peace from above, and the salvation of our souls, let us 
pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For the peace of the whole world, the good estate of the holy 
churches of God, and the union of all, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For this holy temple, and for them that with faith, reverence, 
and the fear of God enter herein, let us pray to the Lord 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For our Very Most Reverend Metropolitan N., First Hierarch 
of the ... Church; for our lord the Most Reverend (Archbishop or Bishop N.); 
for the venerable priesthood, the deaconate in Christ, for all the clergy and 
people, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For this land, its authorities and armed forces, let us pray to the 
Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For the God-preserved Russian land and its Orthodox people 
both in the homeland and in the Diaspora, and for their salvation, let us pray to 
the Lord.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That He may deliver His people from enemies both visible and 
invisible, and confirm in us oneness of mind, brotherly love and piety, let us 
pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For this city (or this town, or this holy monastery), for every 
city and country, and the faithful that dwell therein, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For seasonable weather, abundance of the fruits of the earth, 
and peaceful times, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For travelers by sea, land and air; for the sick, the suffering, the 
imprisoned, and for their salvation, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That these waters may be sanctified by the power, effectual 
operation and descent of the Holy Spirit, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That there may descend upon these waters the cleansing 
operation of the super-substantial Trinity, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That He will endue them with the grace of redemption, the 
blessing of Jordan, the might, and operation, and descent of the Holy Spirit, let 
us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That Satan may speedily be crushed under our feet, and that 
every evil counsel directed against us may be set at naught, let us pray to the 
Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That the Lord our God will free us from every attack and 
temptation of the enemy, and make us worthy of the good things He hath 
promised, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That He will illumine us with the light of understanding and of 
piety, through the descent of the Holy Spirit, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Priest/Deacon: That the Lord God may send down the blessing of Jordan, and 
sanctify these waters, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That this water may be unto the bestowing of sanctification, 
unto the forgiveness of sins, unto the healing of soul and body, and unto every 
expedient service, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That this water may be a fountain welling forth unto life 
eternal, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That it may manifest itself effectual unto the averting of every 
machination of our foes, both visible and invisible, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For those who shall draw of it and take it unto the 
sanctification of their homes, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That it may be for the purification of the souls and bodies for 
all who, with faith, shall draw and partake of it, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That He will graciously enable us to perfect sanctification by 
participation in these waters, through the invisible manifestation of the Holy 
Spirit, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That the Lord God may hearken to the voice of the entreaty of 
us sinners, and have mercy upon us, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That we may be delivered from all tribulation, wrath, and 
necessity, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by 
Thy grace. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: Calling to remembrance our most holy, most pure, most 
blessed, glorious Lady Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary with all the saints, let 
us commit ourselves and one another and all our life unto Christ our God. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Choir: Lord, have mercy. 
While these petitions are being intoned, the Priest readeth this prayer quietly: 
 
O Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son, Who art in the bosom of the 
Father, the true God, Source of life and immortality, Light of Light, Who camest into 
the world to enlighten it! Enlighten our mind with Thy Holy Spirit, and accept us 
who offer unto Thee magnification and thanksgiving for Thy marvelous and mighty 
works, which are from all eternity; as, also, for Thy saving providence in these latter 
ages, in which Thou hast clothed Thyself in our frail and lowly substance, and 
condescended to the stature of a servant, Who yet art the King of all, and didst 
receive baptism in the Jordan at the hands of a servant: that Thou, O Sinless One, 
having sanctified the nature of water, mightest make for us a way which should be 
unto a new birth, through water and the Spirit, and mightest restore unto us our 
primal freedom. Celebrating the memory of that divine mystery, we entreat Thee, O 
Master Who lovest mankind, sprinkle us, Thine unworthy servants, according to Thy 
divine promise, with pure water, the gift of Thy loving-kindness, that the petition of 
us sinners over this water may be well-pleasing to Thy goodness; and may Thy 
blessing be given unto us and all Thy faithful people through it, unto the glory of Thy 
holy and adorable Name.  
Secretly: For unto Thee is due all glory, honor and worship, together with Thy 
Father who is from everlasting, and Thy most holy, and good and, life-giving 
Spirit, both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen 
When the Deacon hath completed the litany, the Priest beginneth this prayer aloud: 
Priest: Great art Thou, O Lord, and marvelous are Thy works; and there is no 
word which sufficeth to hymn Thy wonders. (Thrice.) 
The Priest Continues: For Thou, by Thy will, from nothingness hast brought all 
things into being; by Thy majesty Thou dost uphold all creation, and by Thy 
providence Thou dost direct the world. When Thou hadst framed the universe out of 
the four elements, Thou didst crown the cycle of the year with the four seasons. All 
the reason-endowed powers tremble. The Sun singeth Thy praises, and the Moon 
glorifieth Thee; the Stars, also, stand before Thy presence. The Light obeyeth Thee. 
The deeps shudder with awe before Thee; the water-springs do thy bidding. Thou 
hast spread out the heavens like a curtain. Thou hast establish the earth upon the 
waters. With sand hast Thou walled in the sea. Thou hadst shed abroad the air for 
breathing. The Angelic powers serve Thee. The Archangelic hosts adore Thee. The 
many-eyed Cherubim and the six-winged Seraphim, as they stand round about and do 
fly, veil their faces with awe before Thine unapproachable glory. For Thou, the God 
which cannot be circumscribed, who art from everlasting and ineffable, and didst 
come down upon earth, taking on the form of a servant and being made in the 
likeness of men. For Thou couldst not endure, O Master, because of Thy loving-

--- PAGE 16 ---
kindness of Thy mercy, to behold the children of men tormented by the devil; but 
thou didst come, and didst save us. We confess Thy grace, we proclaim Thy mercy, 
we conceal not Thy gracious deeds. Thou hast set at liberty the generations of our 
race, by Thy birth Thou hadst sanctified the Virgin’s womb. All creation singeth 
praises unto Thee, Who didst reveal Thyself; for Thou, our God, didst manifest 
thyself upon earth, and didst dwell among men. Thou didst hallow, also, the streams 
of Jordan, in that thou didst send down from heaven Thy Holy Spirit, and didst crush 
the heads of the serpents which lurked there. 
Then the Priest saith the following verse thrice,  
each time blessing the water with his hand: 
Priest: Wherefore do Thou, O King Who lovest mankind, come down now 
also through the descent of Thy Holy Spirit, and sanctify this water. (Thrice.) 
The Priest Continues: And impart unto it the grace of redemption, the blessing of 
Jordan. Make it a fountain of immortality, a gift of sanctification, the forgiveness of 
sins, the healing of infirmities, the destruction of the demons, unapproachable by 
hostile powers, filled with angelic might. And may it be unto all those who shall draw 
it, and shall partake of it unto the purification of their souls and bodies, unto the 
healing of their passions, unto the sanctification of their homes, and unto every 
expedient service. For Thou art our God, Who through water and the Spirit hast 
renewed our nature which had fallen into decay through sin. For Thou art our God, 
Who with water didst drown sin in the days of Noah. For Thou art our God, Who by 
the sea, through Moses, freed the Hebrew people from slavery to Pharaoh. For Thou 
art our God, Who smote the rock in the wilderness, so that waters gushed forth, and 
torrents welled forth, and Who satisfied Thy thirsty people. For Thou art our God, 
Who by water and fire, through Elijah, didst set Israel free from the errors of Baal. 
Priest: Do Thou Thyself, O Master, sanctify now also this water by Thy Holy 
Spirit. (Thrice.) 
Grant also unto all who shall be sprinkled therewith, and shall partake thereof, and 
shall anoint themselves therewith, sanctification, blessing, purification and bodily 
health. 
O Lord, save our civil authorities; have mercy upon the Most Holy Synod, and 
keep them in peace beneath Thy shelter. Subdue under them from every enemy and 
adversary; grant all their petitions which are unto salvation, and life eternal, that with 
the elements, and men, and Angels, and with all things visible and invisible, they may 
magnify Thy most holy Name, together with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, always 
now and ever, and unto the ages of ages.  
Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Peace be unto all. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Choir: And to thy spirit. 
Deacon: Bow your heads unto the Lord. 
Choir: To thee, O Lord. 
 
And the Priest, bowing his head, saith this prayer: 
Incline Thine ear, O Lord, and hear us, O Thou Who wast graciously pleased to be 
baptized in the Jordan and didst sanctify the waters. Bless us all, who by the bowing 
of our necks do outwardly signify our humility of mind; and vouchsafe that we may 
be filled with Thy sanctification, through our partaking of this water, and through 
sprinkling therewith. And may it be unto us, O Lord, for the health of souls and 
bodies. 
Exclamation: For Thou art the sanctification of our souls and bodies, and unto 
Thee we send up glory, thanksgiving and worship, together with Thy Father, 
Who is from everlasting, and Thy most holy, and good, and life-giving Spirit, 
both now and ever and unto the ages of ages. 
 
Choir: Amen. 
 
And straightway, blessing the water by making the sign of the Cross in it with 
the holy cross, the Priest plungeth it directly into the water, holding it with both 
hands, while this Troparion is chanted: 
Troparion of the Feast in Tone I: 
When Thou, wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest; * for the voice of the Father bare witness to Thee, * calling Thee His 
beloved Son. * And the Spirit in the form of a dove * confirmed the certainty of the 
word. * O Christ our God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory be 
to Thee. 
 
As the Choir chanteth this, the Priest signeth the water a second time with the 
Cross. And when they chant this again, the Priest signeth the water a third time. 
Then, taking some of the water in a bowl, the Priest turneth to face the west, 
holding the cross in his left hand, and in his right hand a sprinkler. Then the 
senior priest approacheth first, and kisseth the precious cross, and useth the 
sprinkler to sign his face with holy water. Then the rest of the clergy approach in 
order, and all the faithful. The Troparion, “When Thou wast baptized in the 
Jordan, O Lord ...,” is chanted many times, until all have been sanctified by 
sprinkling with the holy water.  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
When everyone hath been blessed, we sing this Sticheron in Tone VI: 
O ye faithful, let us hymn the magnitude of God’s benefactions toward us; * for 
having become man for the sake of our transgressions, * He Who alone is pure and 
incorrupt, * Who sanctifieth me and the waters, * and crusheth the heads of the 
serpents in the water, * is purified in the Jordan with our purification. * Wherefore, 
let us draw forth water with gladness, O brethren; * for the grace of the Spirit is 
invisibly imparted * to those who draw it forth with faith, ** by Christ God, the 
Savior of our souls.  
Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and for evermore. (Thrice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Note: This may be sung, or simply read. 
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my mouth. * In 
the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I sought the 
Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. * 
This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and will 
deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man that hopeth 
in Him.  
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear Him. * 
Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the Lord shall not 
be deprived of any good thing.  
Come ye children, hearken unto me; * I will teach you the fear of the Lord. * What 
man is there that desireth life, * who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, * and thy lips from speaking guile. * Turn away from 
evil, and do good; * seek peace, and pursue it.  
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, * and His ears are opened unto their 
supplication. * The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, * utterly to destroy 
the remembrance of them from the earth.  
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them out of all 
their tribulations. * The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart, * and He 
will save the humble of spirit. *  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver them out of 
them all. * The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be broken.  
The death of sinners is evil, * and they that hate the righteous shall do wrong. * 
The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, * and none of them will do wrong 
that hope in Him.  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
AT GREAT COMPLINE 
At the tenth hour of the night (i.e., 4 o’clock in the morning), the great bell is 
rung to announce the service, whereupon all the bells are rung. The priest and 
deacon, having put on their sacerdotal vestments, begin the service as is done 
for all the feasts of the Lord.  
Deacon: Bless, master. Priest: Blessed is our God ...,  
And as the priest censeth, we begin reading Great Compline from the beginning: 
Glory to Thee, our God. glory to Thee! O heavenly King ..., Trisagion, and the 
rest. We chant “God is with us! ...” in hymnody. In place of the usual Troparia. 
“Enlighten mine eyes ...,” we chant the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee!  
Instead of “Have mercy on us. O Lord ...,” we chant the Kontakion of the feast, 
in Tone IV:  
Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, * and Thy light, O Lord, hath been 
signed upon us * who with understanding hymn Thee. * Thou hast come, Thou hast 
appeared, ** the Light unapproachable.  
After “Glory to God in the highest ...,” the Litiya is performed as usual, at which 
we chant these Stichera, the composition of Cosmas the monk:  
In Tone IV: 
He that hath adorned Himself with light as it were with a garment hath deigned 
for our sake to become like as we are; and today He is covered with the streams of 
the Jordan, though He hath no need to be purified by them, but that, through the 
cleansing He receiveth, He might Himself bestow regeneration upon us. Oh, the 
wonder! Without fire Christ God, the Savior of our souls, casteth anew, and without 
shattering He hath fashioned, and He saveth those who are enlightened in Him.  
Beholding Thee, Who in the Spirit and in fire doth purge away the sin of the 
world, coming to Him, the Baptist cried out in awe and trembling, saying: “I dare not 
touch Thy most pure head! Do Thou sanctify me by Thy divine epiphany, O Master 
Who alone lovest mankind!  
Come ye, let us emulate the wise virgins! Come ye, let us greet the Master Who 
hath appeared unto us! For He hath come to John like a Bridegroom. The Jordan, 
seeing Thee, was afraid and halted. And John cried out: “I dare not touch the head of 
the Immortal One!” The Spirit descended in the form of a dove, to sanctify the water. 
And a voice was heard from heaven, saying: “This is my Son Who hath come into the 
world to save the human race!” O Lord, glory be to Thee!  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Christ is baptized. He cometh up out of the waters and leadeth the world up with 
Himself, and He beholdeth the heavens opening, which Adam closed to himself and 
to those with him. And the Spirit beareth witness to His divinity, for He maketh haste 
to come to His like. And a voice is heard from heaven; for the Savior of our souls is 
borne witness to from thence.  
The hand of the Baptist trembled when it touched Thy most pure head. the River 
Jordan turned back, not daring to minister unto Thee; for if it was in awe of Joshua 
son of Nun, how could it not have been stricken with awe by its own Creator? O our 
Savior Who alone lovest mankind, Thou hast fulfilled all Thy dispensation, that Thou 
mayest save the world by Thine epiphany.  
Glory ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII:  
Desiring to fulfill that which Thou hast established from before time, O Lord, 
Thou didst accept ministers of Thy mystery from among all creatures: Gabriel from 
among the angels, the Virgin from among men, the star from among the heavens, and 
the Jordan from among the waters, wherein Thou didst destroy the iniquity of the 
world. O our Savior, glory be to Thee!  
Both now ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII: 
Today creation is enlightened! Today all things are glad, those of heaven and those 
on earth! Angels and men mingle together! For where the King arriveth, there doth 
order prevail. Wherefore, let us all hasten to the Jordan and see how John baptizeth 
the sinless head which no man hath fashioned. And, chanting the cry of the angel, let 
us exclaim together: The grace of God hath appeared, saving all mankind, illumining 
and granting mercy unto the faithful!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone II:  
Seeing Thee coming to him at the River Jordan, John said: “O Christ God, 
wherefore hast Thou come to Thy servant? O Lord, since Thou art free of 
defilement, in whose name shall I baptize Thee? The Father? But Thou bearest Him 
within Thee. The Son? But Thou Thyself art Him incarnate. The Holy Spirit? Thou 
knowest how to give Him to the mouths of the faithful. O God Who hast made 
Thyself manifest, have mercy upon us!”  
Verse: The sea beheld and fled, * Jordan turned back.  
The waters saw Thee, O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid; for the 
cherubim are unable to gaze upon Thy glory, and the seraphim cannot bear to look 
upon Thee; yet, standing before Thee in fear, the cherubim bear Thee up and the 
seraphim glorify Thy power. With them, O Compassionate One, we declare Thy 
praise, saying: O God Who hast revealed Thyself, have mercy upon us!  
Verse: What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? * And thou Jordan, that thou 
didst turn back?  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Today the Creator of heaven and earth approacheth the Jordan in the flesh; the 
Sinless One asketh baptism, that He may cleanse the world of the delusion of the 
enemy. And the Master of all is baptized by a servant, and through water granteth 
cleansing unto the human race. To Him let us cry aloud: O our God Who hast 
appeared, glory be to Thee!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI: 
Beholding the Sun Who shone forth from the Virgin asking for baptism in the 
Jordan, the radiant luminary who shone forth from the barren woman cried out to 
Him with fear and joy: “Do Thou sanctify me by Thy divine epiphany, O Master!”  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant...,” and Trisagion through Our Father ... 
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
When Thou, wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest; * for the voice of the Father bare witness to Thee, * calling Thee His 
beloved Son. * And the Spirit in the form of a dove * confirmed the certainty of the 
word. * O Christ our God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory be 
to Thee. (Thrice)  
And the Blessing of the Loaves, as usual. Then, “Blessed be the name of the Lord 
from henceforth and forevermore!” (Thrice). And Psalm 33:  
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my mouth. * In 
the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I sought the 
Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. * 
This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and will 
deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man that hopeth 
in Him.  
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear Him. * 
Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the Lord shall not 
be deprived of any good thing.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
When Thou, wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest; * for the voice of the Father bare witness to Thee, * calling Thee His 
beloved Son. * And the Spirit in the form of a dove * confirmed the certainty of the 
word. * O Christ our God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory be 
to Thee. (Thrice)  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
When Thou didst appear in the Jordan and wast baptized by the forerunner, O 
Christ our Savior, Thou wast borne witness to as the beloved Son; wherefore, Thou 
wast revealed as co-beginningless with the Father, and the Holy Spirit descended 
upon Thee. And, enlightened by Him, we cry aloud: Glory to God in Trinity!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Another Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Thou didst sanctify the streams of the Jordan and didst crush the might of sin, O 
Christ our God; Thou didst bow Thy head beneath the hand of the forerunner and 
hast saved the human race from deception. Wherefore, we entreat Thee: Save Thou 
our souls!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:  
Thou hast wrapped Thyself in the streams of the Jordan, O Thou Who dost most 
gloriously clothe Thyself in light, and Thou hast restored therein the nature of Adam, 
which had been corrupted by evil disobedience, O Word of God. Wherefore, we all 
praise and glorify Thy holy Epiphany.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Another Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Wherefore didst thou marvel, O River Jordan, seeing the Invisible One naked? “I 
beheld and trembled,” it said, “for how could I have desired not to be filled with awe 
of Him and withdraw?” The angels were filled with fear, beholding Him; heaven was 
affrighted, and the earth quaked; the sea, and all things visible and invisible, were 
troubled. Christ appeared in the Jordan, to sanctify the waters.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify Thee, O Christ Bestower of life, 
Who for our sake wast baptized by John in the flesh, in the waters of the 
Jordan.  
Selected Psalm verses:  
A: God be gracious unto us and bless us, and shine the light of Thy countenance 
upon us, and have mercy upon us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  

--- PAGE 23 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Come, O ye faithful, let us behold where Christ was baptized, that after Him we 
may follow to the River Jordan to the voice of one crying in the wilderness, and there 
may see the Creator of Adam touched by the hand of His servant, in His ineffable 
tender compassion; and may cry aloud to Him: Thou hast come and revealed Thyself, 
to sanctify the waters in the Jordan!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: The sea beheld and fled, * Jordan turned back.  
Verse: What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? and thou Jordan, that thou 
didst turn back?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, § 2 (MK. 1: 9-11)  
At that time, Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of John in 
Jordan. And straightway coming up out of the water, He saw the heavens opened, 
and the Spirit like a dove descending upon Him: and there came a voice from heaven, 
saying: “Thou art My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased.”  
After Psalm 50:  
Glory ..., Let all things rejoice today, for Christ hath been baptized in the Jordan!  
Both now ..., Let all things rejoice today, for Christ hath been baptized in the 
Jordan!  
And after “Have mercy on us, O God, have mercy on us ...,”  
We chant this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
God the Word appeared in the flesh unto the race of mankind and stood forth to 
be baptized in the Jordan. And the forerunner said to Him: “How can I stretch forth 
my hand and touch the head of Thee Who holdest all things? Even though Thou art 
Mary’s Child, yet do I know Thee to be the pre-eternal God, Who art hymned by the 
seraphim and goest about on the earth. A servant knoweth not how to baptize his 
master. O unapproachable Lord, glory be to Thee!”  
Two canons, the Irmoi of both of which are chanted twice, the Troparia repeated to 
make up 12, after which the first choir chanteth the Irmos of Canon I, and the 
second choir chanteth the Irmos of Canon II.  
Canon I of the Feast, the acrostic whereof is: “Baptism is the cleansing of mortals’ 
sins”, the composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone II:  

--- PAGE 24 ---
ODE I  
Irmos: The Lord mighty in battle * uncovered the foundation of the deep * 
and led His servants on dry ground; * but He covered their adversaries with 
the waters, * for He hath been glorified. 
The Lord, the King of the ages, restoreth corrupted Adam with the streams of the 
Jordan and crusheth the heads of the serpents who make their nest therein, for He 
hath been glorified.  
The Lord Who became incarnate of the Virgin, clothing material flesh in the 
immaterial fire of the Godhead, doth wrap Himself in the water of the Jordan, for He 
hath been glorified.  
He Who washeth away the defilement of men, cleanseth Himself for them in the 
Jordan desiring to make Himself like unto them yet remaining as He was before, the 
Lord Who enlighteneth those in darkness, for He hath been glorified.  
Canon II of the Feast, in Tone II, the composition of St. John of Damascus:  
Irmos: Israel traversed the stormy depths of the sea, * which had straightway 
become as dry land; * but the dark waters engulfed the chief captains of Egypt 
* in a watery grave, * by the mighty power of the right hand of the Master. 
When the Light of the radiant Dawn shone forth upon mortal mankind, coming 
forth from the wilderness to the waters of the Jordan Thou O King of the Sun, didst 
bow Thy neck before him that Thou mightest ransom our forefather from the 
minions of darkness and cleanse creation of all defilement.  
O beginningless Word, Thou hast buried mankind with Thyself in the stream, and 
Thou dost lead him forth new again, that had been corrupted by deception; and the 
mighty voice of the Father testifieth to Thee ineffably, saying: This is My beloved 
Son, the Child Who is equal to Me by nature.  
ODE III  
Canon I of the Feast  
Irmos: The Lord who granteth strength unto our kings, * and exalteth the horn 
of His anointed, * is born of a Virgin and cometh unto baptism. * Therefore 
let us, the faithful, cry aloud: * None is as holy as our God. 
O Church of Christ, who of old wast barren and grievously childless, be glad 
today; for by water and the Spirit children have been born unto thee, who cry out 
with faith: There is none as holy as our God!  
In the wilderness the forerunner crieth out with aloud voice: “Prepare ye the ways 
of Christ and make straight the paths of our God, crying out with faith: There is none 
as holy as our God!”  
 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Canon II of the Feast  
Irmos: From the ancient snares have we all been set loose, * and the teeth of 
the lions have been smashed asunder. * Let us then rejoice with great joy * 
and open wide our mouths, * weaving with words a sweet hymn to the Word, * 
Who delighteth in bestowing gifts upon us. 
He who once assumed the form of a malignant serpent and planted death in the 
garden of creation, is now cast into darkness by Christ’s coming in the flesh; and by 
assailing the Master, the Dawn which hath shone forth upon us, he hath crushed his 
own hateful head.  
The Master draweth to Himself the divinely fashioned nature of mankind, which 
had been overcome by the tyranny of greed; and He restoreth mortals, granting them 
a new birth, and accomplishing thereby a mighty work; for He is come to cleanse our 
nature.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
When Thou didst illumine all by Thine epiphany, the salty sea of unbelief fled, and 
the Jordan, which flowed down, turned back, bearing us up to the heavens. Yet by the 
height of Thy divine commandments, O Christ God, and through the supplications 
of the Theotokos, have mercy upon us.  
ODE IV  
Canon I of the Feast  
Irmos: I heard, O Lord, Thy voice, * which Thou didst call the voice of one 
crying in the wilderness, * for Thou didst thunder over the multitude of waters, 
* bearing witness to Thy Son. * And, wholly filled with the Spirit which had 
descended, * He cried aloud: * Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of 
God! 
“Who hath ever seen the sun cleansed which is most bright by nature?” the herald 
crieth out. “Am I then to wash with water Thee, the Effulgence of glory, the Image of 
the ever-existent Father? Am I, who am grass, to touch Thy divinity? For Thou art 
Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”  
“When he happened upon Thee, Moses showed the divine reverence he felt, for 
he understood that it was Thee Who spake out of the bush; and he straightway 
averted his face. How, then, can I gaze directly at Thee? How can I touch Thee with 
my hand? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”  
“Wisely doing what is spiritual, and being honored with speech, yet am I in awe 
before inanimate things. For if I baptize Thee, the mountain which smoked with fire, 
the sea which parted in twain and this Jordan which turned back will be mine 
accusers. For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”  
 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Canon II of the Feast  
Irmos: Purified by the fire of a mystical vision, * the prophet praiseth the 
restoration of mankind; * and, filled with the inspiration of the Spirit, * he 
lifteth up his voice to reveal the incarnation of the ineffable Word, * by Whom 
the dominion of the mighty hath been abolished.  
O most radiant Word, Who hast been sent forth by the Father, Thou comest to 
repel utterly the night of evil darkness and to uproot the sins of men, and by Thy 
baptism to draw forth children of light from the streams of the Jordan, O Good One.  
When he saw in very truth the Word Who had been foretold, the herald bore 
witness of Him to creation, and cried, plainly saying, This is He Who was before me, 
yet cometh after. Though like us in form, He hath shone forth with divine power to 
take away our hateful sin!  
That He might bring His own back to the life-giving pastures of paradise, the 
Word of God falleth upon the lairs of the dragons, and destroying their manifold 
snares, he assaileth him who hath bruised all mankind, and, imprisoning him, 
delivereth creation.  
ODE V 
 Canon of the Feast 
Irmos: Jesus, the Prince of Life, * hath come to set loose from condemnation * 
Adam the first-formed man; * and though as God He needeth no cleansing, * 
yet for the sake of fallen man He is cleansed in the Jordan. * In its streams He 
slew the enmity * and bestoweth the peace that passeth all understanding. 
When countless people went down to be baptized of John, Thou Thyself didst 
stand in their midst. And he announced to those present: “Who hath told you, O 
rebellious ones, to avoid the impending wrath? Bring forth fruits worthy of Christ; for 
He standeth before you, granting peace.”  
Standing in their midst, the Creator and Fashioner alone trieth the hearts of all; 
and taking his winnowing-fan in His hand, He doth all-wisely separate the harvest of 
the whole world, letting the chaff fall away, granting eternal life to the fruitful.  
Canon II of the Feast 
Irmos: Washed clean of the poison of the dark and defiled enemy * by the 
cleansing of the Spirit, * we have set out upon a new path * which leadeth to 
unapproachable joy, * to which only they whom God hath reconciled with 
himself * can draw near. 
The Creator, beholding him whom He had formed of dust bound by inescapable 
bonds in the darkness of sin, raised him up and laid him on His shoulders; and now, 
in the midst of abundant waters, He washeth him clean from the ancient shame of 
Adam’s sinful inclination.  
 

--- PAGE 27 ---
With piety let us eagerly make haste to the most pure wellsprings of the stream of 
salvation, and, gazing upon the Word Who hath come forth from the incorrupt 
Virgin, let us drink the pure water which quencheth our holy thirst, gently healing the 
infirmity of the world.  
ODE VI 
 Canon I of the Feast 
Irmos: The Voice of the Word, the Candlestick of the Light, * the Morning 
Star and Forerunner of the Sun, * cried in the wilderness to all the peoples: * 
‘Repent and be cleansed beforehand. * For lo, Christ is at hand, * Who 
delivereth the world from corruption. 
Christ, Who was begotten incorruptibly of God the Father, hath become incarnate 
of the Virgin without defilement. The forerunner teacheth that it is not possible to 
loose the sandals, the bond between the Word and us, of Him Who delivereth 
mortals from deception.  
Christ shall baptize His enemies, who do not acknowledge Him as God, with the 
uttermost fire; but He shall restore with the water of grace those who accept His 
divinity, delivering them from their transgressions.  
Canon II of the Feast 
Irmos: With a supremely blessed voice * the Father revealed His Beloved One, 
* Whom He had begotten from the womb. * Verily, saith He, this is the 
splendid Son, * of the same nature as Myself, * and He hath come forth from 
the human race. * He is My living Word, * Who by My providence hath 
become a man.  
The prophet, mysteriously swallowed up for the space of three nights in the belly 
of the sea monster, came forth again, making manifest beforehand to all our 
regeneration in the last times, and our deliverance from the dragon that slayeth 
mankind.  
When the shining vaults of heaven were opened, he who knew the Scriptures 
beheld the Spirit, Who proceedeth from the Father and abideth in the most pure 
Word, descending in ineffable manner in the form of a dove; and he commanded the 
multitudes to hasten to the Master.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, * and Thy light, O Lord, hath been 
signed upon us * who with understanding hymn Thee. * Thou hast come, Thou hast 
appeared, * the Light unapproachable.  
Ikos: Upon Galilee of the nations, upon the land of Zebulon and the land of 
Naphthali, as the prophet said, a great Light hath shone, even Christ. A radiant 
darkness hath dawned upon those who sat in darkness, shining forth from 

--- PAGE 28 ---
Bethlehem. The Lord born of Mary, the Sun of righteousness, shineth forth with 
splendor upon the whole world. Come, therefore, all ye naked children of Adam, and 
let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warmed; for He Who covereth the 
naked and enlighteneth those in darkness, hath come. He hath appeared, the Light 
unapproachable!  
ODE VII 
 Canon I of the Feast 
Irmos: The breath of the wind heavy with dew * and the descent of the angel 
of God * preserved the Holy Children from all harm, * as they walked in the 
fiery furnace. * Refreshed with dew in the flames, * they sang in thanksgiving: 
* ‘Blessed and supremely praised art Thou, * O Lord God of our fathers.’ 
As in heaven, with trembling and wonder the angelic hosts stood before Thee in 
the Jordan, gazing at the extent of God’s condescension; for the God of our fathers, 
Who holdeth the firmament of the waters above, stood, incarnate as a man, in the 
waters.  
The cloud and the sea of old prefigured the wonder of divine baptism, for the 
ancient people of the law were baptized therein when they fled Egypt. The sea was an 
image of the water, and the cloud was an image of the Spirit, whereby we are made 
perfect. And we cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever!  
O all ye faithful, in Him have we received perfection; and, theologizing continually 
with the angels let us glorify the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. For, lo! the 
consubstantial Trinity of Hypostases is the One God. To Him do we chant: Blessed 
art Thou, O Lord God, forever!  
Canon II of the Feast 
Irmos: He Who burnt the heads of the dragons in the waters, * cooled the lofty 
flame * that encircled the pious youths in the furnace; * He it is that doth wash 
away all the unbearable gloom of sin * by the dew of the Spirit.  
The fierce Assyrian flame that prefigured Thee hast Thou quenched, transforming 
it into dew. And now, O Christ, Thou hast clothed Thyself in water as in flame, and 
Thou burnest up the harmful malice hidden in its depths, which calleth men to fall 
with stumbling step.  
When the Jordan was parted of old, the people of Israel passed clean over it on dry 
ground, prefiguring Thee, O most powerful Lord, Who now bearest up creation in 
the waters without touching it, leading it to a better and imperishable path.  
We know that in the beginning Thou didst, in Thy mercy, bring the waters of the 
flood upon the earth to destroy every living creature that Thou hadst made. And now, 
O Christ, Who workest wonders strange and most great, Thou hast drowned sin in 
the waters of Thy compassion, unto the salvation of mortal men.  

--- PAGE 29 ---
ODE VIII  
Canon I of the Feast 
Irmos: The Babylonian furnace, as it poured forth dew, * foreshadowed a 
marvelous mystery: * how the Jordan should receive in its streams the 
immaterial fire, * and should encompass the Creator, * when He was baptized 
in the flesh. * Him do ye peoples bless and supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
“Put aside all fear,” the Redeemer said to the forerunner; “Obey Me, in that I am 
good, and touch Me, for this have I become by nature. Submit to My commands and 
baptize Me Who am come down.” Him do the people bless and supremely exalt 
throughout all ages.  
When the Baptist heard the words of the Master, he stretched forth his hand with 
trembling, and as he touched the head of his Creator he cried out to Him Who was 
being baptized: “Sanctify me, for Thou art my God, Whom the people bless and 
supremely exalt throughout all ages!” 
The Trinity was revealed in the Jordan, for the Father, the all-divine Essence 
Himself, announced: “This One Who is baptized is my beloved Son!” And the Spirit 
came upon Him Who was like unto Him, Whom the people bless and supremely exalt 
throughout all ages.  
Canon II of the Feast 
Irmos: Creation hath found itself set free, * and those who previously sat in 
darkness are now sons of light; * alone the prince of darkness moaneth, * 
wherefore let His inheritance * which was formerly in misery * now bless Him 
Who hath accomplished this. 
The three godly children, sprinkled with dew in the midst of the fire, plainly 
prefigured how the transcendent Nature, which is resplendent with most radiant rays 
of threefold holiness, doth, through human nature, mercifully consume all pernicious 
falsehood with the fire of dew.  
Let the whole of earthly creation be clothed in white, for this day it is raised up 
from its fall to heaven; and, washed and most splendidly cleansed in the flowing 
waters by the Word, by Whom all things are preserved, it hath escaped its former 
sins.  
At ODE IX the brethren again light the candles. We do not chant the Magnificat, but 
sing instead the refrains of the feast: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable than the armies on high.  
 

--- PAGE 30 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: Every tongue is at a loss to praise thee as is due: * even a spirit from 
the world above is filled with dizziness, * when it seeketh to sing thy praises, 
O Theotokos. * But since thou art good, accept our faith: * Thou knowest well 
our love inspired by God, * for thou art the Protector of Christians and we 
magnify thee. 
Then the second choir chanteth the same refrain and Irmos. 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, Him Who asketh baptism of the forerunner.  
O David, come thou in spirit to the enlightened and chant, saying: “Approach 
God now with faith and be illumined! Lowly Adam cried out in his fall, and the Lord 
heard him, and, coming to the streams of the Jordan, He restored the corrupted one.”  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, Him Who came to be baptized in the Jordan.  
O David, come thou in spirit to the enlightened and chant, saying: “Approach 
God now with faith and be illumined! Lowly Adam cried out in his fall, and the Lord 
heard him, and, coming to the streams of the Jordan, He restored the corrupted one.”  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, Him to Whom the Father’s voice bore witness.  
Isaiah saith: “Change your ways and cleanse yourselves; leave off your wickedness 
in the face of the Lord! Ye who thirst, go to the living Water; for Christ sprinkleth 
with water those who have recourse to Him with faith, renewing them, and He 
baptizeth with the Spirit unto life which ageth not.”  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the One of the Trinity Who bowed His head and 
received baptism.  
Isaiah saith: “Change your ways and cleanse yourselves; leave off your wickedness 
in the face of the Lord! Ye who thirst, go to the living Water; for Christ sprinkleth 
with water those who have recourse to Him with faith, renewing them, and He 
baptizeth with the Spirit unto life which ageth not.”  
Refrain: O prophet, come unto Me! Stretch forth thy hand, and baptize Me!  
By grace and the seal are we preserved, O ye faithful; for as of old the blood-
smeared lintels permitted the Hebrews to escape the destroyer, so shall the laver of 
regeneration be for us a divine exodus. And henceforth we shall see the never-waning 
light of the Trinity.  
Refrain: O prophet, suffer it to be so now, and baptize Me Who so desire; for I 
have come to fulfill all righteousness.  
By grace and the seal are we preserved, O ye faithful; for as of old the blood-
smeared lintels permitted the Hebrews to escape the destroyer, so shall the laver of 
regeneration be for us a divine exodus. And henceforth we shall see the never-waning 
light of the Trinity.  
Then the first choir chanteth the refrain of Canon II: 

--- PAGE 31 ---
Refrain: Today the Master boweth His head beneath the hand of the forerunner.  
Irmos: The wonders of thy birthgiving pass all understanding, * O all-pure 
Bride, blessed Mother! * Through thee we have received the most perfect 
salvation, * wherefore we praise our Benefactor as is meet and right, * bearing 
a hymn of thanksgiving unto Him as a gift. 
And the second choir likewise chanteth the refrain and the Irmos, whereupon the 
remaining refrains are alternated with the Troparia, as indicated. 
Refrain: Today John doth baptize the Master in the streams of the Jordan.  
That which was revealed to Moses in the bush we see here fulfilled in wondrous 
manner; for as it bore fire, yet was not consumed, so hath the Virgin been preserved, 
who gaveth birth unto the Benefactor Who bringeth us light, and the streams of the 
Jordan suffered no harm when they received Him.  
Refrain: Today the Master burieth the sin of man in the waters.  
That which was revealed to Moses in the bush we see here fulfilled in wondrous 
manner; for as it bore fire, yet was not consumed, so hath the Virgin been preserved, 
who gaveth birth unto the Benefactor Who bringeth us light, and the streams of the 
Jordan suffered no harm when they received Him.  
Refrain: Today the Master is borne witness to from on high as the beloved Son.  
O beginningless King, through the communion of the Spirit dost Thou anoint and 
make perfect the nature of mankind, and cleansing it in the pure streams of baptism, 
putting the arrogant might of darkness to shame, Thou now dost raise it up to eternal 
life.  
Refrain: Today the Master hath come to sanctify the nature of water.  
O beginningless King, through the communion of the Spirit dost Thou anoint and 
make perfect the nature of mankind, and cleansing it in the pure streams of baptism, 
putting the arrogant might of darkness to shame, Thou now dost raise it up to eternal 
life.  
Refrain: Today the Master receiveth baptism at the hand of the forerunner.  
O beginningless King, through the communion of the Spirit dost Thou anoint and 
make perfect the nature of mankind, and cleansing it in the pure streams of baptism, 
putting the arrogant might of darkness to shame, Thou now dost raise it up to eternal 
life.  
Then both choirs, going down together, chant the first refrain of the feast and the 
Irmos of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable than the armies on high.  
 
 

--- PAGE 32 ---
Katavasia I: Every tongue is at a loss to praise thee as is due: * even a spirit 
from the world above is filled with dizziness, * when it seeketh to sing thy 
praises, O Theotokos. * But since thou art good, accept our faith: * Thou 
knowest well our love inspired by God, * for thou art the Protector of 
Christians and we magnify thee. 
Followed by the refrain and Irmos of Canon II: 
Refrain: Today the Master boweth His head beneath the hand of the 
forerunner.  
Katavasia II: The wonders of thy birthgiving pass all understanding, * O most 
pure Bride, blessed Mother! * Through thee we have received the most perfect 
salvation, * wherefore we praise our Benefactor as is meet and right, * bearing 
a hymn of thanksgiving unto Him as a gift. 
And all make a prostration. 
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us ...”: 
The Savior appeared, grace and truth, in the streams of the Jordan, and He 
illumined those sleeping in darkness and shadow, for He, the immutable Light, hath 
come and appeared. (Thrice)  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, the composition of Patriarch Germanus, in Tone I: 
Christ our Savior, the Light of Light, hath shone forth upon the world, 
manifesting Himself as God. Let us worship Him, O ye people!  
How can we who are servants honor the Master as is meet? For He hath restored 
us all in the waters.  
Baptized in the Jordan, touched by Thy servant’s hand, O our Savior, Thou didst 
sanctify the waters, healing the sufferings of the world. Great is the mystery of Thine 
epiphany! O Lord Who lovest mankind, glory be to Thee!  
The true Light hath appeared granting enlightenment to all. Christ is baptized with 
us, Who is above all in purity. He draweth sanctification into the water and becometh 
the cleansing of our souls, which is at once earthly and transcendeth the heavens. 
Salvation is accomplished through the laver, and the Spirit cometh through water. 
Through immersion is our ascent to God made. Wondrous are Thy works, O Lord! 
Glory be to Thee!  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VI: 
Thou didst clothe Thyself in the waters of the Jordan, O Savior Who art clothed in 
light as with a garment; and Thou Who hast measured heaven by Thy span didst bow 
Thy head before the forerunner, that Thou mightest turn the world away from 
falsehood and save it, in that Thou lovest mankind.  
 

--- PAGE 33 ---
Both now ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone II: 
Today Christ hath come to be baptized in the Jordan! Today John toucheth the 
head of the Master! The hosts of heaven were in awe, beholding this most glorious 
mystery; the sea saw and fled, the Jordan, seeing it, turned back. But we, illumined, 
cry out: Glory to God Who hath appeared, was seen on earth and hath illumined the 
world!  
Great Doxology. Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
When Thou, wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest; * for the voice of the Father bare witness to Thee, * calling Thee His 
beloved Son. * And the Spirit in the form of a dove * confirmed the certainty of the 
word. * O Christ our God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory be 
to Thee.  
Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour. 

--- PAGE 34 ---
AT LITURGY 
ANTIPHON I 
Verse: When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from among a barbarous 
people.  
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us!  
Verse: Judea became His sanctuary, Israel His dominion.  
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us!  
Verse: The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back.  
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us!  
Verse: What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou Jordan, that thou didst 
turn back?  
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us!  
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us!  
 
ANTIPHON II 
Verse: I am filled with love, for the Lord will hear the voice of my supplication.  
Refrain: O Son of God Who wast baptized in the Jordan, save us who chant 
unto Thee: Alleluia!  
Verse: For He hath inclined His ear unto me, and in my days will I call upon Him.  
Refrain: O Son of God Who wast baptized in the Jordan, save us who chant 
unto Thee: Alleluia!  
Verse: The pangs of death have encompassed me, the perils of Hades have found me.  
Refrain: O Son of God Who wast baptized in the Jordan, save us who chant 
unto Thee: Alleluia!  
Verse: Merciful is the Lord and righteous, and our God hath mercy.  
Refrain: O Son of God Who wast baptized in the Jordan, save us who chant 
unto Thee: Alleluia!  
Glory..., Both now ..., Amen. 
O only-begotten Son and Word of God, Who art immortal, yet didst deign for our 
salvation to be incarnate of the Holy Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, and without 
change didst become a man, and was crucified, O Christ God, trampling down death 
by death. Thou Who art one of the Holy Trinity, glorified with the Father and the 
Holy Spirit, save us. 
 
 

--- PAGE 35 ---
ANTIPHON III 
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good, for His mercy endureth 
forever.  
When Thou, wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest; * for the voice of the Father bare witness to Thee, * calling Thee His 
beloved Son. * And the Spirit in the form of a dove * confirmed the certainty of the 
word. * O Christ our God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory be 
to Thee.  
Verse: Let the house of Israel now say that He is good, for His mercy endureth 
forever.  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord ... 
Verse: Let the house of Aaron now say that He is good, for His mercy endureth 
forever.  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord ... 
Verse: Let all that fear the Lord now say that He is good, for His mercy 
endureth forever.  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord ... 
Introit: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. We have blessed you 
out of the house of the Lord.  
When Thou, wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest; * for the voice of the Father bare witness to Thee, * calling Thee His 
beloved Son. * And the Spirit in the form of a dove * confirmed the certainty of the 
word. * O Christ our God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory be 
to Thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, * and Thy light, O Lord, hath been 
signed upon us * who with understanding hymn Thee. * Thou hast come, Thou hast 
appeared, the Light unapproachable.  
Instead of the Trisagion: As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on 
Christ. Alleluia. (Thrice) 
Glory..., Both now ..., Amen. Have put on Christ. Alleluia. 
As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Alleluia. 
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. * 
God is the Lord and hath appeared unto us.  
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good, for His mercy endureth 
forever.  

--- PAGE 36 ---
EPISTLE TO TITUS, § 302 (TIT. 2:11-14; 3: 4-7)  
Titus my child: The grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, 
teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, 
righteously, and godly, in this present age, looking for that blessed hope, and the 
glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior, Jesus Christ, Who gave Himself 
for us, that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a people of 
His own, zealous of good works. But after the kindness and love of God, our Savior, 
toward mankind appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but 
according to His mercy He saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of 
the Holy Spirit, which He shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ, our Savior, 
that, being justified by His grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of 
eternal life.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Bring unto the Lord, ye sons of God, bring unto the Lord 
the sons of rams, bring unto the Lord glory and honour. 
Verse: The voice of the Lord is upon the waters, the God of glory hath thundered, 
the Lord is upon the many waters.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 6 (MT. 3: 13-17) 
At that time came Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him. 
But John forbade Him, saying: “I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest 
Thou to me?” And Jesus answering said unto him: “Suffer it to be so now: for thus it 
becometh us to fulfill all righteousness.” Then he suffered Him. And Jesus, when He 
was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and, lo! the heavens were opened 
unto Him, and He saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon 
Him: and lo! a voice from heaven, saying: “This is My beloved Son, in Whom I am 
well pleased.”  
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Refrain and Irmos of ODE IX: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable than the armies on high.  
Irmos: Every tongue is at a loss to praise thee as is due: * even a spirit from 
the world above is filled with dizziness, * when it seeketh to sing thy praises, 
O Theotokos. * But since thou art good, accept our faith: * Thou knowest well 
our love inspired by God, * for thou art the Protector of Christians and we 
magnify thee. 
Communion Verse: The grace of God that bringeth all men to salvation hath 
appeared. 
 At the festal meal monastics eat fish, cheese and eggs, and drink wine, and layfolk eat 
meat, even if the feast fall on a Wednesday or a Friday.  
