--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS PHILIP, 
METROPOLITAN OF MOSCOW & ALL RUSSIA, THE NEW CONFESSOR  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Having made thine abode in the mansions of heaven, * O holy hierarch Philip, * 
standing with the angels before the throne of Christ, * as a true hierarch and athlete, * 
pray that we be granted forgiveness of transgressions ** and peace and great mercy 
for our souls. (Twice)  
Meekly entreating the tsar and boldly teaching him * to maintain his kingdom 
undivided, O holy hierarch Philip, * thou didst clear sins away from the furrows of 
thy soul * and plant the word of God therein like seeds, * which thou producest also 
for us, ** unto the salvation of our souls.  
Thou wast the dwelling-place of spiritual virtues, * having shown thyself to be a 
holy hierarch and true confessor; * for within thee, as in an honored temple, * did 
Christ make His abode. * Pray thou, O father, that we all be granted everlasting 
salvation ** and great mercy for our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Assembling today, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, with songs of praise let 
us hymn the adornment of hierarchs, the ornament of the fathers, the great 
intercessor for the Russian land, saying: Rejoice, O holy hierarch Philip, steadfast 
mind, hallowed by grace and truth, who hast thus become the receptacle of the most 
holy Spirit! And now, standing with the holy hierarchs before the throne of Christ, 
pray thou on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine who hast budded forth for us the Fruit of life. 
We entreat thee: Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that our souls find mercy.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Thou hast been shown to be * a habitation of the Holy Spirit, * O holy hierarch, * 
having within thee the Word of wisdom. ** O blessed Philip, entreat Christ God on 
our behalf.  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of my heart shall be 
of understanding.  
With hymns let us praise * the star of Russia, * for he illumineth with beams of 
light * all who are in the darkness of ignorance ** shining upon them the light of 
divine knowledge.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, * and his tongue 
shall speak of judgment.  
Thou wast the dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit, * full of the grace * of divine 
teachings, * whereby thou dost water the world, ** O most wise Philip.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Rejoice, O Theotokos Mary, * thou indestructible temple * and surpassing holy 
one; * as the prophet crieth out: Holy is thy temple, ** wondrous in righteousness!  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O successor of the primates of Russia, pillar of orthodoxy, * champion of the 
truth, new confessor, holy hierarch Philip, * thou didst lay down thy life for thy flock. 
* Wherefore, as thou hast boldness before Christ, pray thou for this city, ** and the 
people who honor thy holy memory as is meet.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel: “O Lord, even though Thou didst stand before the tribunal ...”:  
O Lord, * even though thou didst stand before John * as a man, in the Jordan, * 
yet, seated with the Father, * Thou didst not depart from Thy throne. * And, baptized 
for our sake, * Thou didst free the world * from bondage to the alien one, ** in that 
Thou art compassionate and lovest mankind.  
O Lord, * even though Thou didst surround Thyself * as a man with the Jordan’s 
waters, * yet from on high wast Thou confirmed * by the descent of the Spirit, * and 
the voice of the Father * bare witness to Thee as His Son. * But do Thou appear ** 
and grant incorruption * unto our souls.  
O immutable Lord, * Who before the ages * wast begotten of the Father, * Thou 
didst come in the latter days * and didst assume the guise of a servant, * and as 
Creator * didst renew Thine image; * for, having been baptized, ** Thou hast 
bestowed incorruption upon our souls.  
And 5 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice, O life-bearing Cross ...”: 
Rejoice, O sacred one, pure vessel of the Holy Spirit, holy hierarch Philip, divinely 
inspired instrument, unfathomable abyss of piety, adornment of the Church, great 
ornament of the royal city of Moscow, confirmation of Russia, helper of the 
oppressed, close follower of the apostles, emulator of the ways of Chrysostom! Thou 
didst manfully lay down thy life for thy flock, following the example of Christ, the 
true Chief Shepherd. Him do thou beseech, that He grant our souls peace and great 
mercy. (Twice)  
Rejoice, O mouth of lustrous gold, venerable and divinely melodious swallow, 
unshakable pillar of Orthodoxy, insuperable rampart of our city, refuge of the 
sorrowful, calm haven for the tempest-tossed, defender against misfortunes and 
tribulations for those who have recourse unto thee, thou who dost encourage us to 
chant divinely beauteous hymns with zeal, emulator of the martyrs and confessors, 
who standest together with the holy angels, peer of the apostles! Unceasingly entreat 
Christ, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.  
Rejoice, O sacred one, holy hierarch Philip, for like a sun of surpassing radiance 
thou shinest everywhere in thy teachings, and didst pasture thy flock on the fields of 
the Spirit, O thou who art unshakable, in that thou hast been founded upon the firm 
Rock! Hence, thou didst amaze the tsar with thy courage, praying that his rage be 
transformed into meekness, and warning him at the same time, for which he, unjustly 

--- PAGE 4 ---
depriving thee of thy see and thy flock, sent thee to the Otroch Monastery in the city 
of Tver, where thou didst receive an undeserved death, praying for those who slew 
thee, saying: “O Lord, count not this sin against them!” Wherefore, O blessed one, a 
crown hath been given thee by Christ God, Whom do thou beseech, that He grant 
our souls peace and great mercy.  
Rejoice, O thou who didst bear the light burden of ascetic struggles, thou pure 
house of the Trinity, vessel of sweet savor, confirmation of the Church, co-enthroned 
with the apostles, adornment of holy hierarchs, glory of the martyrs and ornament of 
the venerable, renowned model of the virtues, splendid height of humility, defender 
of the oppressed and feeder of the poor! Entreat Christ, O blessed one, that He grant 
unto our souls peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Rejoice, and be glad, O most glorious city of Moscow! Celebrate with splendor, 
joining together, O ye Churches of Christ! Dance, O divinely assembled flock! Today 
the universal festival of the archpastor doth summon us. Come ye, therefore, and let 
us radiantly celebrate his memorial, saying: Rejoice, O divinely wise and holy hierarch, 
who didst arm thyself with spiritual courage as with a breast-plate, and by the 
authority given thee by the one God didst infallibly denounce those who would not 
heed thee! Rejoice, divine consolation for those who are troubled of soul, defender of 
the oppressed, right tranquil haven for all the faithful! Wherefore, standing about thy 
most precious shrine, we venerate it with love, O holy hierarch Philip, and through 
thee we ask to receive the love of God for mankind, that by thy supplications He may 
grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone II:  
The Sinless One asketh baptism, that He may cleanse the world of the delusion of 
the enemy. And the Master of all is baptized by a servant, and through water granteth 
cleansing unto the human race. To Him let us cry aloud: O our God Who hast 
appeared, glory be to Thee!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 

--- PAGE 5 ---
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple 
mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul 
pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This 
the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His 
grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom; the lips of wise men know grace. 
The mouth of wise men meditateth wisdom, and righteousness shall deliver them 
from death. At the death of a just man, his hope doth not perish. A righteous son is 
born for life; and a good man shall eat of the fruits of righteousness. The righteous 
always have light, and with the Lord they find grace and glory. The tongue of the wise 
knoweth what is good; there is wisdom in the good heart of a man. The Lord loveth 
holy hearts, and pleasing to Him are all the undefiled in the way. The wisdom of the 
Lord enlighteneth the countenance of the prudent; for she overtaketh those who 
desire her, in making herself first known unto them, and is easily seen of them that 
love her. Whoso seeketh her early shall have no great travail; and whoso watcheth for 
her shall quickly be without care. For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of 
her, and showeth herself favorably to them in the ways. Vice shall not prevail against 
wisdom. For this cause was I a lover of her beauty; and I loved her, and sought her 
out from my youth. I desired to make her my bride, for the Master of all Himself 
loved her. For she is privy to the mysteries of the knowledge of God, and a discloser 

--- PAGE 6 ---
of His works. Her labors are virtues: for she teacheth chastity and prudence, justice 
and fortitude, which are such things, as men can have nothing more profitable in their 
life. If a man desireth much experience, she knoweth things of old, and conjectureth 
aright what is to come. She knoweth subtleties of speech, and can expound obscure 
dreams; she foreseeth signs and wonders, and the events of seasons and times. She is 
a good ally unto all, for immortality is in her, and in communing with her in speech, a 
good report. Wherefore, I spake with the Lord, and besought Him, and with my 
whole heart I said: God of my fathers and Lord of mercy, Who hast created all things 
by Thy word, and fashioned man by Thy wisdom, that he should have dominion over 
the creatures which Thou hast made, and order the world according to equity and 
righteousness: give me wisdom which sitteth by Thy throne, and reject me not from 
among Thy children, for I am Thy servant and the son of Thy handmaid. O, send her 
from the heavens, out of Thy holy habitation, and from the throne of Thy glory, that, 
being with me, she may teach me what is well-pleasing in Thy sight, may guide me to 
understanding and preserve me in her glory. For the thoughts of mortal men are 
miserable, and their ponderings sinful.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera:  
In Tone I: As is meet, O father Philip, thou hast not forsaken thy homeland, but 
hast returned to the royal city Of Moscow, where thou wast a hierarch hallowed by 
the Holy Spirit, and didst shepherd thy flock with great labors, bearing for its sake 
great oppression and dishonor, and enduring banishment; and thou didst suffer for it 
even unto death, and hast passed over, rejoicing, unto Christ. And now the Church, 
seeing thee again in its midst, hath been gladdened by thy return, for, receiving thy 
remains as a gift beyond price, it crieth aloud to the Master: By the supplications of 
thy hierarch, O Christ, grant unto Thy people forgiveness and great mercy.  
In Tone II: An earthly angel, a heavenly man, a lover and beholder of divine glory 
hast thou shown thyself to be, having subdued the passions and enslaved the flesh, O 
Philip, fellow sufferer with the apostles and peer of the martyrs, right zealously 
fulfilling the law of Christ, thou didst lay down thy life for the people; and now, 
standing before the throne of Christ, pray thou on behalf of us, thy children.  
Thou wast an unshakable pillar of the Church of Christ, O father, for, aflame with 
divine zeal, thou didst rightly and justly denounce the unjust undertaking, exhorting 
the tsar and the people to follow the Traditions of the apostles and the fathers, thou 
didst command that the division of the realm and the wicked undertaking cease, and 
didst manfully adjure them by the authority given thee by God. Wherefore, as a true 
pastor, thou didst lay down thy life for thy flock, O emulator of Christ the true 
Shepherd. And now, O hierarch Philip, pray thou that all who honor thy sacred 
memory with love may be saved.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
It is fitting that the royal city of Moscow ever have Philip as its hierarch, like a 
royal adornment, a treasure which cannot be taken away, who giveth to all the saving 
riches of confession, and gathereth all together to chant hymns of divine beauty. To 
him let us cry aloud: O holy hierarch and confessor, entreat Christ God on behalf of 
our souls!  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
Today creation is enlightened! Today all things are glad, those of heaven and those 
on earth! Angels and men mingle together! For where the King arriveth, there doth 
order prevail: Wherefore, let us all hasten to the Jordan and see how John baptizeth 
the sinless head which no man fashioned. And, chanting the cry of the angel, let us 
exclaim together: The grace of God hath appeared, saving all men, illumining and 
granting mercy unto the faithful!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O luminary Philip, * by the adornment of divinely beauteous virtues * thou didst 
become a most pure habitation of the all-holy Spirit * and a treasure which cannot be 
taken away, * granting unto all inexhaustible riches * for thou hast adorned us with 
the radiant exhalations of thy words * as with golden ornaments; * for the sound of 
thy corrections ** hath gone forth, O holy hierarch and father, as saith the prophet.  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of my heart shall be 
of understanding.  
O holy hierarch, * thou luminary of the Word and right instructive tongue, * the 
godly voice of the sound of thy teachings * moving all greatly toward zeal for the 
majesty of God, * thou wast an emulator of the apostles, * O God bearer. * 
Wherefore, having astonished the tsar with thy zeal, * thou wast shown to be an heir 
to the kingdom of Christ. ** Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved.  
Verse: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, * and his tongue 
shall speak of judgment.  
Come, ye councils of Russia, * and with hymns let us piously honor today * the 
honored festival of the holy hierarch; * for from his youth he hath truly been 
vouchsafed to receive * the effulgence of the Holy Spirit, * and having laid waste to 
his body with abstinence, * through purity of spirit * he hath been shown to be a ray 
of the light of the threefold Sun, ** and prayeth now on behalf of those who honor 
him.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Like a star of surpassing radiance hast thou shone forth upon the city of Moscow 
in the teachings of thy words, O all-blessed and ever-memorable Philip; for thou wast 
shown to be a most wise preacher, and wast revealed as an inheritor of piety, 
confirming with true Christian teaching the tsar and people under thy care, that they 
abide in love and inseparable unity. And after thy repose, thou didst give thy pure and 

--- PAGE 8 ---
incorrupt body as a priceless gift to the honored and far-famed monastery wherein 
thou hadst received spiritual rebirth. And, as thou hast returned therefrom, after 
many years, to the royal city, we bless thee with psalms and hymns, and celebrate thy 
holy and most honored memory.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VI: 
The composition of Cosmos the Monk: 
He that hath adorned Himself with light as it were with a garment hath deigned 
for our sake to become like as we are; and today He is covered with the streams of 
the Jordan, though He hath no need to be purified by them, but that, through the 
cleansing He receiveth, He might Himself bestow regeneration upon us. Oh, the 
wonder! Without fire Christ God, the Savior of our souls, casteth anew, and without 
shattering He hath fashioned, and He saveth those who are enlightened in Him.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O successor of the primates of Russia, pillar of orthodoxy, * champion of the 
truth, new confessor, holy hierarch Philip, * thou didst lay down thy life for thy flock. 
* Wherefore, as thou hast boldness before Christ, pray thou for this city, ** and the 
people who honor thy holy memory as is meet.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee! (Twice)  
Glory ..., that of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O successor of the primates of Russia, pillar of orthodoxy, * champion of the 
truth, new confessor, holy hierarch Philip, * thou didst lay down thy life for thy flock. 
* Wherefore, as thou hast boldness before Christ, pray thou for this city, ** and the 
people who honor thy holy memory as is meet.  
Both now ..., that of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Thy blood crieth out from the earth like that of Abel, O wise hierarch Philip, thou 
new confessor; for thou didst not fear the wrath of the tsar, wisely teaching him and 
reproving his vain-minded savagery. Wherefore, thou hast made thine abode in the 
heavenly bridal-chamber of Christ our God. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Moved by Thy compassion, O God, in the tender compassion of Thy mercy Thou 
didst seek out that which was lost and had perished, O Lover of mankind. Wherefore, 
Thou hast come to the Jordan, giving utterance unto the mystery of the Holy Trinity. 
And, chanting hymns with faith, we cry out: Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared, O 
Light unapproachable!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
O venerable and thrice-blessed sacred confessor Philip, thou good shepherd and 
favorite of Christ, the Chief Shepherd, thou didst lay down· thy life for the people of 
Moscow who were under thy care. Wherefore, O blessed and holy hierarch Philip our 
father, ask now of the Lord, that He grant us great mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel: “Of the shepherds’ pipes ...”: 
The Master of all hath mystically appeared to us in the streams of the Jordan to 
cleanse us of every sin, in that He is merciful and supremely good. Let all creation 
then leap for joy, for Christ the Lord is baptized, Who as God hath been well-pleased 
to save the human race!  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Philip, and 
we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God on our behalf.  
Selected Psalm verses: 
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., (Thrice).  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
The Church of Russia, which thou didst deliver from sickness and tribulation, now 
proclaimeth thee, O divinely blessed father Philip, who hast been revealed to be a 
converser with the angels. Wherefore, though joining chorus with the apostles and 
martyrs, thou art still our helper amid sorrows, the consolation of the grieving, the 
shepherd and guide of the lost, O most excellent and blessed Philip. By thy 
supplications deliver us also from misfortunes, and pray to Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness unto those who with faith and love honor thy holy memory. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Come, O ye faithful, let us behold where Christ was baptized, that after Him we 
may follow to the River Jordan to the voice of one crying in the wilderness, and there 
may see the Creator of Adam touched by the hand of His servant, in His ineffable 
loving-kindness; and may cry aloud to Him: Thou hast come and revealed Thyself, to 
sanctify the waters in the Jordan.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (LK. 6: 17-23)  
At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judaea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre 
and Sidon, which came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that 
were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude 
sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all And He 
lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor, for yours is the 
kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now, for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye 
that weep now, for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when 
they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your 
name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy, for, 
behold, your reward is great in heaven.”  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VIII:  
Assembling, let us praise Philip, the emulator of the apostles, the most blessed 
father and teacher, saying: Rejoice, O holy hierarch, steadfast of mind, sanctified by 
grace and truth, for which thou didst become a receptacle of the all-holy Spirit! And 
now, standing with the holy hierarchs before the throne of Christ, ever pray thou on 
behalf of thy servants.  
Canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia, including its Irmos; and that of the holy hierarch, 
with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, in Tone II:  
Irmos: Israel traversed the stormy depths of the sea, * which had straightway 
become as dry land; * but the dark waters engulfed the chief captains of Egypt 
* in a watery grave, * by the mighty power of the right hand of the Master. 
When the Light of the radiant Dawn shone forth upon mortal men, coming forth 
from the wilderness to the waters of the Jordan, Thou, O King of the Sun, didst bow 
Thy neck before him, that Thou mightest ransom our forefather from the minions of 
darkness and cleanse creation of all defilement.  
O beginningless Word, Thou hast buried mankind with Thyself in the stream, and 
Thou dost lead him forth new again, that had been corrupted by deception; and the 
mighty voice of the Father testifieth to Thee ineffably, saying: This is My beloved 
Son, the Child Who is equal to Me by nature.  
Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified! 
O Lamb and Word of God, through the effulgence of Thy Holy Spirit send down 
upon my mind a brilliant ray of light, and inspire within me the words to praise him 
whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself: the sacred passion-bearer Philip. 
 O holy one, ask of God divine grace for thy servant, and fill my soul with 
understanding, that I may praise thy life, O holy hierarch Philip, wherein, by thy 
struggles, thou didst astonish all, chanting unto the Lord: For gloriously hast Thou 
been glorified!  
Kings marveled at thy mighty courage and the effulgence of the great virtues which 
illumined thy works, O venerable one, for thy tongue never ceased to admonish 
them, and thou didst chant unto the Lord: For gloriously hast Thou been glorified!  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: The words of the divinely eloquent preachers’ have been fulfilled in 
thee, O Mother of God; for, lo! thou hast given birth, O Virgin, to a little Babe Who 
is older than ancient Adam and is co-enthroned with the Father, unto the salvation of 
the whole world and the abolition of corruption.  
Katavasia, in Tone II: The Lord mighty in battle ...  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: From the ancient snares have we all been set loose, * and the teeth of 
the lions have been smashed asunder. * Let us then rejoice with great joy * 
and open wide our mouths, * weaving with words a sweet hymn to the Word, * 
Who delighteth in bestowing gifts upon us. 
He who once assumed the form of a malignant serpent and planted death in the 
garden of creation, is now cast into darkness by Christ’s coming in the flesh; and by 
assailing the Master, the Dawn which hath shone forth upon us, he hath crushed his 
own hateful head.  
The Master draweth to Himself the divinely fashioned nature of mankind, which 
had been overcome by the tyranny of greed; and He restoreth mortal mankind, 
granting them a new birth, and accomplishing thereby a mighty work; for He is come 
to cleanse our nature.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: My heart is established in the Lord, * my horn is exalted in my God, * 
my mouth is enlarged against mine enemies, * and I rejoice in Thy salvation. 
Thou didst hasten to ascend the mountain of the virtues, and enter the darkness of 
vision, O holy hierarch Philip, and didst come to know, as far as it is possible, the 
nature of the Unapproachable One; and full of light, O father, thou didst receive 
divine grace.  
Seeking the one God of goodness, and desiring to receive His glory alone, O 
blessed one, thou didst forsake the honor of thine earthly sojourn as something 
fleeting, and didst shine forth as a favorite of Christ, the Master of all.  
With desire for the Spirit thou didst cause the desire of the flesh to wither away, O 
blessed one, and within thyself thou didst wed purity as thy bride; and through purity 
were all the virtues begotten in thee, O ever glorious one, making thee a child of the 
immaterial Light.  
Theotokion: Thou didst slay the noetic serpent who brought death upon Adam in 
paradise and grief upon Eve, our first mother. And having caused Life to spring 
forth, O pure Virgin, thou hast freed us from corruption, for God ineffably issued 
forth from thy womb.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, * and Thy light, O Lord, hath been 
signed upon us * who with understanding hymn Thee. * Thou hast come, Thou hast 
appeared, ** the Light unapproachable.  
Ikos: Upon Galilee of the Gentiles, upon the land of Zebulon, and the land of 
Naphtali, as the prophet said, a great Light hath shone, even Christ. A radiant 
brightness hath dawned upon those who sat in darkness, shining forth from 
Bethlehem. The Lord born of Mary, the Sun of righteousness, shineth forth with 
splendor upon the whole universe. Come, therefore, all ye naked children of Adam, 
and let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warmed; for He that covereth the 
naked, and enlighteneth those who are in darkness, hath come. He hath appeared, the 
Light unapproachable.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
As the namesake and emulator of a chosen apostle, O father, thou didst endure 
tribulation and persecution. And emulating the zeal of the Prophet Elijah and the 
Baptist, thou didst manfully denounce the iniquitous, and didst govern well the see 
entrusted to thee, running the good race until the end. And thou hast left thy body 
behind like a mantle, emitting myrrh redolent of perfumes, and pourest forth the 
grace of the Spirit like rain, mystically watering the furrows of our hearts. O holy 
hierarch Philip, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who 
with love honor thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone V:  
Thou hast wrapped Thyself in the streams of the Jordan, O Thou Who dost most 
gloriously clothe Thyself in light, and Thou hast restored therein the nature of Adam, 
which had been corrupted by evil disobedience, O Word of God. Wherefore, we all 
praise and glorify Thy holy Epiphany.  
ODE IV 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Purified by the fire of a mystical vision, * the prophet praiseth the 
restoration of mankind; * and, filled with the inspiration of the Spirit, * he 
lifteth up his voice to reveal the incarnation of the ineffable Word, * by Whom 
the dominion of the mighty hath been abolished.  
O most radiant Word, Who hast been sent forth by the Father, Thou comest to ut-
terly repel the night of evil darkness and to uproot the sins of mankind, and by Thy 
baptism to draw forth children of light from the streams of the Jordan, O Good One.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
When he saw in very truth the Word Who had been foretold, the herald bare 
witness of him to creation, and cried, plainly saying, This is He Who was before me, 
yet cometh after. Though like us in form, He hath shone forth with divine power to 
take away our hateful sin!  
That He might bring His own back to the life-giving pastures of paradise, the 
Word of God falleth upon the lairs of the dragons, and destroying their manifold 
snares, he assaileth him who hath bruised all mankind, and imprisoning him, 
delivereth creation.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: With noetic eyes the Prophet Habbakuk * foresaw Thy coming, O 
Lord; * wherefore he cried aloud: * ‘God shall come out of Theman!’ Glory to 
Thy power! * Glory to Thy condescension!  
Those moved by malice against thee, the innocent lamb, rose up like wild beasts 
against thee, and, unable to bear being pierced by thy words as with a pike, they were 
provoked to rage, O divinely wise and holy hierarch.  
The whole world hath thee as its ally and help amid perils, for, as a faithful 
champion and a speedy intercessor, by thy sacred supplications thou dost rescue from 
dangers and misfortunes those who have recourse to thy care.  
Having carried out the goodly struggles of Him Whom thou didst desire, O 
divinely wise namesake, thou hast been granted immortality, where, rejoicing, thou 
hast received the crown of victory, and criest aloud: Glory to Thine advent, O Christ!  
Theotokion: Cast down the might of all the enemies who bring grief to those who 
hymn thee as her who gave birth to the Lord of glory, O Mother of God, and 
preserve thy flock, unharmed by the assaults of the wicked, that we may bless thee as 
is meet.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Washed clean of the poison of the dark and defiled enemy * by the 
cleansing of the Spirit, * we have set out upon a new path * which leadeth to 
unapproachable joy, * to which only they whom God hath reconciled with 
himself * can draw near. 
The Creator, beholding him whom He had formed of dust bound by inescapable 
bonds in the darkness of sin, raised him up and laid him on His shoulders; and now, 
in the midst of abundant waters, He washeth him clean from the ancient shame of 
Adam’s sinful inclination.  
With piety let us eagerly make haste to the most pure wellsprings of the stream of 
salvation, and, gazing upon the Word Who is come forth from the incorrupt Virgin, 
let us drink the pure water which quencheth our holy thirst, gently healing the 
infirmity of the world.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Disperse, O Word, the darkness from my soul, * O Christ God, the 
Light-Giver, * Having driven out the primordial darkness of the abyss, * grant 
unto me the light of Thy commandments, * that early in the morning I may 
glorify Thee. 
Thine intercession hath been shown to be like a ray of the Sun of righteousness, 
shining with the splendors of the virtues, O holy hierarch Philip, dispelling the cloud 
of the misfortunes which assail us. Preserve now in peace those who hymn thee, 
glorify and illumine them with beauty.  
Thy tongue was shown to be a two-edged sword, O blessed one, for, armed with 
the fear of Christ, thou didst wisely denounce rulers, calling upon Christ, the King of 
all, as witness, and His divine apostles.  
Thou wast shown to be a new man of zeal, like a second Moses, causing us to 
wonder not by performing awesome signs, but instructing us with the teachings of 
godly discourses, and leading us forth from the passions of Egypt to the calm haven 
of the new Israel.  
Theotokion: We call thee the noetic cloud, for from thee did Christ shine forth, O 
all-immaculate one, and show thee to be more spacious than the heavens: for without 
knowing a man, O pure one, thou hast given birth to Him Who became incarnate in 
His indescribable loving-kindness.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: With a supremely blessed voice * the Father revealed His Beloved One, 
* Whom He had begotten from the womb. * Verily, saith He, this is the 
splendid Son, * of the same nature as Myself, * and He hath come forth from 
the human race. * He is My living Word, * Who by My providence hath 
become a man.  
The prophet, mysteriously swallowed up for the space of three nights in the belly 
of the sea monster, came forth again, making manifest beforehand to all our 
regeneration in the last times, and our deliverance from the dragon that slayeth 
mankind.  
When the shining vaults of heaven were opened, he who knew the Scriptures 
beheld the Spirit, Who proceedeth from the Father and abideth in the most pure 
Word, descending in an ineffable manner in the form of a dove, commanding the 
multitudes to hasten to the Master.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Thou O Lord, didst place Jonah alone within the sea monster. * Do 
Thou save me, * who am ensnared in the nets of the enemy, * as thou didst 
save him from corruption. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Thou didst make thy general concern that those cared for by thee be one in soul 
and heart, O glorious one, abiding in the one Faith of Christ; thou didst uproot 
heathen customs, O wise one, and didst teach them to avoid divisions.  
Moved by zeal for Christ, thou didst try to turn the rage of the ruler into 
meekness, and wast in nowise daunted by the threats of the tsar, for, in that thou art a 
doer of the commandments of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be a mighty and 
brave warrior, suffering for thy flock even unto death with rejoicing.  
We see thee, O holy hierarch Philip, as a light-bearing ray shining upon those in 
the darkness of life, and as an inextinguishable lamp burning with the immaterial 
Light, illumining all the ends of the earth and removing the gloom of ignorance.  
Theotokion: In a godly manner Moses, among the prophets, once prefigured thee, 
O all-immaculate one, as a tablet of the law, the lampstand of the Light, the 
tabernacle, the rod which budded forth, the jar containing the Manna, and the ladder 
whereby we are led up from earth to the heights of heaven.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Let us praise the most wise Philip, * the instructor of Orthodoxy, * the proclaimer 
of the Truth, the luminary of Russia, * who noetically feedeth his children with the 
food of his words; * for with his tongue he sang praise, * and with his lips he chanted 
hymnody, ** as an initiate of the mysteries of the grace of God.  
Ikos: Come, ye who love the martyrs, and, celebrating the memory of the 
hieromartyr with hymnody and spiritual songs, let us rejoice in a godly manner. The 
time of our gladness and reward hath arrived, wherein we shall receive the gift of 
release from sufferings; for the pillar of fire hath appeared, consuming the heads of 
the iniquitous, but illumining the souls of the faithful with teachings of divine 
knowledge, and leading us, the New Israel, to the divine city, the heavenly Jerusalem, 
in that he is a disciple of the grace of God.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: He Who burnt the heads of the dragons in the waters, * cooled the lofty 
flame * that encircled the pious youths in the furnace; * He it is that doth wash 
away all the unbearable gloom of sin * by the dew of the Spirit.  
The fierce Assyrian flame that prefigured Thee hast Thou quenched, transforming 
it into dew. And now, O Christ, Thou hast clothed Thyself in water as in flame, and 
burnest up the harmful malice hidden in its depths, which calleth men to fall with 
stumbling step.  
When the Jordan was parted of old, the people of Israel passed clean over on dry 
ground, prefiguring Thee, O most powerful Lord, Who now bearest up creation in 
the waters without touching it, leading it to a better and imperishable path.  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
We know that in the beginning Thou didst, in Thy mercy, bring the waters of the 
flood upon the earth to destroy every living creature that Thou hadst made. And now, 
O Christ, Who workest wonders strange and most great, Thou hast drowned sin in 
the waters of Thy compassion, unto the salvation of mortal mankind.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: On the plain of Dura the tyrant once placed a furnace * to torment the 
God-bearers; * and therein the three youths chanted hymns unto the one God, 
* and the three together, chanted saying: * O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
Thou didst stand before the Lord, adorned with the struggles of virtue and 
wearing a crown inlaid with drops of thy blood, O holy hierarch Philip. Wherefore, be 
thou ever mindful of those who celebrate thy radiant memorial, and chant: O God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having fled the hordes of the noetic Pharaoh, O blessed one, thou didst easily 
pass over to the heavens, making thine abode there, receiving the honor of glory in 
the light of the righteous for thy patience, chanting in joy with the saints: O God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Those who have recourse to thy shrine praise thee, blessing thee with love, O 
blessed one, for, kissing thy relics which lie therein, they receive abundant grace: for 
by thy touch thou hast healed diseases of the eyes and cured pain of the teeth for 
those who chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: From the love of my soul I cry to thee, O Lady: O cloud of the 
supremely radiant Sun, portal of salvation, gate of heaven, noetic ladder, accept the 
entreaty of all Christians who bless thee, the hope of our souls, and who cry aloud to 
thy Son: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Creation hath found itself set free, * and those who previously sat in 
darkness are now sons of light; * alone the prince of darkness moaneth, * 
wherefore let His inheritance * which was formerly in misery * now bless Him 
Who hath accomplished this. 
The three godly children, sprinkled with dew in the midst of the fire, plainly 
prefigured how the transcendent Nature, which is resplendent with most radiant rays 
of threefold holiness, doth, through human nature, mercifully consume all pernicious 
falsehood with the fire of dew.  
Let the whole of earthly creation be clothed in white, for this day it is raised up 
from its fall to heaven; and, washed and most splendidly cleansed in the flowing 
waters by the Word, by Whom all things are preserved, it hath escaped its former 
sins.  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Thou who dost cover Thy chambers on high with the waters, * Thou 
Who hast set the sands to bound the sea * and Who upholdest all things: * the 
sun doth sing Thy praises, * the moon giveth Thee glory, * every creature 
offereth a hymn unto Thee, * as their Fashioner, throughout the ages. 
Thou dost freely heal those who call upon thee with faith, as, appearing to the 
paralytic, thou didst straightway raise him up, didst heal one suffering from a 
complaint of the liver by the touch of thy hand, and by thine appearance didst move 
to joy one suffering from despondency, O blessed one, ever doing these things for all, 
throughout the ages.  
In that thou wast a victor, O all-blessed one, with His life-bearing right hand the 
Creator hath set upon thy head the crown of suffering, an honor beyond price; and 
He hath preserved thy body unharmed by earthly wolves, emitting the sweet savor of 
perfumes. And thus hath the Judge of the contest glorified thee throughout the ages.  
As a true pastor, O blessed one, do thou subdue arrogance and civil strife; drive 
away the wolves which rage against thy flock with the staff of thy supplications; make 
mighty the rule of our civil authorities, and put down the uprisings of the heathen, 
that we may hymn thee as our intercessor throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: With the shield of the Faith do thou preserve thy holy temple, O 
Virgin Theotokos; vouchsafe thy glory unto those who together glorify thee therein, 
and deliver us from the assault and retribution of the barbarians; and still thou the 
raging waves of our mind by thy supplication, O all-hymned one.  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The wonders of thy birthgiving pass all understanding, * O all-pure 
Bride, blessed Mother! * Through thee we have received the most perfect 
salvation, * wherefore we praise our Benefactor as is meet and right, * bearing 
a hymn of thanksgiving unto Him as a gift. 
That which was revealed to Moses in the bush we see here fulfilled in a wondrous 
manner; for as it bare fire, yet was not consumed, so hath the Virgin been preserved, 
who gaveth birth unto the Benefactor Who bringeth us light, and the streams of the 
Jordan suffered no harm when they received Him.  
O beginningless King, through the communion of the Spirit dost Thou anoint and 
make perfect the nature of mankind, and cleansing it in the pure streams of baptism, 
putting the arrogant might of darkness to shame, Thou dost now raise it up to eternal 
life.  
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, * Who hath exalted the horn of 
salvation on our behalf * in the house of His child David, * wherein the 
Dayspring from on high hath visited us, * and guided us on the path of peace.  
Thou didst theologize concerning the one essence of the Trinity, and boldly 
denouncing those who taught vain things, O all-wise one, and exhorting the faithful 
with thy godly instructions, thou didst wisely strengthen them. O holy hierarch Philip, 
dweller with the angels, preserve in peace those who celebrate thy memory.  
For youths silence is a relative attainment, yet for fathers is it truly wondrous; 
wherefore, do thou accept this our thanksgiving, O father, not as truly worthy to 
serve for thy praise, but as offered unto thee with fervor; for we are unable to praise 
and magnify thee as is meet.  
As one co-enthroned with the apostles, equally enrolled in the choir of the martyrs, 
and equal in honor with the holy hierarchs, O passion-bearer Philip, by thine 
intercession preserve those who hymn thee in peace, lift up the horn of our civil 
authorities, and set at naught the savagery of the barbarians, that, rejoicing, we may 
hymn and magnify thee. 
Theotokion: O receptacle of the Light, divinely joyous Lady, true confirmation of 
holy hierarchs and boast of all the venerable: save us who hymn thee, the all-hymned 
one, from misfortunes and evil circumstances, and from the invasion of the heathen.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us ...”: 
O holy hierarch Philip, thou lover of chastity from the days of thy youth, thou 
didst strive for the Truth, but wast punished and sent into exile, and didst endure a 
bitter death. And now, standing in the heavens before the throne of the Holy Trinity, 
do thou ever pray for us who celebrate thy memory with faith and love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the feast: 
Thou hast come in the guise of a servant, O Word, and, though eternal, didst ask 
for baptism as a man. Heaven and earth, the ranks of the angels and the nature of 
water were struck with awe; and the Forerunner, trembling, nevertheless performed 
his ministration in fear and joy.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the saint, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Thou didst finish the race * and keep the Faith, * O blessed and holy hierarch 
Philip; * wherefore, Christ hath crowned thee * with a splendid wreath of 
righteousness, * and adorned thy confession, O right wondrous one. * Therefore, 
receiving a heavenly inheritance, * pray thou to the Savior ** on behalf of those who 
hymn thy memory. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 20 ---
O blessed Philip, * emulator of the confessors, * be thou the advocate of those 
who fervently praise thee, * and deliver us, O father, * from all misfortune, sin and 
tempest, * in that thou art a martyr of great might * and a God-pleasing hierarch. * As 
thou hast boldness before Christ God, ** pray for those who hymn thy memory.  
O holy hierarch Philip, * thou hast been shown to be a ray of the noetic Light, * a 
luminary of the Church, * the adornment of hierarchs, * a true model of the monastic 
life of fasting, * and our fervent ally, * freeing us from the ruination of the wicked. * 
Pray thou, O father, ** on behalf of those who hymn thy memory.  
Glory ..., of the holy hierarch, in Tone VI:  
Thou art a good shepherd and an excellent teacher, O holy hierarch Philip, and we 
ever cry aloud to thee in praise: With thee hath God adorned the church of His 
Mother, and thy body, which suffered in exile for thy flock, and was hidden in the 
earth for many years, hath He returned to thy cathedra, gladdening thy people. 
Wherefore, praying unceasingly for those who praise and honor thy memory, ask 
forgiveness of sins and salvation for our souls.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VI: 
As ones that have been led out of evil lands, come ye noetically, and let us cleanse 
our senses; and beholding Christ baptized in the flesh by John the Forerunner, let us 
all cry out with faith, chanting with him: Blessed art Thou, O our God, Who hast 
revealed Thyself! Glory be to Thee!  
Great doxology, Troparion of the feast in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee!  
Litanies & dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE IV of the canons of Theophany, 
and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the holy hierarch.  
O all-radiant Word, Who hast been sent forth by the Father, Thou comest to ut-
terly repel the night of evil darkness and to uproot the sins of mankind, and by Thy 
baptism to draw forth children of light from the streams of the Jordan, O Good One. 
(Twice) 
When he saw in very truth the Word Who had been foretold, the herald bare 
witness of him to creation, and cried, plainly saying, This is He Who was before me, 
yet cometh after. Though like us in form, He hath shone forth with divine power to 
take away our hateful sin!  
That He might bring His own back to the life-giving pastures of paradise, the 
Word of God falleth upon the lairs of the dragons, and destroying their manifold 
snares, he assaileth him who hath bruised all mankind, and imprisoning him, 
delivereth creation.  
Thou didst make thy general concern that those cared for by thee be one in soul 
and heart, O glorious one, abiding in the one Faith of Christ; thou didst uproot 
heathen customs, O wise one, and didst teach them to avoid divisions.  
Moved by zeal for Christ, thou didst try to turn the rage of the ruler into 
meekness, and wast in nowise daunted by the threats of the tsar, for, in that thou art a 
doer of the commandments of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be a mighty and 
brave warrior, suffering for thy flock even unto death with rejoicing.  
We see thee, O holy hierarch Philip, as a light-bearing ray shining upon those in 
the darkness of life, and as an inextinguishable lamp burning with the immaterial 
Light, illumining all the ends of the earth and removing the gloom of ignorance.  
Theotokion: In godly manner Moses, among the prophets, once prefigured thee, 
O all-immaculate one, as a tablet of the law, the lampstand of the Light, the 
tabernacle, the rod which budded forth, the jar containing the Manna, and the ladder 
whereby we are led up from earth to the heights of heaven.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee!  
 
 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O successor of the primates of Russia, pillar of orthodoxy, * champion of the 
truth, new confessor, holy hierarch Philip, * thou didst lay down thy life for thy flock. 
* Wherefore, as thou hast boldness before Christ, pray thou for this city, ** and the 
people who honor thy holy memory as is meet.  
Glory ..., Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Let us praise the most wise Philip, * the instructor of Orthodoxy, * the proclaimer 
of the Truth, the luminary of Russia, * who noetically feedeth his children with the 
food of his words; * for with his tongue he sang praise, * and with his lips he chanted 
hymnody, ** as an initiate of the mysteries of the grace of God.  
Both now ..., Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, * and Thy light, O Lord, hath been 
signed upon us * who with understanding hymn Thee. * Thou hast come, Thou hast 
appeared, ** the Light unapproachable.  
 
Prokeimenon of the feast, in Tone IV: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of 
the Lord. * God is the Lord and hath appeared unto us.  
And the Prokeimenon of the saint, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * 
and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations, give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 335 (HEB. 13: 17-21)  
Brethren: obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they 
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and 
not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us; for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, that 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work 
to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus 
Christ, to Whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.  
 
Alleluia, in tone IV: Bring unto the Lord, ye sons of God, bring unto the Lord 
the sons of rams.  
And of the saint, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate 
wisdom, * and his tongue shall speak of judgment. 
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped. 
 
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 36 (JN. 10: 9-16)  
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 
know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep have I, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one Shepherd.”  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Refrain and Irmos of ODE IX: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable than the armies on high.  
Irmos: Every tongue is at a loss to praise thee as is due: * even a spirit from 
the world above is filled with dizziness, * when it seeketh to sing thy praises, 
O Theotokos. * But since thou art good, accept our faith: * Thou knowest well 
our love inspired by God, * for thou art the Protector of Christians and we 
magnify thee. 
 
Communion Verse: The grace of God that bringeth all men to salvation hath 
appeared. 
Communion Verse of the Saint: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous 
be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
