--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
AFTERFEAST OF THE HOLY THEOPHANY OF OUR LORD 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR POLYEUCTUS OF MELITENE IN 
ARMENIA  
AT VESPERS  
At ‘‘Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: ‘‘O Lord, even though Thou didst stand before the tribunal ...”: 
O Lord, * even though thou didst stand before John * as a man, in the Jordan, * 
yet, seated with the Father, * Thou didst not depart from Thy throne. * And, baptized 
for our sake, * Thou didst free the world * from bondage to the alien one, ** in that 
Thou art compassionate and the Lover of mankind.  
O Lord, * even though Thou didst surround Thyself * as a man with the Jordan’s 
waters, * yet from on high Thou wast confirmed * by the descent of the Spirit, * and 
the voice of the Father bare witness to Thee as His Son. * But do Thou appear * and 
grant incorruption ** unto our souls.  
O immutable Lord, * Who before the ages * wast begotten of the Father, * Thou 
didst come in the latter days * and didst assume the guise of a servant, * and as 
Creator * didst renew Thine image; * for, having been baptized, ** Thou hast 
bestowed incorruption upon our souls.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: ‘‘Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
As Christ led David up out of the pit of the passions, * so did He raise thee up, O 
martyr, * from the miry clay of the deception of idolatry; * for He mystically set thy 
feet * upon the rock of His knowledge. ** Him do thou beseech, that we be saved.  
Neither the desire of thy spouse, * nor the love of thy children, nor thy dignity, * 
nor yet thy wealth in possessions and estates, * caused the strength of thy soul to 
waver * from the true faith in Christ, ** O all-blessed Polyeuctus.  
Even before the grace of thy suffering, O martyr, * thou wast truly adorned with 
the works of righteousness. * Wherefore, in accordance therewith, * thou wast 
deemed worthy to be a faithful witness of Christ, * being piously baptized in thine 
own blood ** into His death  
Glory ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone I:  
The hosts of the angels today join chorus to commemorate, the martyr Polyeuctus, 
and the race of mankind doth faithfully hold festival, and joyously crieth out: Rejoice, 
O all-praised one, who hast triumphed over the subtle snares of Belial, and hast been 
crowned by Christ with the wreath of victory! Rejoice, warrior of our great King and 
Savior, who destroyed the temples of the idols! Rejoice, adornment of martyrs! Pray 
thou that those who faithfully keep thine ever-honorable memory be delivered from 
every threat.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., in Tone II:  
Today the Creator of heaven and earth approacheth the Jordan in the flesh; the 
Sinless One asketh baptism, that He may cleanse the world of the delusion of the 
enemy. And the Master of all is baptized by a servant, and through water granteth 
cleansing unto the human race. To Him let us cry aloud: O our God Who hast 
appeared, glory be to Thee!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: ‘‘On the third day ...”:  
Before all Thou didst stand in the waters, * O Unapproachable One, * and bowed 
Thy head before the Baptist. * And sanctifying the world, * Thou didst deliver it from 
slavery by Thy baptism, ** O Sinless One.  
Verse: The sea beheld and fled, * Jordan turned back.  
From on high, of old, * the Father and the Spirit * bare witness to the beloved 
Son, O Christ. * Thus the mystery of the Trinity * became known ** when Thou wast 
baptized in the Jordan.  
Verse: What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? * and thou Jordan, that 
thou wast driven back?  
As God, O Savior, * all the waters of the Jordan * and the nature of water didst 
Thou sanctify. * Wherefore, the human race * doth glorify and hymn ** Thine 
appearance.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone IV:  
He that hath adorned Himself with light as it were with a garment hath deigned 
for our sake to become like as we are; and today He is covered with the streams of 
the Jordan, though He hath no need to be purified by them, but that, through the 
cleansing He receiveth, He might Himself bestow regeneration upon us. Oh, the 
wonder! Without fire Christ God, the Savior of our souls, casteth anew, and without 
shattering He hath fashioned, and He saveth those who are enlightened in Him.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Polyeuctus O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: ‘‘Having been lifted up ...”:  
Moved by Thy compassion, O God, in the tender compassion of Thy mercy Thou 
didst seek out that which was lost and had perished, O Lover of mankind. Wherefore, 
Thou hast come to the Jordan, giving utterance unto the mystery of the Holy Trinity. 
And, chanting hymns with faith, we cry out: Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared, O 
Light unapproachable!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., and the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: ‘‘Of the shepherds’ pipes ...”:  
The Master of all hath mystically appeared to us in the streams of the Jordan to 
cleanse us of every sin, in that He is merciful and supremely good. Let all creation 
then leap for joy, for Christ the Lord is baptized, Who as God hath been well pleased 
to save the human race!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., and the foregoing is repeated.  
Canon of the feast, with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the holy martyr, 
with four Troparia:  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast (originally written in iambic verse), in Tone II: 
Irmos: Israel traversed the stormy depths of the sea, * which had straightway 
become as dry land; * but the dark waters engulfed the chief captains of Egypt 
* in a watery grave, * by the mighty power of the right hand of the Master. 
When the Light of the radiant Dawn shone forth upon mortal mankind, coming 
forth from the wilderness to the waters of the Jordan, Thou, O King of the Sun, didst 
bow Thy neck before him, that Thou mightest ransom our forefather from the 
minions of darkness and cleanse creation of all defilement.  
O beginningless Word, Thou hast buried mankind with Thyself in the stream, and 
Thou dost lead him forth new again, who had been corrupted by deception; and the 
mighty voice of the Father testifieth to Thee ineffably, saying: This is My beloved 
Son, the Child Who is equal to Me by nature.  
Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: ‘‘Bestow upon me the grace of prayer, 
O martyr,” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified! 

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
Satisfied with much desired food, full of blessed radiance, and deemed worthy to 
join in the angelic chorus, O glorious Polyeuctus, save those who praise thy feast and 
chant unto the Lord: For gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Thy radiant and right renowned feast hath shown forth, full of light most divine, 
illumining those who with faith splendidly hymn thee, 
O all-blessed Polyeuctus, valiant warrior of Christ, chanting unto the Lord: For 
gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Strengthened by the might of the Spirit and invested with divine power, O blessed 
one, without hesitation thou didst go forth to contend with the prideful one; and, 
having mightily cast him down, thou didst cry aloud with zeal: Let us chant unto the 
Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate and all-pure Virgin Theotokos, while manifestly re-
maining a virgin, thou didst yet give birth unto the Incarnate One Who before had 
been incorporeal, Who in the richness of His compassion impoverished Himself for 
our sake, and hath saved those who cry to Him: Gloriously hath He been glorified!  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: From the ancient snares have we all been set loose, * and the teeth of 
the lions have been smashed asunder. * Let us then rejoice with great joy * 
and open wide our mouths, * weaving with words a sweet hymn to the Word, * 
Who delighteth in bestowing gifts upon us. 
He who once assumed the form of a malignant serpent and planted death in the 
garden of creation, is now cast into darkness by Christ’s coming in the flesh; and by 
assailing the Master, the Dawn which hath shone forth upon us, he hath crushed his 
own hateful head.  
The Master draweth to Himself the divinely fashioned nature of mankind, which 
had been overcome by the tyranny of greed; and He restoreth mortal mankind, 
granting them a new birth, and accomplishing thereby a mighty work; for He is come 
to cleanse our nature.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Thou didst exchange philosophy for piety, having been deemed worthy of the 
divine vision of the Savior from on high, O Polyeuctus.  
Desiring victory, O glorious one, thou didst spit upon all the things of this earth, 
and hast been granted heavenly delight. 
  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Desiring the glory which passeth understanding, thou didst run with endurance 
and set at naught the ignominy of idolatry.  
Theotokion: Direct my steps, O Lady, that I may go to thy Son with a 
praiseworthy life.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: ‘‘Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
When the Savior bowed His head in the Jordan, * the head of the serpent was 
crushed; * and the decapitated head of Polyeuctus ** hath put the deceiver to shame.  
Ikos: In the river Jordan the Creator of all, bowing His head, received baptism; 
and, having invisibly crushed the serpents’ heads, He bestowed upon mankind power 
against the exceeding crafty one, who of old in paradise ensnared Adam with the fruit 
of the tree and brought upon him death without hope. Wherefore, the athlete 
Polyeuctus, in no wise yielding to the flatteries of his wife, suffered steadfastly, and, 
stretching forth his head, he put the deceiver to shame upon its severing.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: Spec. Mel.: ‘‘The Word co-beginningless ...”:  
As a valiant warrior of Christ, the God of all, strengthened by His grace, thou wast 
turned wholly to His love, O wise one, through the faithful warrior Nearchus, who 
was with thee. Wherefore, having suffered lawfully, thou hast been crowned by the 
Lord, as is meet, O martyr Polyeuctus.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone V: 
Thou hast wrapped Thyself in the streams of the Jordan, O Thou Who dost most 
gloriously clothe Thyself in light, and hast restored therein the nature of Adam, 
which, O Word of God, had been corrupted by evil disobedience. Wherefore, we all 
praise and glorify Thy holy Epiphany.  
ODE IV 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Purified by the fire of a mystical vision, * the prophet praiseth the 
restoration of mankind; * and, filled with the inspiration of the Spirit, * he 
lifteth up his voice to reveal the incarnation of the ineffable Word, * by Whom 
the dominion of the mighty hath been abolished.  
O most radiant Word, Who hast been sent forth by the Father, Thou comest to ut-
terly repel the night of evil darkness and to uproot the sins of mankind, and by Thy 
baptism to draw forth children of light from the streams of the Jordan, O Good One.  
When he saw in very truth the Word Who had been foretold, the herald bare 
witness of him to creation, and cried, plainly saying, This is He Who was before me, 
yet cometh after. Though like us in form, He hath shone forth with divine power to 
take away our hateful sin!  
That He might bring His own back to the life-giving pastures of paradise, the 
Word of God falleth upon the lairs of the dragons, and destroying their manifold 
snares, he assaileth him who hath bruised all mankind, and imprisoning him, 
delivereth creation.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
In thy pious confession, O most excellent one, thou didst bring thyself to the 
Master, lovingly accepting to become a sacrifice for Him, and being freed of every 
vice, O glorious one. Hence, thou criest to the Savior: Glory to Thy power, O Lover 
of mankind!  
In the sweetness of piety didst thou take delight, and thou didst take wing with 
divine love. Wounded with pure and radiant desire, and aflame with the love of the 
kingdom on high, thou dost chant unto the Master: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of 
mankind!  
Captivated by the supra-natural unity of mind shown forth by Nearchus, and 
catechized in the godly faith in the Trinity by his words, O divinely wise martyr 
Polyeuctus, thou wast truly deemed worthy of the greatly desired and lovely splendors 
of the martyrs.  
Having enrolled in the army of the martyrs, thou didst receive the indestructible 
kingdom; and, newly slain, thou didst enter therein, still dripping with thy blood. And 
thou wast taken into the immutable joy and unwaning light, receiving great glories.  
Theotokion: The Heavenly One, having likened Himself to those who are on 
earth, hath made them heavenly; and having suffered through His nature which is 
subject to human passions, He hath given us to partake of divine dispassion. 
Wherefore, knowing her who gaveth birth unto Him to be a maiden who kneweth 
not wedlock, we glorify her as the Theotokos.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Washed clean of the poison of the dark and defiled enemy * by the 
cleansing of the Spirit, * we have set out upon a new path * which leadeth to 
unapproachable joy, * to which only they whom God hath reconciled with 
himself * can draw near. 
The Creator, beholding him whom He had formed of dust bound by inescapable 
bonds in the darkness of sin, raised him up and laid him on His shoulders; and now, 
in the midst of abundant waters, He washeth him clean from the ancient shame of 
Adam’s sinful inclination.  
With piety let us eagerly make haste to the most pure wellsprings of the stream of 
salvation, and, gazing upon the Word Who is come forth from the incorrupt Virgin, 
let us drink the pure water which quencheth our holy thirst, gently healing the 
infirmity of the world.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why has the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
That thou mightest receive ever-existing delight, O most blessed one, thou didst 
disdain the beautiful things of this life, the character of nature, sweetness, glory and 
life itself; and thou didst not lose hope.  
Initiated into the divine mysteries of the image of God, by thy firmness of mind 
thou wast set apart for perfect struggles; and shown to be the victor, thou wast 
deemed worthy of imperishable crowns, O Polyeuctus.  
Burning with zeal for piety and filled with divinely inspired ardor, O most glorious 
one, thou didst piously reject most godless honor, being possessed of the wisdom 
which by its nature is contrary to evil; and thou didst set at naught the vain gods of 
the heathen.  
Theotokion: Obedient to the words of thy mouth, O most pure one, we call thee 
blessed, for, truly accomplishing mighty works with thee, the Lord hath magnified 
thee, and He hath revealed thee to be the true Mother of God, having been born 
from thy womb.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: With a supremely blessed voice * the Father revealed His Beloved One, 
* Whom He had begotten from the womb. * Verily, saith He, this is the 
splendid Son, * of the same nature as Myself, * and He hath come forth from 
the human race. * He is My living Word, * Who by My providence hath 
become a man.  
The prophet, mysteriously swallowed up for the space of three nights in the belly 
of the sea monster, came forth again, making manifest beforehand to all our 
regeneration in the last times, and our deliverance from the dragon that slayeth 
mankind.  
When the shining vaults of heaven were opened, he who knew the Scriptures 
beheld the Spirit, Who proceedeth from the Father and abideth in the most pure 
Word, descending in an ineffable manner in the form of a dove, commanding the 
multitudes to hasten to the Master.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: The abyss of my sins and the storm of my transgressions * disquieten 
me and thrust me down * into the depths of despondency; * but do Thou 
stretch forth Thy mighty arm, * unto me as Thou didst to Peter, * and save 
me, O my Guide.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Manifestly having displayed angelic zeal, O right wondrous martyr, thou hast been 
deemed worthy to enter the ranks of the angels. With them, therefore earnestly pray, 
O blessed one, that those who hymn thee be delivered from temptations.  
When thy head was severed by the sword, O much suffering athlete, thou didst 
lovingly sleep the needful sleep. And now, abiding with the martyrs in the heavens, 
thou hast inherited an incorrupt estate.  
Thou wast like unto the Savior, Who for our sake submitted to suffering on the 
Cross, and didst share in His suffering; and now, O blessed one, thou reignest with 
Him, as He promised, for time without end.  
Theotokion: As thou hast tender compassion, having given birth unto the Word 
Who is the Lover of mankind, save us from cruel and violent circumstances; for thee 
alone do we the faithful have, as an invincible intercessor, O all-pure Lady.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, * and Thy light, O Lord, hath been 
signed upon us * who with understanding hymn Thee. * Thou hast come, Thou hast 
appeared, ** the Light unapproachable.  
Ikos: Upon Galilee of the Gentiles, upon the land of Zebulon, and the land of 
Naphtali, as the prophet said, a great Light hath shone, even Christ. A radiant 
brightness hath dawned upon those who sat in darkness, shining forth from 
Bethlehem. The Lord born of Mary, the Sun of righteousness, shineth forth with 
splendor upon the whole universe. Come, therefore, all ye naked children of Adam, 
and let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warmed; for He that covereth the 
naked, and enlighteneth those who are in darkness, hath come. He hath appeared, the 
Light unapproachable.  
ODE VII 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: He Who burnt the heads of the dragons in the waters, * cooled the lofty 
flame * that encircled the pious youths in the furnace; * He it is that doth wash 
away all the unbearable gloom of sin * by the dew of the Spirit.  
The fierce Assyrian flame that prefigured Thee hast Thou quenched, transforming 
it into dew. And now, O Christ, Thou hast clothed Thyself in water as in flame, and 
burnest up the harmful malice hidden in its depths, which calleth men to fall with 
stumbling step.  
When the Jordan was parted of old, the people of Israel passed clean over on dry 
ground, prefiguring Thee, O most powerful Lord, Who now bearest up creation in 
the waters without touching it, leading it to a better and imperishable path.  
We know that in the beginning Thou didst, in Thy mercy, bring the waters of the 
flood upon the earth to destroy every living creature that Thou hadst made. And now, 
O Christ, Who workest wonders strange and most great, Thou hast drowned sin in 
the waters of Thy compassion, unto the salvation of mortal mankind.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst show Thy power to Thy servant, O Master; wherefore, with great 
fervor he went forth to his struggles unbidden. And, victorious, he chanted: O God 
of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thy glorious and most renowned feast hath shone forth, O martyr; for it beareth 
the light of the manifestation of Thy Master and illumineth those who with faith cry 
out: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Riches that cannot be stolen and dignity which abideth and falleth not away hast 
thou found; and thou hast received glory which lasteth forever, O wondrous one, 
chanting: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Having conceived Him Who is understood, to abide ever with the 
beginningless Father, O Virgin, thou hast given birth unto the incarnate Son, that He 
might save those who with faith cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Creation hath found itself set free, * and those who previously sat in 
darkness are now sons of light; * alone the prince of darkness moaneth, * 
wherefore let His inheritance * which was formerly in misery * now bless Him 
Who hath accomplished this. 
The three godly children, sprinkled with dew in the midst of the fire, plainly 
prefigured how the transcendent Nature, which is resplendent with most radiant rays 
of threefold holiness, doth, through human nature, mercifully consume all pernicious 
falsehood with the fire of dew.  
Let the whole of earthly creation be clothed in white, for this day it is raised up 
from its fall to heaven; and, washed and most splendidly cleansed in the flowing 
waters by the Word, by Whom all things are preserved, it hath escaped its former 
sins.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Today thy feast of great supplication is celebrated with sacred rites, O Polyeuctus, 
martyred athlete of Christ; for thou wast a sacrifice right pleasing and acceptable unto 
Christ, Who was slain and sacrificed for thy sake; ye children bless, ye priests hymn, 
ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Having shown forth on earth an athlete’s opposition,-even unto the shedding of 
thy blood, O Polyeuctus, thou hast come to dwell in a chamber of great splendor in 
the heavens, having been baptized in the laver of thine own blood, chanting unto the 
Master; Ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Raise up my soul which hath been slain by my falls into sin, reckoning it as 
embraced by the boldness of thy martyrdom, at the divine command, O glorious one, 
and right properly turning it to virtue as it chanteth unto the Master: Ye priests hymn, 
ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Rejoice, thou through whom we have found everlasting joy! Rejoice, 
thou who hast assuaged the grief of Eve and turned the sorrow of Adam into radiant 
gladness! Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, who hast given birth unto the incarnate God, 
thou intercessor for the faithful who supremely exalt thee throughout all ages!  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The wonders of thy birthgiving pass all understanding, * O all-pure 
Bride, blessed Mother! * Through thee we have received the most perfect 
salvation, * wherefore we praise our Benefactor as is meet and right, * bearing 
a hymn of thanksgiving unto Him as a gift. 
That which was revealed to Moses in the bush we see here fulfilled in a wondrous 
manner; for as it bare fire, yet was not consumed, so hath the Virgin been preserved, 
who gaveth birth unto the Benefactor Who bringeth us light, and the streams of the 
Jordan suffered no harm when they received Him.  
O beginningless King, through the communion of the Spirit dost Thou anoint and 
make perfect the nature of mankind, and cleansing it in the pure streams of baptism, 
putting the arrogant might of darkness to shame, Thou dost now raise it up to eternal 
life.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: All are awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * for the 
Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man in the 
Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure Theotokos. 
Come, therefore, ye who love the martyrs, and let us hymn him who hath been 
crowned by God, whom the Most High hath glorified on His epiphany, which is 
named for the light, and hath honored and crowned and adorned on this, his honored 
day.  
With the streams of the blood of thy martyrdom which flowed forth, thou didst 
choke the most malicious worker of iniquity, O divinely blessed one; and watering 
therewith the Church of Christ which doth ever bless thee faithfully, thou hast made 
it bright.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Be thou my helper, O martyr, delivering me from divers temptations and evil 
circumstances, loosing the bonds of heresy, and freeing me from cruel imprisonment 
by thy supplication, who hymn thee with a pure mind, O most glorious one.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth, O most pure one, unto Christ, the head and 
fulfillment of the Law and the prophets, Whose good pleasure it was, in the 
unfathomable abyss of His tender compassion, to become a man for our sake 
through thee, and Who hath saved those who ever magnify thee with faith.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyr: 
Spec. Mel.: ‘‘By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
Having acquired the most desired riches of heaven and the glory and splendor 
which thy soul greatly desired, O blessed Polyeuctus, abiding in God thou didst 
receive a divine crown from the hands of the Most High, as a true member of the 
choir of the martyrs.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the feast: 
Thou hast come in the guise of a servant, O Word, and, though eternal, didst ask 
for baptism as a man. Heaven and earth, the ranks of the angels and the nature of 
water were struck with awe. And the Forerunner, trembling, nevertheless performed 
his ministration in fear and joy.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: ‘‘Go before us, ye hosts of angels ...”:  
Tell us, and say, O prophet Isaiah: Who is he that crieth in the wilderness? Who 
crieth out: Draw ye therefore the water of purification with gladness? Even John, who 
baptizeth in the wilderness and crieth out: Christ is come! Blessed art Thou, O our 
God, Who hast revealed Thyself! Glory be to Thee!  
Verse: The sea saw that, and fled: * Jordan was driven back.  
Oh, the ineffable tender compassion which passeth understanding! How the 
Creator of creation inclineth His most pure and divine head, providing through His 
baptism an example of humility for those who are illumined in Him. And therein we 
chant: Blessed art Thou, O our God, Who hast revealed Thyself! Glory be to Thee!  
Verse: What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? * And thou Jordan, that 
thou wast driven back?  
The grace of baptism hath been poured forth for us as a living delight from the 
torrent of the Jordan; and having been illumined therewith through baptism, we say: 
Glory to Him Who hath appeared in the world and granted us life! and we chant: 
Blessed art Thou, O our God, Who hast revealed Thyself! Glory be to Thee!  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: ‘‘Go before us, ye hosts of angels ...”:  
As ones who have been led out of evil lands, come ye noetically, and let us cleanse 
our senses; and beholding Christ baptized in the flesh by John the Forerunner, let us 
all cry out with faith, chanting with him: Blessed art Thou, O our God, Who hast 
revealed Thyself! Glory be to Thee!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes: 6 Troparia, from ODE IV of the canon for the feast.  
‘‘Who hath ever seen the sun cleansed which is most bright by nature?” the herald 
crieth out. ‘‘Am I then to wash with water Thee, the Effulgence of glory, the Image of 
the ever-existent Father? Am I, who am grass, to touch Thy divinity? For Thou art 
Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”  
‘‘When he happened upon Thee, Moses showed the divine reverence he felt, for 
he understood that it was Thee Who spake out of the bush; and he straightway 
averted his face. How, then, can I gaze directly at Thee? How can I touch Thee with 
my hand? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”  
‘‘Wisely doing what is spiritual, and being honored with speech, yet am I in awe 
before inanimate things. For if I baptize Thee, the mountain which smoked with fire, 
the sea which parted in twain and this Jordan which turned back will be mine 
accusers. For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”  
O most radiant Word, Who hast been sent forth by the Father, Thou comest to 
repel utterly the night of evil darkness and to uproot the sins of men, and by Thy 
baptism to draw forth children of light from the streams of the Jordan, O Good One.  
When he saw in very truth the Word Who had been foretold, the herald bore 
witness of Him to creation, and cried, plainly saying, This is He Who was before me, 
yet cometh after. Though like us in form, He hath shone forth with divine power to 
take away our hateful sin!  
That He might bring His own back to the life-giving pastures of paradise, the 
Word of God falleth upon the lairs of the dragons, and destroying their manifold 
snares, he assaileth him who hath bruised all mankind, and, imprisoning him, 
delivereth creation.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee!  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Polyeuctus O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone I: 
Glory ..., When the Savior bowed His head in the Jordan, * the head of the serpent 
was crushed; * and the decapitated head of Polyeuctus ** hath put the deceiver to 
shame.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Both now ..., Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, * and Thy light, O 
Lord, hath been signed upon us * who with understanding hymn Thee. * Thou hast 
come, Thou hast appeared, ** the Light unapproachable.  
 
Instead of ‘‘It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Refrain and Irmos of ODE IX: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable than the armies on high.  
Irmos: Every tongue is at a loss to praise thee as is due: * even a spirit from 
the world above is filled with dizziness, * when it seeketh to sing thy praises, 
O Theotokos. * But since thou art good, accept our faith: * Thou knowest well 
our love inspired by God, * for thou art the Protector of Christians and we 
magnify thee. 
 
Communion Verse: The grace of God that bringeth all men to salvation hath 
appeared. 
 
