--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE AND GOD-BEARING FATHER, 
SERAPHIM, WONDERWORKER OF SAROV  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Assembling today, O ye Christian people, let us crown with hymns of praise the 
earthly angel and heavenly man, and let us cry out to him with fervor: O blessed 
father Seraphim, most glorious boast of fasters, pray thou to the Lord on our behalf, 
that He have mercy upon our souls. (Twice)  
Loving chastity and meekness from thy youth, O father Seraphim, with purity of 
mind and heart thou didst acquire the love of Christ, whereby thou didst draw nigh 
unto God. Do thou therefore now entreat Him to deliver from misfortune those who 
keep thine honored memory with faith.  
O venerable father Seraphim, the multitudes of Christian peoples assembling today 
for the glorification of thy precious relics are filled with joy and gladness. For thou 
hast been revealed to be the healing of the afflicted, and the feet for the lame, who 
approach the shrine of thy relics with faith.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Rejoice, and be glad in the Lord, O Monastery of Sarov, for in thee hath shone 
forth a new light of the land of Russia. Adorn thyself and dance, O Church of God, 
and rejoice with her, O ye multitudes of monks. Leap for joy, O assemblies of those 
who love the feasts of the Church; and having woven a wreath of spiritual flowers, 
cry out with David: ‘Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints’. For 
this is the beginning of the glory of the venerable Seraphim, whereof do thou make us 
partakers through thy supplications, O blessed one.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
No one that fleeth unto thee, O most pure Virgin Theotokos, * departeth from 
thee ashamed; * for those that asketh grace of thee, ** ever receiveth a gift for their 
profitable petition.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Departing thy native region and traveling to the city of Kiev, where, at the relics of 
the wonderworkers of the Caves, thou didst receive a blessing for the path of salvific 
struggle. Send down also upon us who keep thy most holy and most honored 
memory, thy blessings.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Through love thou didst acquire great skill in the obedience of monastic struggles, 
O venerable father Seraphim, astonishing the brethren by thy patience and love. Pray 
thou, that our souls be saved.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * he shall greatly delight in His 
commandments.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Strengthened by the counsels of the abbot, thou didst withdraw to dwell in the 
wilderness of Sarov, O father, making haste to abide there in prayerful struggles, 
showing thyself to be a habitation of the Holy Spirit.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Strengthened by the counsels of the abbot, thou didst withdraw to dwell in the 
wilderness of Sarov, O father, making haste to abide there in prayerful struggles, 
showing thyself to be a habitation of the Holy Spirit.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Thou art our intercessor and protection, * O most pure one. * Deliver us from 
grievous misfortunes and circumstances, ** and save our souls by thy divine prayers.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
From thy youth didst thou love Christ, O blessed one; * and, aflame with the 
desire to serve Him alone, * thou didst struggle in the wilderness in unceasing prayer 
and labor; * and with compunction of heart having acquired the love of Christ, * thou 
wast shown to be the beloved favorite of the Mother of God. * Wherefore, we cry 
unto thee: ** Save us by thy prayers, O our venerable father Seraphim. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion of the forefeast, In Tone IV:  
Make ready, O Zebulon! * Adorn thyself, O Nephthali! * O River Jordan, leaping 
up, * receive thou the Master Who cometh to be baptized! * Rejoice, O Adam, with 
our first mother! * Hide not yourselves as ye did before in paradise; * for He who 
beheld you naked hath appeared, * that He may clothe you in your primal raiment. ** 
Christ hath appeared, desiring to make all creation new!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
We chant “Blessed is the man” ..., the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera, 3 of the forefeast, in Tone IV,  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Let us piously sound forth beforehand * the hymns of the forefeast * of the 
honored baptism of our God; * for, lo! as a man He wisheth * to approach His 
Forerunner in the flesh * and to request saving baptism * for the edification of all * 
who with faith are enlightened in a sacred manner ** and partake of the Spirit.  
Christ is pointed out! * God is made manifest, * as David most plainly wrote 
beforehand; * and He goeth to a servant, asking baptism. * O river Jordan, be thou 
filled with gladness! * Ye earth and sea, * ye mountains and hills, * and hearts of all 
mankind, now leap for joy, ** receiving the noetic light!  
O Almighty Lord, * how can the river’s streams receive Thee * Who art the River 
of the world * and a torrent of nourishment, * as it is written, * Who goest up naked, 
* Who clothest heaven with clouds, * Who hast lain bare all the malice of the enemy, 
** and arrayest mortal mankind in incorruption?  
And 5 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I,  
Spec. Mel.: “O marvelous wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! A struggler for piety is revealed at Sarov, and the most 
wondrous Seraphim doth become a fervent intercessor for us before God. Rejoice, O 
Monastery of Sarov, that dost hold within thyself the relics of the venerable one! Leap 
for joy, O ye multitudes of the Orthodox, who have the most wondrous Seraphim as 
a defender amid misfortune and who cry unto him: Rejoice, thou light of the Russian 
land! Utterly disperse the legions of our adversaries, and beseech the Lord to grant 
peace and great mercy to our souls.  
O marvelous wonder! In the Monastery of Sarov, behold, the blessed Seraphim 
revealeth himself to us as an unshakeable pillar of piety. Wherefore, O ye assemblies 
of the divinely wise, be ye exalted in the spirit to the heights, crying to the venerable 
one: O venerable father Seraphim, beseech the Lord to grant peace and great mercy 
to our souls!  
Wondrous are Thy mysteries, O Christ our God, for Thou hast given us a beacon 
in the venerable Seraphim, a mighty champion for our right-believing hierarchs 
against the adversary, and intercessor for monks and all Orthodox Christians, and the 
boast and foundation of his holy monastery, who now doth entreat Thee, O Lord, to 
grant peace and great mercy unto our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
When thou didst enter the wilderness of Sarov, O venerable one, having utterly 
cast off thine own will, thou didst show steadfast obedience to all, for thou didst 
joyously endure vexation and dishonor. Thou didst receive blows and stripes from 
evil men, for whom thou didst yet pray, O venerable one. And glorifying thy most 
honored memory, we beseech thee, O venerable one: Beg the Lord to grant peace to 
the world and great mercy to our souls.  
Blessed is the Monastery of Sarov, which hath thee, O venerable father Seraphim, 
as a treasury of virtues, a vessel of purity and chastity, a receptacle of grace, a fount of 
healings, a physician who cureth the infirm without fee, a true faster, a comforter of 
the afflicted, and a calm haven for those who are tempest-tossed by the passions of 
life. O venerable father Seraphim, pray that peace and great mercy be granted unto us 
who keep thine honored memory.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Come, ye assemblies of the faithful, let us glorify our most wondrous father with 
songs of praise today, and let us cry thus unto him: O venerable father Seraphim, 
thou wast truly deemed worthy of a godly life, receiving a crown of unfading glory 
from God. Wherefore, the Monastery of Sarov doth boast of thee, and the people, 
beholding the precious shrine of thy relics and the miracles that take place through 
thine intercession, glorify the Lord Who doth glorify thee. Beseech Him, O venerable 
father, that He grant peace and great mercy to our souls!  
Both now ..., Doxasticon of the forefeast, in Tone VIII:  
The Christ of truth cometh to the Jordan to be baptized of John, and he sayeth 
unto Him: “I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me? I who am 
grass dare not touch fire! But do Thou, O Master, sanctify me by Thy divine 
revelation!”  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the Day. And three Lessons: 
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (3:1-9). 
But the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no 
torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their 
departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they 
are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
he tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with him: for grace and mercy is to his saints, and he hath 
care for his elect.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (5:15-6:3) 
But the righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the 
care of them is with the most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, 
and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall he cover 
them, and with his arm shall he protect them. He shall take to him his jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature his weapon for the revenge of his enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of an 
helmet. He shall take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall he 
sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with him against the unwise. Then shall 
the right aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn 
bow, shall they fly to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a 
stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall 
cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm 
shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill-dealing 
shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear therefore, O ye kings, and 
understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the 
people, and glory in the multitude of nations, for power is given you of the Lord, and 
sovereignty from the Highest, who shall try your works, and search out your counsels.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (4:7-15) 
But though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was loved of him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted he to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in their minds, 
That his grace and mercy is with his saints, and that he hath respect unto his chosen.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone I: 
With what crowns of praise shall we crown the great ascetic, the venerable 
Seraphim? For he was shown to be a good guide in steadfast faith and virtue, 
instructing those who came unto him with divinely inspired teachings and by his 
angelic life. Wherefore, we cry unto him: O venerable one, beseech Christ to establish 
the Orthodox faith and to save our souls! 
 
  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Come, O ye multitudes of monks, let us piously praise the venerable one today, the 
true disciple of the Savior, who hath trampled down the deception of the world, hath 
taken the yoke of Christ upon his shoulders, and put to shame the hosts of the 
demons. Let us cry thus unto him: O father Seraphim, forget not us who praise and 
honor thy holy memory!  
O venerable Seraphim, thy radiant and godly memory hath struck kings, princes 
and hierarchs with wonder, for while yet in the flesh thou, like one of the bodiless 
hosts, didst put to shame the invisible enemies. The whole province of Tambov and 
the holy Monastery of Sarov rejoice, possessed of thy holy relics, through which 
health is granted unto all who draw nigh to thy precious reliquary in faith. Wherefore, 
enlightened by thee we cry unto thee, O venerable one: Pray thou that our souls be 
saved!  
Glory ..., of the venerable one, in Tone V: 
O land of Russia, rejoice this day; and be thou glad, O holy Monastery of Sarov! 
Ye multitudes of the faithful who have hastened hither today, let us glorify our 
venerable father, pastor and teacher, the divinely wise guide of those astray, the ready 
healer of all the afflicted, the great adornment of the Russian land, whom praising 
thus we say: O venerable Seraphim, save us by thy prayers!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Thou art the temple and portal, * the palace and throne of the King, * O most 
honored Virgin, * through whom Christ the Lord, my Redeemer, * Who is the Sun of 
righteousness, * hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in darkness, * deigning 
to enlighten those * whom He hath fashioned in His image by His own hand. * 
Wherefore, O all-hymned one, * as thou hast acquired a mother’s boldness before 
Him, ** entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be saved. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone V; 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice, O life-bearing Cross ...”: 
Rejoice, converser with angels, O venerable Seraphim! Having lived piously on 
earth, thou didst teach the fear of the Lord unto the many who came to thee. 
Illumined by the grace of the most holy Spirit, thou didst behold as present things 
which were to come, and hast filled many that were suffering in spirit with com-
punction and joy. Wherefore, we beseech thee: Pray to the Lord on behalf of those 
who honor thee!  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Rejoice, most wondrous instructor of the erring, who wast deemed worthy to 
behold in the temple Christ the Lord with angels and archangels. And now, O 
venerable one, who in the heavens dost take unceasing delight in the vision of Him, 
do thou pray for us who keep thy memory in faith.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Rejoice, O venerable Seraphim, for thou hast commanded all to keep Christ’s true 
faith; and, yearning for the life on high, thou didst disdain wealth, wherefore thou 
dost now behold the ineffable beauty of heaven and takest delight in the sweet 
hymnody of the angels. Entreat thou the Lord, that He grant unto us peace and great 
mercy.  
Glory ..., of the venerable one, in Tone VI: 
O venerable father Seraphim, who can recount thy labors and sufferings? And 
what tongue can describe thy harsh life in the wilderness, thy vigils and fasting, yea, 
and thy life in seclusion, thy silence and unceasing prayer? Thou hast truly been 
shown to be the adornment of those who fast and a steadfast intercessor before God. 
Wherefore, we cry unto thee: Rejoice, O model of monastic life! Rejoice, great 
consolation amid misfortunes and sorrows, and fervent advocate for all! O venerable 
one, pray thou that our souls be saved!  
Both now ..., Doxasticon of the forefeast, in Tone I:  
Come, all ye faithful, and, forsaking the land of Judea, let us cross over the 
wilderness of Jordan; and there shall we behold today Him Who hath appeared in the 
flesh for our sake, requesting baptism in the streams of the Jordan from the Baptist, 
who refused, crying aloud in fear: “I dare not touch Fire with my hand of clay! For 
Jordan and the sea fled and turned back, O Savior; how can I therefore place my 
hand upon the crown of the head of Thee, before Whom the seraphim tremble? 
Jordan fled when Elisha received the mantle of Elijah; and how is it that it hath not 
sunk into chaos and the lower depths, beholding Thee naked in its streams? How is it 
that it doth not scald me who am set all afire by Thee?” “Wherefore dost thou hesi-
tate to baptize my Lord, O Baptist?” the Jordan cried out to John. ‘‘Why hinderest 
thou the cleansing of many? Sanctify all creation, and remain Thou also to sanctify 
me, and the nature of water, for it is for this that Thou hast made Thyself manifest!”  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
From thy youth didst thou love Christ, O blessed one; * and, aflame with the 
desire to serve Him alone, * thou didst struggle in the wilderness in unceasing prayer 
and labor; * and with compunction of heart having acquired the love of Christ, * thou 
wast shown to be the beloved favorite of the Mother of God. * Wherefore, we cry 
unto thee: ** Save us by thy prayers, O our venerable father Seraphim. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion of the forefeast, In Tone IV:  
Make ready, O Zebulon! * Adorn thyself, O Nephthali! * O River Jordan, leaping 
up, * receive thou the Master Who cometh to be baptized! * Rejoice, O Adam, with 
our first mother! * Hide not yourselves as ye did before in paradise; * for He who 
beheld you naked hath appeared, * that He may clothe you in your primal raiment. ** 
Christ hath appeared, desiring to make all creation new!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
From thy youth didst thou love Christ, O blessed one; * and, aflame with the 
desire to serve Him alone, * thou didst struggle in the wilderness in unceasing prayer 
and labor; * and with compunction of heart having acquired the love of Christ, * thou 
wast shown to be the beloved favorite of the Mother of God. * Wherefore, we cry 
unto thee: ** Save us by thy prayers, O our venerable father Seraphim. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Make ready, O Zebulon! * Adorn thyself, O Nephthali! * O River Jordan, leaping 
up, * receive thou the Master Who cometh to be baptized! * Rejoice, O Adam, with 
our first mother! * Hide not yourselves as ye did before in paradise; * for He who 
beheld you naked hath appeared, * that He may clothe you in your primal raiment. ** 
Christ hath appeared, desiring to make all creation new!  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Having overcome the temptations of the enemy by the sign of the Cross and by 
prayer, thou didst please the Lord right well with fasting and abstinence. Wherefore, 
thou didst receive the gift of miracles, bestowing healing upon all that approach the 
shrine of thy relics with faith, O venerable Seraphim. Beseech Christ God, that He 
grant forgiveness of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Having clothed Thyself in my poverty, O my Jesus, mingling with Thy servants 
Thou comest forth, requesting baptism of a servant, O Lover of mankind. Wherefore, 
John, beholding Thee, cried out: “How can I baptize Thee Who art wholly without 
defilement, O supremely good God?  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
In the depths of the wilderness of Sarov thou didst kneel upon a rock, stretching 
forth thy venerable hands unto the Lord. Wherefore, thou didst receive from the 
Savior the grace of the Holy Spirit, to heal suffering bodies and to enlighten the souls 
of the faithful. Therefore, we cry unto thee: Entreat Christ God, O venerable one, 
that He save us who celebrate thy holy memory! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
The Rich One, having beggared Himself in His great tender compassion, and 
desiring to enrich us who once made ourselves beggars through intemperance, 
cometh forth to enter the streams of the Jordan and to be baptized openly by John. O 
ye faithful, let us hymn His extreme humility!  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Polyeleos, and this Magnification: We bless thee, O venerable father Seraphim, 
and we honor thy holy memory, thou instructor of monks and converser with 
angels.  
The Selected Psalm verses: 
A: I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my 
calling.  
B: He set my feet upon the rock, and ordered my goings.  
Glory ..., Now and ever ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
Thy virtuous life hath now shone forth in the land of Russia, O venerable one, and 
thou art glorified with hymns of praise by all; for, like Elijah ascending on the chariot 
of the virtues, in thy soul thou hast soared aloft to heaven, and there hast been justly 
crowned with a most splendid crown. Wherefore, we cry unto thee in thanksgiving: O 
blessed Seraphim, beseech Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto us that 
honor thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
In His goodness Christ cometh forth to the streams of the River Jordan, and 
therein He wishes to accomplish our renewal through grace; the godly Forerunner, 
rejoicing, hath received Him, washing in the waters Him Who wished it, the only 
Lover of mankind.  
Hymns of Ascent, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of his 
saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that he hath rendered unto me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (11:27-30)  
The Lord spake unto His disciples saying: All things are delivered unto me of my 
Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the 
Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Come unto me, 
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, 
and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your 
souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
Celebrating in spirit on the appointed festival of the venerable father and piously 
rejoicing, let us fervently cry aloud today, O ye faithful: Rejoice, O blessed Seraphim! 
Rejoice, heavenly man and earthly angel! Rejoice, O thou who hast guided many to 
the path of salvation! Rejoice, boast of pious Orthodox Christians and confirmation 
of the Russian land! Pray thou on behalf of our souls!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
The canon of the forefeast, with 6 Troparia, including its Irmos, followed by both 
canons of the venerable one, with a total of 8 Troparia. 
ODE I 
Canon of the forefeast of the Theophany, the acrostic whereof is the alphabet, the 
composition of Joseph the Hymnographer, in Tone II: 
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * Who by His divine command * dried up 
the billowing and impassable sea, * and through it led the Israelite people on 
foot: * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
The divine Forerunner, aware of the advent of the Lord, emerged from the desert, 
radiantly crying aloud: “Our deliverance hath drawn nigh and appeared! Repent ye, 
and cleanse yourselves with water!”  
O Word, Who art co-beginningless with the Father, with the sprinkling of 
repentance, which is Thy baptism, ever grant redemption to the faithful, for the sake 
of Thine immeasurable loving-kindness.  
The land of Zebulon, as it is written, having beheld the never-setting Light, was 
enlightened; for, lo! He is come to the streams of the Jordan! Wherefore hymning the 
God of all, it crieth aloud: Let us chant unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been 
glorified!  
The divinely eloquent Forerunner, seeing all the people who had come, exclaimed 
to them: “Who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth 
therefore fruits of repentance, O ye who are saved by grace!”  
Canon I of the venerable one, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory.  
O Lord, open mine unworthy lips and grant me a word of understanding, that I 
may worthily hymn the memory of the blessed Seraphim, who with the angels doth 
now beseech Thee to deliver us from every grievous circumstance.  
Thou wast a great intercessor before the Theotokos, O venerable one, and wast 
deemed worthy to behold her with the apostles. And now, cease not to visit thy 
children by thine intercessions.  
From thy youth, O venerable one, thou didst surrender thyself in mind unto the 
Lord, and having subdued the passions of thy body through rigorous abstinence, thou 
wast adorned with every virtue, O most wise one.  
Theotokion: O all-blessed Lady, who hast given birth unto the supremely good 
God in the flesh, cleanse thou my heart which is tormented by passions, that I may 
magnify thee with faith and love.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Canon II of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us now sing. 
Thou didst tread the straight and narrow path to the heavenly kingdom in 
accordance with the commandment of Christ the Master, disdaining the broad and 
spacious path. And now do thou pray for us that keep thy most radiant memory.  
Having ascended the mount of dispassion and taken up thy cross from thy youth, 
thou didst unfalteringly follow after Christ. And having acquired spiritual wisdom, 
thou didst attain the heavenly Jerusalem, O venerable one. Pray thou to the Lover of 
mankind on our behalf.  
Standing now before the throne of God, O venerable one, intercede thou for the 
suffering Russian land; and by thy prayers, O venerable one, entreat salvation for the 
Christ-loving people of Russia.  
Theotokion: Hearken, O Lady, unto those who flee to thee with faith and love, 
and who hymn thee with fear.  
Katavasia: The Lord mighty in battle * uncovered the foundation of the deep * 
and led His servants on dry ground; * but He covered their adversaries with 
the waters, * for He hath been glorified. 
ODE III 
Canon of the forefeast 
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
“The Christ hath appeared!” the Forerunner crieth out, “And He cometh up to the 
streams of the Jordan! Let us make haste to greet Him, enlightened by pure 
thoughts!”  
O my God, Thou deliverance of all, having clothed Thyself in my abundant 
poverty, Thou approachest to be baptized, seeking me who have strayed from the 
right path.  
Let earth and heaven now join chorus, for the Benefactor of all is baptized, 
submerging the multitude of our countless transgressions in the waters. 
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Standing before God with the angels in thy prayer, O venerable one, pray thou for 
the whole world, that the assaults of the enemy be overcome and that Orthodox 
Christians be granted victory over their adversaries.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
From thy youth thou didst cleave with faith and love unto the Master of the hosts 
on high, O venerable Seraphim; and, shining forth like the sun in the wilderness of 
Sarov, thou wast a comfort to those who approached thee in sorrow. Pray thou that 
we be saved!  
To those who pray unto thee, thou hast been revealed to be an unshakeable pillar 
and a refuge for those who have recourse unto the Monastery of Sarov, and abundant 
grace for those who receive healings.  
Theotokion: Our first mother Eve heard: In sorrow thou shalt bring forth 
children. And thou, O pure Virgin, hearing: The Lord is with thee! Rejoice! didst put 
to flight the grief of our first mother with this cry of joy!  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Beseech Christ God, O blessed one, to deliver us from famine and plagues, from 
sudden death, from secret transgressions and wicked thoughts, that with a pure heart 
we may cry out to Christ: O Lord, save us by the supplications of the venerable one!  
Following after Christ the Master in meekness and humility, thou wast all things to 
all mankind; tirelessly instructing both rich and poor in piety, thou didst foresee the 
future as though it were the present. Beseech Christ God, O venerable one, to grant 
us forgiveness of our sins!  
Deliver thy monastery from every assault of the enemy, O venerable one, and fill it 
with love and grace, that it heed not the cares of this life, but attain unto the goodness 
and beauty which save the soul.  
Theotokion: Our trust and hope art thou, O most holy Sovereign Lady. Save the 
suffering Russian land and thy people that pray and call upon thy holy name!  
Katavasia: The Lord who granteth strength unto our kings, * and exalteth the 
horn of His anointed, * is born of a Virgin and cometh unto baptism. * 
Therefore let us, the faithful, cry aloud: * None is as holy as our God. 
The Kontakion of the Forefeast, In Tone IV,  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou Hast Appeared Today ...”: 
In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: * Fear not to 
baptize Me, ** for I have come to save Adam the first-formed!  
Ikos: “I do not require thee to transgress the bounds of what is meet, O Baptist; I 
am not saying unto thee: Tell Me what thou tellest the iniquitous, and what thou 
teachest sinners. Only baptize Me in silence, awaiting those things which come 
through baptism; for it is for the sake of this that thou hast received a dignity which 

--- PAGE 14 ---
even the angels do not possess; for I have made thee greater than all the prophets. 
Thus, not one of them beheld Me plainly, but only in images, shadows and 
reflections; but thou dost behold Me standing before thee. For I am come to save 
Adam the first-formed!”  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Having utterly overcome the passions of the sea of life by abstinence, and attained 
unto the haven of dispassion, thou wast revealed as a vessel of abstinence, O 
venerable Seraphim. Beseech Christ God to grant us great mercy!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the shepherds ...”: 
O invisible God, unapproachable Word, Thou wast begotten of the Father in a 
manner transcending nature and past all telling; and again, in the latter days, without 
altering what Thou wast, Thou wast born of the Virgin and hast now come to be 
baptized in the flesh in the streams of the Jordan, O Thou Who as God hast been 
well pleased to save the race of mankind.  
ODE IV 
Canon of the forefeast 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry to Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
The great Forerunner doth marvel at Thine arrival, O Jesus our Benefactor, and in 
awe he crieth out to Thee: “O Master Who art fire, burn me not who am grass!”  
“Beholding Me standing in these waters of Mine own will, O John, do thou now 
draw nigh and baptize Me, that with water I may fashion grace for the human race!”  
“I have come to know Thee in the flesh to be as the sun which covereth itself with 
clouds. How therefore is it that I now behold Thee naked, clothed in the waters?” 
John cried out, marveling.  
“Human nature is enlightened and receiveth deliverance from the darkness of sin, 
and is clothed from on high with the divine vesture of incorruption when I am 
stripped naked.”  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Today the Monastery of Sarov doth radiantly celebrate thy memory, O venerable 
one, beseeching thee: Ask of the Lord peace for the whole world and great mercy for 
our souls!  
In thy great struggles didst thou flourish like a palm tree, O venerable one, 
sweetening the hearts of those who have recourse unto thee with fruitful words and a 

--- PAGE 15 ---
blameless life: Wherefore, do thou now pray that we obtain mercy from Christ our 
Savior!  
By thy prayers entreat God for us, O venerable Seraphim, and drive away the 
sinful darkness of our grief. Adorn with dispassion, faith and love all who honor thy 
most glorious memory!  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O Virgin Sovereign Lady, thou beauty of the Churches, 
might and boast of the suffering Russian land! Pray to Christ God without ceasing, 
that He preserve us from misfortunes by thy prayers.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
It is not the Monastery of Sarov alone, but the whole land of Russia which hath 
thee, O blessed one, as a fervent intercessor and speedy helper, almighty and 
invincible defender and mediator for our souls.  
Be thou an intercessor and mediator for us before the most holy Trinity, and move 
thou to pray with thee the choirs of the saints whose life thou didst emulate, O 
venerable one. With them pray for peace and the good estate of the whole world, that 
in this age we may live a peaceful and quiet life, and in the future inherit eternal life.  
Being great among fasters, O venerable one, thou didst lead an arduous monastic 
life in the wilderness, and didst end it in compunctionate prayer. Pray that we be 
saved!  
Theotokion: Thou art our refuge and confirmation, O most pure Theotokos. 
Beseech thy Son and our God, that He grant us salvation and forgiveness of sins.  
Katavasia: I heard, O Lord, Thy voice, * which Thou didst call the voice of one 
crying in the wilderness, * for Thou didst thunder over the multitude of waters, 
* bearing witness to Thy Son. * And, wholly filled with the Spirit which had 
descended, * He cried aloud: * Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of 
God! 
 
ODE V 
Canon of the forefeast 
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Crying out, ‘‘Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand,” the sacred 
Forerunner appeared out of the desert, renewing those who had grown desolate in 
evil deeds.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
His law and the sacred company of the prophets said of old that the Christ would 
come, renewing through divine baptism us who wax old through our many 
transgressions.  
“Strange and awesome things do I behold today,” said John, “for now the 
Wellspring of immortality is come to ask baptism of the least droplet!”  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Unto all who come to thee thou hast been a true teacher and a great intercessor 
before the Theotokos. And now, O venerable one, cease not to pray for thy children, 
for thou hast great boldness.  
Let the Christian people now enter into the temple of the Monastery of Sarov, 
bowing down before thy precious relics, O venerable Seraphim, and, glorifying Christ, 
let them ask of thee healing and salvation.  
The invisible enemy desired to affright thee when thou wast praying to God at 
night, O venerable one. But, put to shame by thy prayer, the most wicked one 
vanished.  
Theotokion: O most pure Mary, beseech God Who was born of thee, that He 
grant forgiveness of transgressions unto thy servants.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
Thou didst glorify the Monastery of Sarov with fasting and unceasing prayer, O 
venerable one, anointing the infirm with oil from the icon of the Theotokos and 
granting them healing in abundance. Pray thou now that our souls be saved!  
O ye hierarchs and priests, rejoice with the monks of Sarov, and ye people, hymn 
together the blessed father, the calm haven of those who are tempest-tossed by 
sorrows, the ready healer of infirmities of body and soul.  
Offer up thy prayers, O venerable one, as an acceptable and unblemished sacrifice 
unto the most holy Trinity, and forget not us who now keep thy memory. Beg mercy 
for those who hate, wrong and are angered against us, and deliver all from every 
sorrow.  
Theotokion: Guide my mind which is tempest-tossed by many passions, O 
Sovereign Lady. Save us who have recourse unto thee, O Theotokos, for apart from 
thee we know none other help, O pure one.  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Katavasia: Jesus, the Prince of Life, * hath come to set loose from 
condemnation * Adam the first-formed man; * and though as God He needeth 
no cleansing, * yet for the sake of fallen man He is cleansed in the Jordan. * In 
its streams He slew the enmity * and bestoweth the peace that passeth all 
understanding. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the forefeast 
Irmos: The deep abyss of offenses hath surrounded me, O Lord, * but do 
Thou lead up my life from corruption, * as Thou didst the Prophet Jonah, O 
Lord.  
As rain onto a fleece of wool do Thou drop down the forgiveness of our sins, O 
Lover of mankind, Who in Thy great mercy, drowned the transgressions of those 
born of earth in the streams of the Jordan.  
Being an abyss of righteousness, O Christ, Thou dost now come forth to the River 
Jordan to drown the serpent and to wash away the crime of Adam.  
“How can the river’s streams hold Thee Who art truly a stream of incorruption, O 
Christ?” the Forerunner cried aloud, glorifying Thy great compassion.  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Thy holy soul was an abode of God, wherein the Father, the Son and the Holy 
Spirit dwelt. Wherefore, we pray thee, O venerable one, dispel the slanders of the 
enemy from those who honor thee, and grant peace to the suffering land of Russia.  
O venerable Seraphim, we honor thy great struggles and labors in the wilderness 
and the sweetness of thy teaching, whereby thou hast enlightened many who came to 
thee, teaching them to hymn the consubstantial Trinity.  
Following after Christ the Master in purity of life, thou didst complete the good 
race, O venerable one. Having ascended to the eternal mansions, thou dost behold 
there what the angels see. Wherefore, honoring thy memory, we glorify Christ.  
Theotokion: I now flee unto thee, O most pure one. Save and preserve me by thy 
supplications. For whatsoever thou desirest, that thou canst do, in that thou art the 
Mother of the Almighty.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O my 
God. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
We are all full of sin, but thy prayers, O venerable Seraphim, ascend unto the Lord 
like fragrant incense. We now pray thee: Calm thou the raging storm of evil impiety in 
the land of Russia, and entreat the Lord for the salvation of our souls.  
Truly blessed wast thou, O venerable Seraphim, having acquired riches through 
poverty, and through tears, joy, which thou didst abundantly bestow upon those who 
came to thee. And now emitting rays of miracles, thou dost heal all who have 
recourse unto thee in faith.  
Having dug with thine own hands a well in the wilderness, O venerable one, thou 
didst give drink unto the thirsty that came unto thee. And now thou healest the 
diseases of the sick with the water of this well. Truly, the Master hath shown thee 
forth unto all as a miraculous intercessor and wonderworker, O venerable one.  
Theotokion: We confess thee to be indeed the Mother of God, the true 
Theotokos, for by thy birthgiving we have been delivered from the curse of 
corruption, by the tender compassion of God, the Lover of mankind, and have been 
called to life incorruptible.  
Katavasia: The Voice of the Word, the Candlestick of the Light, * the Morning 
Star and Forerunner of the Sun, * cried in the wilderness to all the peoples: * 
‘Repent and be cleansed beforehand. * For lo, Christ is at hand, * Who 
delivereth the world from corruption. 
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Having forsaken the beauty of the world and the corruption therein, * thou didst 
take up thine abode in the Monastery of Sarov. * And having lived there as an angel, * 
thou didst become a path for many to salvation. * Wherefore, Christ hath glorified 
thee, O father Seraphim, * enriching thee with the gift of healings and miracles. ** 
Therefore, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O our venerable father Seraphim!  
Ikos: Having forsaken family and friends, and regarding riches as but dust, thou 
didst take up thine abode in the wilderness of Sarov; and having struggled against the 
passions like one of the bodiless hosts, thou wast deemed worthy to stand in the 
angelic choir. Wherefore, having received spiritual knowledge, grant even us, O 
venerable one, to chant this unto thee with understanding, saying: Rejoice, O blessed 
Seraphim, heavenly man and earthly angel! Rejoice, emulator of Christ in thy love! 
Rejoice, abode of the Holy Spirit! Rejoice, great joy of the despondent! Rejoice, 
source of healing! Rejoice, sweet consolation for sorrowful souls! Rejoice, calm haven 
for monks and most wise instructor! Rejoice, boast of the land of Russia! Rejoice, O 
our venerable father Seraphim!  
ODE VII 
Canon of the forefeast 
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Clothing me in sacred vesture, who have been stripped naked through the counsel 
of the false one, O Christ, Thou hast come in the richness of Thy goodness to pass 
naked through the waters. I hymn Thy tender compassion and worship Thy 
wondrous providence.  
When John beheld Thee naked and commanding that he baptize Thee, he said: 
“What is this great economy toward us, O Christ? What is this poverty? What is this 
ineffable descent which passeth understanding?”  
Thou didst light Thy precious flesh like a lamp in the midst of the Jordan, O 
Christ, and didst search for Thine image which had been buried by sin and the 
passions; and finding it, Thou didst adorn it with Thy baptism, O Good One. 
Wherefore, we hymn Thee.  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Wondrously was thy life shown to be full of the grace of the divine Spirit, O 
venerable one. Truly thou didst receive the blessed end of the righteous, rejoicing in 
Christ. And we cry out to Him who hath glorified thee: O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Gathering together at thy holy monastery today, a multitude of people doth bow 
down before thy precious relics, O venerable Seraphim, and we all draw forth 
healings therefrom, crying out unceasingly: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
This report hath gone out into all the world, that a most glorious wonderworker 
hath appeared in Sarov, pouring forth a multitude of healings upon all who with faith 
approach and cry out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, who ineffably didst give birth unto the Word, 
thy Creator: With the venerable Seraphim beseech Him to have mercy upon our 
souls!  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Have mercy on us, O Lord, and through the prayers of him who pleased Thee, the 
venerable Seraphim, preserve us from every soul-corrupting evil, that we may all cry 
out with compunction: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Who is not astounded, who doth not glorify the unfathomable abyss of Thy tender 
compassion, O Lord? For Thou hast revealed to the whole world him that pleased 
Thee, the venerable Seraphim, the fervent intercessor before Thee for us who cry 
aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Accept this hymn of thanksgiving which we offer unto thee, O venerable 
Seraphim, and grant healing unto all of us who keep thy holy memory, and who bow 
down before the shrine of thy relics and cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
Theotokion: Thou art our refuge and confirmation, O most holy Theotokos. 
Entreat thy Son and our God to grant us salvation and forgiveness of sins.  
Katavasia: The breath of the wind heavy with dew * and the descent of the 
angel of God * preserved the Holy Children from all harm, * as they walked in 
the fiery furnace. * Refreshed with dew in the flames, * they sang in 
thanksgiving: * ‘Blessed and supremely praised art Thou, * O Lord God of our 
fathers.’ 
ODE VIII  
Canon of the forefeast 
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
John stood forth, the voice of him crying out clearly in the wilderness, turning the 
hearts of those who have fervently repented to glorify the Savior and Master Who 
appeared in the Jordan.  
“A rushing torrent art Thou, Who fashioned the sea and the wellsprings, and how 
comest Thou up to the waters? Why seekest Thou cleansing, O Thou Who art the 
washing and purification of those who hymn Thee, O Christ, throughout all ages?”  
Seeking to dry up the streams of the enemy’s malice, to drain the sea of the 
passions and to pour forth cleansing and forgiveness upon the faithful, a Master, 
Thou comest to be baptized in the streams of the Jordan.  
O Creator of the hours and years, having in Thy tender compassion come under 
time, Thou hast shone forth timelessly from the beginningless Father, and hast come 
to wash away in the streams of the Jordan the transgressions committed throughout 
all ages.  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Having subdued the passions of the flesh and died to the world, thou didst receive 
the words of eternal life in thy heart, O blessed one, teaching all who had recourse 
unto thee to cry aloud: O ye works, praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages! 
  

--- PAGE 21 ---
At the glorification of thy precious relics, O venerable one, the Monastery of Sarov 
was filled with joy. And all the people cried out unto God Who is wondrous in His 
saints: O ye works, praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him for ever!  
Being filled with the grace of the divine Spirit, O venerable Seraphim, through thy 
prayers beg forgiveness of sins for the faithful people that keep thy holy memory and 
cry out: Ye children, bless; ye priests, praise; ye people, and supremely exalt the Lord 
throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, who hast given birth unto the Savior and Master of all, 
thou hast been shown forth to us as the mediatress of salvation; wherefore, we pray 
thee: Grant salvation unto all who faithfully hymn thee throughout the ages.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
The most evil enemy, hating thy virtuous life, desired to cause thee to falter, O 
venerable one. But having put him to shame by the grace of God and the prayers of 
the Theotokos, thou didst glorify God, singing: O ye works, praise ye the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
As flashing lightning illumineth the firmament, so have the reports of thy wonders 
gone forth throughout all the world, O venerable one. And marveling at thy glory, we 
cry out: O ye children, bless; ye priests, praise; ye people, supremely exalt the Lord 
throughout all ages!  
Heal thou our minds which are disquieted by vain and passionate imaginings, O 
venerable one; quell thou the waves of evil disbelief in our land, and strengthen our 
hearts, which are crippled by worldly cares, that we may glorify Christ the Creator 
throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O fiery throne of the Lord! Rejoice, O ray of immaterial 
splendor! Rejoice, thou cloud of the radiant Sun of righteousness, Christ our Savior, 
Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages!  
Katavasia: The Babylonian furnace, as it poured forth dew, * foreshadowed a 
marvelous mystery: * how the Jordan should receive in its streams the 
immaterial fire, * and should encompass the Creator, * when He was baptized 
in the flesh. * Him do ye peoples bless and supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the forefeast 
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Seeing Thee, our Benefactor, coming to him and asking baptism of him with 
humility, John marveled, astonished, in no wise daring to touch with his hand Thee 
Who touchest all the mountains and makest them smoke.  
Like the cherished swallow heralding a noetic spring, the Baptist hath called forth 
to those caught up in the deep mid-winter of boundless transgressions and ever 
endure the blizzard of adverse spirits and evil passions.  
With hymns do we magnify Thee, O Lord, as God and Savior, the Effulgence of 
the glory of the Father, the never-setting Sun Who hast shone forth upon those who 
sit in the darkness of evil, and art come to enlighten all.  
Seeing thy barrenness, O my soul, the axe of death, lying at thy root, threateneth to 
hew thee down as an unfruitful tree. But cry out to God with fervent repentance: I 
have sinned against Thee! Save me!  
The voice of one crying out hath been heard in the wilderness of our hearts, 
saying: “Be ye glad! Christ hath come forth, granting forgiveness unto all! Be ye all 
sanctified, O springs and rivers, valleys and mountains, and all places under the 
heavens!”  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Accept, and disdain not, our small tribute, offered unto thee from unworthy lips, 
O venerable one. Sanctify all who glorify thee, and deliver us from misfortunes, 
dangers and eternal torments, that we may hymn thee throughout the ages.  
Manfully enduring the heat of the day and the cold of night in the solitude of the 
wilderness, thou wast an abode of the Wisdom of God, and didst hasten toward the 
unwaning radiance. Pray thou that we be saved!  
This day is the monastery glorified, wherein thou didst consent to take upon 
thyself the yoke of Christ; for there didst thou spend thy days in the wilderness; and, 
enlightening by thy teachings the many who came unto thee, thou didst teach them to 
be children of the Church of Christ.  
Theotokion: Thou art our strength, thou art our boast and joy, our protectress, 
help, refuge and invincible intercessor. O most pure Theotokos, save thou thy 
servants!  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we truly confess thee to be the 
Theotokos, * and with the choirs of bodiless hosts we magnify thee.  
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Emulating the great fathers who of old shone forth in fasting and ascetic struggle, 
O venerable one, thou didst spend all the days of thy life in prayer, tears and labor, 
until thou didst attain unto the heavenly mansions. Wherefore as is meet, we bless 
thee.  
With mighty power did Christ God gird thee about and strengthen thee to 
overcome the wiles of the demons, O venerable one. Wherefore, we now pray thee: 
Entreat God, the Lover of mankind, to deliver us all from the assaults and 
temptations of the enemies, and to save our souls.  
In our pain and sorrow we flee to thee, O venerable one, and cry out from the 
depths of our souls: Be thou a calm haven and ready healer for the sick, and deliver 
us from every ill and want, that we may unceasingly magnify thee.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, thou didst give birth unto One of the Holy 
Trinity, the Son and Word, Whom do thou entreat with the saints and the righteous 
on behalf of thy servants who with faith ask forgiveness of sins.  
Katavasia: Every tongue is at a loss to praise thee as is due: * even a spirit from 
the world above is filled with dizziness, * when it seeketh to sing thy praises, 
O Theotokos. * But since thou art good, accept our faith: * Thou knowest well 
our love inspired by God, * for thou art the Protector of Christians and we 
magnify thee. 
Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Come, all ye faithful, let us praise with sacred hymns the venerable Seraphim, 
wondrous in miracles, the new beacon of the land of Russia, the converser with 
angels and fervent intercessor before God for those who honor his holy memory!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Exapostilarion of the forefeast, in the same melody:  
The voice of one crying out hath been raised: “Leap up, O mountains! Join 
chorus, O race of men! for the beginningless Word, Who as a man hath taken flesh 
upon Himself, is come, being baptized by hands which He fashioned, drowning the 
sin of the world in the Jordan.  
On the Praises, 6 Stichera: 
3 Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone VI,  
Spec. Mel.: “O angelic hosts ...”: 
O hosts of angels, go forth from Bethlehem to the streams of the Jordan! O John, 
forsaking the desert, go before us all! Rejoice, O river, and make ready! Let all the 
earth rejoice! Christ cometh to wash away the sin of Adam, for He is compassionate!  
With pure mouths and cleansed souls come ye mystically, leaving Bethlehem; and 
going with Christ to the Jordan, let us hymn Him with gladness, O all ye lands, saying 
with faith: Blessed art Thou, O God, Who hast come! Glory be to Thee!  

--- PAGE 24 ---
Great and awesome is the mystery, for God hath made Himself like man, though 
he kneweth not sin in any wise; and, though innocent, He asketh to be baptized of 
John in the River Jordan today. O our blessed God, Who hast made Thyself manifest, 
glory be to Thee!  
3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
The most honored feast of the Monastery of Sarov hath arrived, the memorial of 
the venerable Seraphim, to whom we now cry out: Rejoice, light and confirmation of 
fasters, star like unto that of the Magi, showing monks the way to the heavenly 
mansions, most glorious boast of priests, ever-flowing fountain of love and chastity, 
most radiant beacon of spiritual discernment! Rejoice, O great model of the virtues!  
O blessed father Seraphim, thou didst truly follow after Christ, drawing all to 
thyself by brotherly love and guilelessness, teaching mankind the path of virtue 
through meekness and humility. Wherefore, we lovingly bless thy memory, O 
venerable Seraphim.  
Thou didst dwell in the wilderness, O venerable one, and, being filled with divine 
wisdom, thou didst ascend to the summit of virtue. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: 
Rejoice, adornment of the Church, fair consolation of priests, splendor and boast of 
monks, O blessed Seraphim! Pray Christ God to grant peace to the world and great 
mercy to our souls!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Come, ye assemblies of monks and conference of fasters; come, ye multitudes of 
Christian people, let us honor the true faster with hymns, crying aloud: Rejoice, thou 
who didst traverse the narrow path in the steps of Christ the Master, thou ready 
helper of those who come to thee in tribulations and sorrows, O most wondrous 
mediator of salvation! Rejoice, thou who wast adorned with the gift of prophecy, 
foretelling the future as though it were the present! Pray thou, O venerable Seraphim, 
for those who honor thy holy memory with faith and love. 
Both now ..., of the forefeast, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII: 
“O Forerunner John, who knewest Me, the Lamb, while yet in the womb of thy 
mother, minister unto Me at the river, offer unto Me service with the angels. 
Stretching forth thy hand, touch the most pure crown of My head; and when thou 
seest the mountains smoke and Jordan turn back, cry aloud with them: O Lord, Who 
wast incarnate of the Virgin for our salvation, glory be to Thee!”  
Great Doxology. Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
From thy youth didst thou love Christ, O blessed one; * and, aflame with the 
desire to serve Him alone, * thou didst struggle in the wilderness in unceasing prayer 
and labor; * and with compunction of heart having acquired the love of Christ, * thou 
wast shown to be the beloved favorite of the Mother of God. * Wherefore, we cry 
unto thee: ** Save us by thy prayers, O our venerable father Seraphim. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Make ready, O Zebulon! * Adorn thyself, O Nephthali! * O River Jordan, leaping 
up, * receive thou the Master Who cometh to be baptized! * Rejoice, O Adam, with 
our first mother! * Hide not yourselves as ye did before in paradise; * for He who 
beheld you naked hath appeared, * that He may clothe you in your primal raiment. ** 
Christ hath appeared, desiring to make all creation new!  
Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia. 4 from ODE III of the canon of the forefeast, 
and 4 from ODE VI of the first canon of the venerable one:  
“The Christ hath appeared!” the Forerunner crieth out, “And He cometh up to the 
streams of the Jordan! Let us make haste to greet Him, enlightened by pure 
thoughts!” (Twice) 
O my God, Thou deliverance of all, having clothed Thyself in my abundant 
poverty, Thou approachest to be baptized, seeking me who have strayed from the 
right path.  
Let earth and heaven now join chorus, for the Benefactor of all is baptized, 
submerging the multitude of our countless transgressions in the waters. 
Thy holy soul was an abode of God, wherein the Father, the Son and the Holy 
Spirit dwelt. Wherefore, we pray thee, O venerable one, dispel the slanders of the 
enemy from those who honor thee, and grant peace to the suffering land of Russia.  
O venerable Seraphim, we honor thy great struggles and labors in the wilderness 
and the sweetness of thy teaching, whereby thou hast enlightened many who came to 
thee, teaching them to hymn the consubstantial Trinity.  
Following after Christ the Master in purity of life, thou didst complete the good 
race, O venerable one. Having ascended to the eternal mansions, thou dost behold 
there what the angels see. Wherefore, honoring thy memory, we glorify Christ.  
Theotokion: I now flee unto thee, O most pure one. Save and preserve me by thy 
supplications. For whatsoever thou desirest, that thou canst do, in that thou art the 
Mother of the Almighty.  
The Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Make ready, O Zebulon! * Adorn thyself, O Nephthali! * O River Jordan, leaping 
up, * receive thou the Master Who cometh to be baptized! * Rejoice, O Adam, with 
our first mother! * Hide not yourselves as ye did before in paradise; * for He who 
beheld you naked hath appeared, * that He may clothe you in your primal raiment. ** 
Christ hath appeared, desiring to make all creation new!  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
From thy youth didst thou love Christ, O blessed one; * and, aflame with the 
desire to serve Him alone, * thou didst struggle in the wilderness in unceasing prayer 
and labor; * and with compunction of heart having acquired the love of Christ, * thou 
wast shown to be the beloved favorite of the Mother of God. * Wherefore, we cry 
unto thee: ** Save us by thy prayers, O our venerable father Seraphim. 
 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Glory ..., Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Having forsaken the beauty of the world and the corruption therein, * thou didst 
take up thine abode in the Monastery of Sarov. * And having lived there as an angel, * 
thou didst become a path for many to salvation. * Wherefore, Christ hath glorified 
thee, O father Seraphim, * enriching thee with the gift of healings and miracles. ** 
Therefore, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O our venerable father Seraphim!  
 Both now ..., the Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV,  
In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: * Fear not to 
baptize Me, ** for I have come to save Adam the first-formed!  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits that He hath 
done unto me?  
THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS (5:22-6:2) 
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (6:17-23)  
 At that time, Jesus: came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the 
company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judaea and 
Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to 
be healed of their diseases; And they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they 
were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out 
of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, 
Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: 
for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, 
when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and 
shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice 
ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven:  
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
