--- PAGE 1 ---
THE ORDER OF THE HOURS CHANTED ON THE EVE OF THE 
THEOPHANY OF THE LORD 
If the Theophany of the Lord falleth on Sunday or Monday, we chant the Royal 
Hours on the morning of the preceding Friday. But if the Theophany fall on any 
other day, we chant the Royal Hours on the morning of the Eve of the Theophany.  
THE FIRST HOUR  
At the beginning of the second hour (i.e., 8 o‟clock in the morning), the bells are 
rung. When we have assembled in church, the priest vesteth in the epitrachelion and 
phelanion, and the deacon in the stikharion. The paraecclesiarch setteth forth an 
analogion, suitably adorned, facing the royal doors, and he lighteth a candle on a 
candle-stand. The priest entereth the nave of the church, or the refectory, through the 
royal doors, the deacon preceding him bearing a censer. The priest setteth the Holy 
Gospel on the analogion and, standing before the analogion, intoneth the usual 
beginning: “Blessed is our God ...” The reader respondeth: “Glory to Thee, our God, 
glory to Thee!”, “O heavenly King ...,” and the rest. And after the exclamation 
(following the Lord‟s Prayer), the priest censeth around the analogion on which the 
Holy Gospel resteth, and then censeth the rest of the icons, the whole temple, the 
superior and the brethren. And the reader readeth:  
PSALM 5  
Unto my words give ear, O Lord; hear my cry. Attend unto the voice of my 
supplication, O my King and my God; for unto Thee will I pray, O Lord. In the 
morning Thou shalt hear my voice. In the morning shall I stand before Thee, and 
Thou shalt look upon me; for not a God that willest iniquity art Thou. He that 
worketh evil shall not dwell near Thee, nor shall transgressors abide before Thine 
eyes. Thou hast hated all them that work iniquity; Thou shalt destroy all them that 
speak a lie. A man that is bloody and deceitful shall the Lord abhor. But as for me, in 
the multitude of Thy mercy shall I go into Thy house; I shall worship toward Thy 
holy Temple in fear of Thee O Lord, guide me in the way of Thy righteousness; 
because of mine enemies, make straight my way before Thee, For in their mouth 
there is no truth; their heart is vain. Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their 
tongues have they spoken deceitfully; judge them, O God. Let them fall down on 
account of their own devisings; according to the multitude of their ungodliness, cast 
them out, for they have embittered Thee, O Lord. And let all them be glad that hope 
in Thee; they shall ever rejoice, and Thou shalt dwell among them. And all shall glory 
in Thee that love Thy name, for Thou shalt bless the righteous. O Lord, as with a 
shield of Thy good pleasure hast Thou crowned us.  
PSALM 22  
The Lord is my shepherd, and I shall not want. In a place of green pasture, there 
hath He made me to dwell; beside the water of rest hath He nurtured me. He hath 
converted my soul, He hath led me on the paths of righteousness for His name‟s 
sake. For though I should walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will fear no 
evil, for Thou art with me; Thy rod and Thy staff, they have comforted me. Thou 

--- PAGE 2 ---
hast prepared a table before me in the presence of them that afflict me. Thou hast 
anointed my head with oil, and Thy cup which filleth me, how excellent it is! And Thy 
mercy shall pursue me all the days of my life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord 
unto length of days.  
PSALM 26  
The Lord is my light and my savior; whom then shall I fear? The Lord is the 
defender of my life; of whom then shall I be afraid? When the wicked draw nigh 
against me to eat my flesh, they that afflict me and are mine enemies, they themselves 
became weak and they fell. Though a host should array itself against me, my heart 
shall not be afraid; though war should rise up against me, in this have I hoped. One 
thing have I asked of the Lord, this will I seek after: That I may dwell in the house of 
the Lord all the days of my life, that I may behold the delight of the Lord, and that I 
may visit His holy temple. For He hid me in His tabernacle in the day of my troubles, 
He sheltered me in the secret place of His tabernacle, upon a rock hath He exalted 
me. And now, behold, He exalted my head above mine enemies. I went round about 
and I sacrificed in His tabernacle a sacrifice of praise and jubilation; I will sing and I 
will chant unto the Lord. Hearken, O Lord, unto my voice, wherewith I cried; have 
mercy on me, and hearken unto me. My heart said unto Thee: I will seek the Lord. 
My face hath sought after Thee; Thy face, O Lord, will I seek. Turn not Thy face 
from me and turn not away in wrath from Thy servant. Be Thou my helper; cast me 
not utterly away, and forsake me not, O God my Savior: For my father and my 
mother have forsaken me, but the Lord hath taken me to Himself. Set me a law, O 
Lord, in Thy way, and lead me in the right path because of mine enemies. Deliver me 
not over unto the souls of them that afflict me, for unjust witnesses are risen up 
against me, and injustice hath lied to itself. I believe that I shall see the good things of 
the Lord in the land of the living. Wait on the Lord; be thou manful, and let thy heart 
be strengthened, and wait on the Lord.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia! Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
Lord have mercy! (Thrice) 
Glory ..., Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
At one time the River Jordan * was turned back by the mantle of Elisha * when 
Elijah was borne aloft, * and the waters were parted on either side, * and the path 
which before was wet became dry for him, * as a true image of baptism, * whereby 
we pass through the flow of life. * Christ hath appeared in the Jordan ** to sanctify 
the waters.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
What shall we call thee, O thou who art full of grace? Heaven, for thou hast shone 
forth the Sun of righteousness upon us. Paradise, for thou hast put forth the Flower 
of immortality. Pure Mother, for thou didst have in thy holy embrace the Son Who is 
God of all. Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Then these Stichera, by Sophronius, Patriarch of Jerusalem, each chanted twice: 
In Tone VIII: Today the nature of the waters is sanctified: * the Jordan is divided 
and turneth back the streams of its waters, ** beholding the Master baptized.  
And the second choir also chanteth the foregoing Sticheron, without any Verse.  
Then the first choir again chanteth the Verse:  
Verse: Therefore will I remember Thee * from the land of Jordan and 
Hermoniem.  
And the Sticheron, in Tone VIII: 
O Christ our King, thou hast come as a man to the river, * and dost hasten to 
receive the baptism of a servant * at the hand of the forerunner because of our sins, 
** O Good One Who lovest mankind.  
And the second choir chanteth the second Verse:  
Verse: The waters saw Thee, O God, * the waters saw Thee and were afraid.  
O Christ our King, thou hast come as a man to the river ..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
To the voice of one crying in the wilderness * “Prepare ye the way of the Lord!” * 
Thou didst come, O Lord, having assumed the guise of a servant, * asking baptism, 
although Thou knewest not sin. * The waters saw Thee and were afraid, * and the 
forerunner trembled and cried aloud, saying: * “How can I enlighten the Beacon of 
light? * How can a servant set his hand upon his Master? * Sanctify me and the 
waters, ** O Savior Who takest away the sin of the world!”  
Then, the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: And the Lord thundered out of heaven, * 
and the Most High gave forth His voice.  
Verse: I will love Thee, O Lord, my strength; the Lord is my foundation.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: Be glad, thou thirsty desert: let the wilderness exult and 
flowering as the lily. And the desert places of Jordan shall blossom and rejoice; the 
glory of Lebanon hath been given unto it, and the honor of Carmel; and my people 
shall see the glory of the Lord and the majesty of God. Be strong, ye feeble hands and 
palsied knees. Comfort one another, ye fainthearted; be strong, fear not. Behold, our 
God rendereth judgment, and He will render it; He will come and save us. Then shall 
the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear. Then shall the 
lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of the stammerers shall speak plainly: for 
water hath burst forth in the desert, and a channel of water in a thirsty land. And the 
dry land shall become pools, and a fountain of water shall be poured into the thirsty 
land; there shall there be a joy of birds, ready habitations and marshes. There shall be 
there a pure way, and it shall be called a holy way; and there shall not pass by there 
any unclean person, neither shall there be there an unclean way; but the dispersed 
shall walk on it, and they shall not go astray. And there shall be no lion there, neither 

--- PAGE 4 ---
shall any evil beast go up upon it, nor at all be found there; but the redeemed and 
gathered on the Lord‟s behalf shall walk in it, and shall return, and come to Sion with 
joy, and everlasting joy shall be over their head; for on their head shall be praise and 
exultation, and joy shall take possession of them: sorrow and pain, and groaning have 
fled away.  
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES, § 33 (ACTS 13: 25-33)  
In those days, as John fulfilled his course, he said, Whom think ye that l am? I am 
not he. But, behold, there cometh one after me, whose shoes of his feet I am not 
worthy to loose. Men and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever 
among you feareth God, to you is the word of this salvation sent. For they that dwell 
at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the 
prophets which are read every Sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in condemning 
him. And though they found no cause of death in him, yet desired they Pilate that he 
should be slain. And when they had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took 
him down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulcher. But God raised him from the 
dead: And he was seen many days of them which came up with him from Galilee to 
Jerusalem, who are his witnesses unto the people.  
Deacon: Wisdom, upright! Let us hear the Holy Gospel.  
Priest: Peace be unto all.  
People: And to thy spirit.  
Priest: The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to St. Matthew. (§ 5) 
People: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee!  
Deacon: Let us attend. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, § 5 (MT. 3: 1-11) 
At that time: John the Baptist came, preaching in the wilderness of Judea, And 
saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. For this is He that was 
spoken of by the prophet Isaiah, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, 
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make His paths straight. And the same John had his 
raiment of camel‟s hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his meat was locusts 
and wild honey. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region 
round about Jordan, And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins. But 
when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto 
them, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? 
Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance: And think not to say within 
yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of 
these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. And now also the axe is laid unto the 
root of the trees: therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn 
down, and cast into the fire. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but He 
that cometh after me is mightier than I, Whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: He 
shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
People: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee!  
My steps do Thou direct according to thy saying, and let no iniquity have 
dominion over me. Deliver me from the false accusations of men, and I will keep Thy 
commandments. Make Thy face to shine upon Thy servant, and teach me Thy 
statutes. 
Let my mouth be filled with praise, that I may hymn Thy glory and Thy majesty all 
the day long.  
Then, Trisagion through Our Father ...,  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: * Fear not to 
baptize Me, ** for I have come to save Adam the first-formed!  
Then, Lord have mercy! (Forty times)  
Thou Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art worshipped 
and glorified, O Christ God, Who art long-suffering, plenteous in mercy, most 
compassionate, Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on sinners; Who callest all 
to salvation through the promise of good things to come: Receive, O Lord, our 
prayers at this hour, and guide our life toward Thy commandments. Sanctify our 
souls, make chaste our bodies, correct our thoughts, purify our intentions, and deliver 
us from every sorrow, evil, and ill. Compass us about with Thy holy angels, that, 
guarded and guided by their array, we may attain to the unity of the faith and the 
knowledge of Thine unapproachable glory: For blessed art Thou unto the ages of 
ages. Amen. 
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice) Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious than the 
Seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the very 
Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father, bless!  
Priest: O God be gracious unto us and bless us, and cause Thy face to shine upon 
us and have mercy on us.  
Reader: Amen. 
Then, the reader readeth this prayer:  
O Christ, the True Light, Who enlightenest and sanctifiest every man that cometh 
into the world: Let the Light of Thy countenance be signed upon us, that in it we may 
see the Unapproachable Light, and guide our steps in the doing of Thy 
commandments, through the intercessions of Thy most pure Mother, and of all Thy 
saints. Amen 

--- PAGE 6 ---
THE THIRD HOUR  
At the beginning of the Third and Sixth Hours, the deacon censeth only the Gospel, 
the iconostasis; the superior and the choirs.  
Reader: O come, let us worship ..., (Thrice)  
PSALM 28  
Bring unto the Lord, ye sons of God, bring unto the Lord the sons of rams; bring 
unto the Lord glory and honor. Bring unto the Lord the glory due unto His name, 
worship the Lord in His holy court. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters; the 
God of glory hath thundered, the Lord is upon the many waters. The voice of the 
Lord in might, the voice of the Lord in majesty, The voice of the Lord Who breaketh 
the cedars yea, the Lord will break the cedars of Lebanon. And He will break them 
small like the calf of Lebanon, and His beloved is like a son of the unicorns. The 
voice of the Lord Who divideth the flame of fire, The voice of the Lord Who shaketh 
the wilderness, yea, the Lord will shake the wilderness of Kaddis. The voice of the 
Lord gathereth the harts, and shall reveal the thickets of oak, and in His temple every 
man uttereth glory. The Lord dwelleth in the flood, yea, the Lord shall sit as king for 
ever. The Lord will give strength unto His people; the Lord will bless His people with 
peace.  
PSALM 41  
As the heart panteth after the fountains of water, so panteth my soul after Thee, O 
God. My soul thirsted for God, the mighty, the living; when shall I come, and appear 
before the face of God? My tears have been my bread by day and by night, whilst it is 
said to me daily: Where is thy God? These things have I remembered, and I poured 
out my soul within me, for I shall go to the place of the wondrous tabernacle, even to 
the house of God, with a voice of rejoicing and thanksgiving, yea, of the sound of 
them that keep festival. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? And why dost thou 
disquiet me? Hope in God, for I will give thanks unto Him; He is the salvation of my 
countenance, and my God. Within me my soul hath been troubled; therefore will I 
remember Thee from the land of Jordan and Hermoniem, from the little mountain. 
Deep calleth unto deep, at the voice of Thy cataracts; all Thy billows and Thy waves 
have passed over me. By day the Lord will command His mercy, and by night His ode 
shall be with me, my prayer unto the God of my life. I will say unto God: Thou art 
my helper. Why hast Thou forgotten me? And wherefore go I with downcast face 
whilst mine enemy afflicteth me? Whilst my bones were broken, mine enemies 
reproached me; whilst they said to me daily: Where is thy God? Why art thou cast 
down, O my soul? And why dost thou disquiet me? Hope in God, for I will give 
thanks unto Him; He is the salvation of my countenance, and my God.  
PSALM 50  
Have mercy on me, O God, according to Thy great mercy; and according to the 
multitude of Thy compassions blot out my transgression. Wash me thoroughly from 
mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I know mine iniquity, and my sin is 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ever before me. Against Thee only have I sinned and done this evil before Thee, that 
Thou mightest be justified in Thy words, and prevail when Thou art judged. For 
behold, I was conceived in iniquities, and in sins did my mother bear me. For behold, 
Thou hast loved truth; the hidden and secret things of Thy wisdom hast Thou made 
manifest unto me. Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be made clean; 
Thou shalt wash me, and I shall be made whiter than snow. Thou shalt make me to 
hear joy and gladness; the bones that be humbled, they shall rejoice. Turn Thy face 
away from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart, O 
God, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from Thy presence, and 
take not Thy Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and with 
Thy governing Spirit establish me. I shall teach transgressors Thy ways, and the 
ungodly shall turn back unto Thee. Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, Thou 
God of my salvation; my tongue shall rejoice in Thy righteousness. O Lord, Thou 
shalt open my lips, and my mouth shall declare Thy praise. For if Thou hadst desired 
sacrifice, I had given it; with whole-burnt offerings Thou shalt not be pleased. A 
sacrifice unto God is a broken spirit; a heart that is broken and humbled God will not 
despise. Do good, O Lord, in Thy pleasure unto Sion, and let the walls of Jerusalem 
be builded. Then shalt Thou be pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, with 
oblation and wholeburnt offerings. Then shall they offer bullocks upon Thine altar.  
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
Lord have mercy! (Thrice) 
Glory ..., Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
At one time the River Jordan * was turned back by the mantle of Elisha * when 
Elijah was borne aloft, * and the waters were parted on either side, * and the path 
which before was wet became dry for him, * as a true image of baptism, * whereby 
we pass through the flow of life. * Christ hath appeared in the Jordan ** to sanctify 
the waters. 
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of life. 
Thee do we entreat: Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have mercy 
upon our souls.  
Then these Stichera: 
In Tone VIII: The right hand of the forerunner and Baptist, * the prophet 
honored above all other prophets, * trembled when he beheld Thee, the Lamb of 
God * Who dost purify the world of sins; * and, rooted fast by the nature of the feat 
required of him, * he cried aloud: “I dare not touch Thy head, O Word!” * Do Thou 
Thyself sanctify and illumine me, * O Compassionate One, ** for Thou art the life, 
light and peace of the world!” (Twice)  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Verse: Therefore will I remember Thee * from the land of Jordan and 
Hermoniem.  
In Tone IV: The Trinity, our God, hath been revealed unto us today; * for the 
Father hath given testimony to His kinship, * and the Spirit hath descended from the 
heavens in the guise of a dove, * while the Son hath bowed His most pure head 
before the forerunner * and, being baptized, hath delivered the human race from 
bondage, ** in that He is the Lover of mankind.  
And the second choir chanteth the second Verse:  
Verse: The waters saw Thee, O God, * the waters saw Thee and were afraid.  
The Trinity, our God, hath been revealed unto us today ..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V:  
The Lord, the Bestower of life, hath come to the Jordan in the flesh, * desiring to 
be baptized in the guise of a man, * in that He is compassionate; * that, delivering us 
from every machination and snare of the serpent * we who have been deceived, * that 
He Who is borne witness to by the Father * might illumine us. * And the divine Spirit 
appearing to Him in the form of a dove, * causeth Him to dwell within our souls, ** 
O Lover of mankind.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: The waters saw Thee, O God, * the waters saw Thee 
and were afraid.  
Verse: With my voice unto the Lord have I cried, with my voice unto God, and 
He was attentive unto me.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (IS. 1: 16-20)  
Thus saith the Lord: Wash ye, be ye clean; remove your iniquities from your souls 
before Mine eyes; cease from your iniquities; learn to do well; diligently seek 
judgment, deliver him that is suffering wrong, plead for the orphan, and obtain justice 
for the widow. And, come, let us reason together, saith the Lord: and though your 
sins be as purple, I will make them white as snow; and though they be as scarlet, I will 
make them white as wool. And if ye be willing, and hearken to Me, ye shall eat the 
good of the land: but if ye be not willing, nor hearken to Me, a sword shall devour 
you: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken this.  
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES (§42)  
In those days, it came to pass that, while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having 
passed through the upper borders came to Ephesus and, finding certain disciples, he 
said unto them: “Have ye received the Holy Spirit, since ye believed?” And they said 
unto him: “We have not so much as heard whether there is any Holy Spirit.” And he 

--- PAGE 9 ---
said to them: “Unto what, then, were ye baptized?” And they said: “Unto John‟s 
baptism.” Then said Paul: “John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, 
saying unto the people that they should believe on Him Who should come after him, 
that is, on Jesus Christ.” When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the 
Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Spirit came on 
them, and they spoke with tongues, and prophesied. And all the men were about 
twelve. And he went into the synagogue, and spoke boldly for the space of three 
months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God.  
Deacon: Wisdom, upright! Let us hear the Holy Gospel.  
Priest: Peace be unto all.  
People: And to thy spirit.  
Priest: The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to St. Mark, §1  
People: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee!  
Deacon: Let us attend. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, § 1 (MK. 1: 1-5) 
The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. As it is written in 
the prophets: “Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy 
way before thee. The voice of one crying in the wilderness: „„Prepare ye the way of the 
Lord, make His paths straight.” John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the 
baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins. And there went out unto him all 
the land of Judaea, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of 
Jordan, confessing their sins. And John was clothed with camel‟s hair, and with a 
girdle of a skin about his loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey; and preached, 
saying: “There cometh One mightier than I after me, the latchet of Whose shoes I am 
not worthy to stoop down and unloose. I indeed have baptized you with water; but 
He shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit.”  
People: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee!  
Then, the following: 
Blessed is the Lord God, blessed is the Lord day by day; the God of our salvation 
shall prosper us along the way; our God is the God of salvation  
Trisagion through Our Father ...,  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: * Fear not to 
baptize Me, ** for I have come to save Adam the first-formed!  
Lord, have mercy! (Forty times) 
 Thou Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art worshipped 
and glorified, O Christ God, Who art long-suffering, plenteous in mercy, most 

--- PAGE 10 ---
compassionate, Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on sinners; Who callest all 
to salvation through the promise of good things to come: Receive, O Lord, our 
prayers at this hour, and guide our life toward Thy commandments. Sanctify our 
souls, make chaste our bodies, correct our thoughts, purify our intentions, and deliver 
us from every sorrow, evil, and ill. Compass us about with Thy holy angels, that, 
guarded and guided by their array, we may attain to the unity of the faith and the 
knowledge of Thine unapproachable glory: For blessed art Thou unto the ages of 
ages. Amen. 
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice)  
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious than the 
Seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the very 
Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father, bless!  
Priest: By the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, have 
mercy upon us.  
Reader: Amen. 
Then, the reader readeth this prayer:  
O Master God, the Father Almighty, O Lord, the Only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ, 
and O Holy Spirit, one Godhead, one Power: Have mercy on me a sinner, and by the 
judgments which Thou knowest, save me, Thine unworthy servant; for blessed art 
Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
THE SIXTH HOUR  
Reader: O come, let us worship ... (Thrice)  
PSALM 73  
O God, why hast Thou cast us off unto the end? Why hath Thine anger raged 
against the sheep of Thy pasture? Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast 
purchased from the beginning. Thou hast redeemed the rod of Thine inheritance, this 
Mount Sion wherein Thou hast dwelt. Lift up Thy hands against their pride at the 
end, against the things which the enemy hath wickedly done in Thy holy place. And 
they that hate Thee have boasted in the midst of Thy feast. They set up their ensigns, 
yea, signs (though they knew it not) as it were for the departing on high. As in a forest 
of trees, with axes they cut down the doors thereof together, with two-edged axe and 
mason‟s hammer have they broken it down. With fire have they burned down Thy 
sanctuary, they have profaned even unto the ground the habitation of Thy name. 
They said in their heart, even the whole kindred of them together: Come let us 
abolish all the feasts of God from the earth. Our signs have we not seen; there is no 
more any prophet, and he will know us no more. How long, O God, shall the enemy 
utter reproaches? Shall the adversary provoke Thy name to the end? Wherefore 
turnest away Thy hand, and Thy right hand out of the midst of Thy bosom for ever? 
But God is our king before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the midst of the 
earth. Thou didst establish the sea by Thy might, Thou didst break the heads of the 
dragons in the water. Thou didst crush the head of the dragon, Thou gavest him as 
food to the Ethiopian peoples. Thou hast cloven fountains and torrents, Thou hast 
dried up the rivers of Ethan. Thine is the day and thine is the night; Thou hast 
perfected the light and the sun. Thou hast made all the borders of the earth; summer 
and spring hast Thou fashioned. Be mindful of this Thy creation. The enemy hath 
reproached, the Lord, and a mindless people hath provoked Thy name. O deliver not 
unto beasts the soul which doth confess Thee; of the souls of Thy paupers be not 
forgetful unto the end. Look Thou upon Thy covenant, for the dark places of the 
earth are filled with the houses of iniquity. Let not the humbled and shamed man be 
turned away; the beggar and the poor man shall praise Thy name. Arise, O God, 
judge Thine own cause; remember the reproach made against Thee by the mindless 
man all the day long. Forget not the voice of Thy suppliants; the pride of them that 
hate Thee ascendeth continually.  
PSALM 76  
With my voice unto the Lord have I cried, with my voice unto God, and He was 
attentive unto me. In the day of mine affliction I sought out God, with my hands 
upraised by night before Him, and I was not deceived. My soul refused to be 
comforted; I remembered God and I was gladdened; I spake in idleness and my spirit 

--- PAGE 12 ---
became faint-hearted. Mine eyes were wakeful before the watches; I was troubled and 
spake not. I thought upon the days of old, and the years of ages past I called to mind, 
and I meditated. By night I pondered in my heart, and my spirit searched diligently. 
Will the Lord then cast me off unto the ages, and will He be favorable no more? Or 
will He cut off His mercy unto the end? Hath He brought to an end His word from 
generation to generation? Or will the Lord forget to be merciful? Or in His wrath will 
He shut up His compassions for ever? And I said: Now have I made a beginning; this 
change hath been wrought by the right hand of the Most High. I remembered the 
works of the Lord; for I will remember Thy wonders from the beginning. And I will 
meditate on all Thy works, and I shall ponder upon Thy ways. O God, in the 
sanctuary is Thy way. What God is as great as our God? Thou art God Who worketh 
wonders. Thou hast made Thy power known among the peoples; with Thine arm 
hast Thou redeemed Thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. The waters saw Thee, 
O God, the waters saw Thee and were afraid; the abysses were troubled. Great was 
the resounding sound of the waters, the clouds gave forth a voice. Yea, for Thine 
arrows passed abroad; the voice of Thy thunder is in their rolling. And Thy lightnings 
have lightened the world; the earth was shaken and it trembled. In the sea are Thy 
byways, and Thy paths in many waters; and Thy footsteps shall not be known. Thou 
leddest Thy people as sheep by the hand of Moses and Aaron.  
PSALM 90  
He that dwelleth in the help of the Most High shall abide in the shelter of the God 
of heaven. He shall say unto the Lord: Thou art my helper and my refuge. He is my 
God, and I will hope in Him. For He shall deliver thee from the snare of the hunters 
and from every troubling word. With His shoulders shall He overshadow thee, and 
under His wings shalt thou have hope. With a shield will His truth encompass thee; 
thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flieth by day, 
Nor for the thing that walketh in darkness nor for the mishap and demon of 
noonday. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but 
unto thee shall it not come nigh. Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold, and thou 
shalt see the reward of sinners. For Thou, O Lord, art my hope. Thou madest the 
Most High thy refuge; No evils shall come nigh thee, and no scourge shall draw nigh 
unto thy dwelling: For He shall give His angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy 
ways. On their hands shall they bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot 
against a stone. Upon the asp and basilisk shalt thou tread, and thou shalt trample 
upon the lion and dragon. For he hath set his hope on Me, and I will deliver him; I 
will shelter him because he hath known My name. He shall cry unto Me, and I will 
hearken unto him. I am with him in affliction, and I will rescue him and glorify him. 
With length of days will I satisfy him, and I will show him My salvation.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia! Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice)  
Glory ..., Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
At one time the River Jordan * was turned back by the mantle of Elisha * when 
Elijah was borne aloft, * and the waters were parted on either side, * and the path 
which before was wet became dry for him, * as a true image of baptism, * whereby 
we pass through the flow of life. * Christ hath appeared in the Jordan ** to sanctify 
the waters. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Seeing that we have no boldness on account of our many sins, do thou beseech 
Him who was born of thee, O Virgin Theotokos for the supplication of a mother 
availeth much to win the Master‟s favor. Disdain not the prayers of sinners, O all- 
pure one, for merciful and mighty to save is He Who deigned also to suffer for our 
sake.  
Then, these Stichera: 
In Tone VIII: Thus did the Lord say unto John: * “Come and baptize Me Who 
have created thee, * and enlightened thee with grace, * do thou purify all! * Touch 
thou My divine head, and be not hesitant. * Let it be so now, for I have come to 
fulfill all righteousness. * Do thou in no wise be hesitant, * for I hasten to destroy the 
prince of darkness, * the adversary who hideth in the waters, * that I might now 
deliver the world from his snares, ** granting everlasting life, in that I am the Lover 
of mankind.” (Twice)  
Verse: Therefore will I remember Thee * from the land of Jordan and 
Hermoniem.  
In Tone VI: Today the prophecy of the Psalmist hasteneth to its fulfillment; * for 
he said: The sea beheld and fled, * Jordan turned back, before the face of the Lord, * 
before the face of the God of Jacob, * Who came to receive baptism from His 
servant, * that we also, having been washed clean of the impurity of idolatry, ** might 
be enlightened in soul for His sake.  
Verse: The waters saw Thee, O God, * the waters saw Thee and were afraid.  
Today the prophecy of the Psalmist ..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V:  
Why dost thou turn thy waters back, O Jordan? * Wherefore dost thou hinder thy 
streams? * Why dost thou not proceed forward in accordance with thy nature? * “I 
am unable to bear the Fire which consumeth me!” it said; * “I marvel and am 
astonished by His extreme condescension; * for I am not accustomed to washing One 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Who is clean, * neither am I used to cleansing One Who is sinless; * but rather it is 
my wont to purify defiled vessels. * Christ Who is baptized in me teacheth me to 
burn up the thorns of sins! * John, the voice of the Word, beareth witness to me, * 
crying: „„Behold, the Lamb of God Who taketh away the sins of the world!” * To Him 
let us cry aloud, O ye faithful: * O God Who hast revealed Thyself for our salvation, 
** glory be to Thee!  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the sea are Thy byways, * and Thy paths in many 
waters.  
Verse: The voice of Thy thunder is in their rolling.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: Draw ye water with joy out of the wells of salvation. And in 
that day thou shalt say: Sing to the Lord, call aloud upon His name, proclaim His 
glorious deeds among the nations; make mention that His name is exalted. Sing praise 
to the name of the Lord; for He hath done great things: declare this in all the earth. 
Exult and rejoice, ye that dwell in Sion: for the Holy One of Israel is exalted in the 
midst thereof.  
THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS §91. 
Brethren: As many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into His 
death. Therefore, we are buried with Him by baptism unto death, that as Christ was 
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in 
newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of His death we 
shall be also in the likeness of His resurrection; knowing this, that our old man is 
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we 
should not serve sin. For he that is dead is freed from sin. Now if we be dead with 
Christ, we believe that we shall also live with Him, knowing that Christ, being raised 
from the dead, dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over Him. For in that 
He died, He died unto sin once; but in that He liveth, He liveth unto God. Likewise, 
reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through 
Jesus Christ, our Lord.  
Deacon: Wisdom, upright! Let us hear the Holy Gospel.  
Priest: Peace be unto all.  
People: And to thy spirit.  
Priest: The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to St. Mark, §2  
People: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee!  
Deacon: Let us attend. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, § 2  
At that time, Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of John in the 
Jordan. And straightway coming up out of the water, He saw the heavens opened, 
and the Spirit like a dove descending upon Him: and there came a voice from heaven, 

--- PAGE 15 ---
saying: “Thou art My beloved Son in Whom I am well pleased.” And immediately the 
Spirit drove Him into the wilderness. And He was there in the wilderness forty days 
tempted by Satan; and was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered unto Him. 
Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Gospel 
of the kingdom of God, and saying: „„The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is 
at hand: repent ye, and believe the Gospel.”  
People: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee!  
Let Thy compassions quickly go before us, O Lord, for we are become exceedingly 
poor. Help us, O God our Savior, for the sake of the glory of Thy name. O Lord, 
deliver us and be gracious unto our sins for Thy name‟s sake. 
The Trisagion through, Our Father ...,  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: * Fear not to 
baptize Me, ** for I have come to save Adam the first-formed!  
Then, Lord, have mercy! (Forty times)  
Thou Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art worshipped 
and glorified, O Christ God, Who art long-suffering, plenteous in mercy, most 
compassionate, Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on sinners; Who callest all 
to salvation through the promise of good things to come: Receive, O Lord, our 
prayers at this hour, and guide our life toward Thy commandments. Sanctify our 
souls, make chaste our bodies, correct our thoughts, purify our intentions, and deliver 
us from every sorrow, evil, and ill. Compass us about with Thy holy angels, that, 
guarded and guided by their array, we may attain to the unity of the faith and the 
knowledge of Thine unapproachable glory: For blessed art Thou unto the ages of 
ages. Amen. 
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice)  
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious than the 
Seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the very 
Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father, bless!  
Priest: By the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, have 
mercy upon us.  
Reader: Amen. 
Then, the reader readeth this prayer of Saint Basil the Great: 
O God and Lord of Hosts, and Maker of all Creation, Who by the tender 
compassion of Thy mercy which transcendeth comprehension, didst send down 
Thine only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, for the salvation of our race, and by 

--- PAGE 16 ---
His precious Cross didst tear asunder the handwriting of our sins, and thereby didst 
triumph over the principalities and powers of darkness: Do Thou Thyself, O Master, 
Lover of mankind, accept also from us sinners these prayers of thanksgiving and 
entreaty, and deliver us from every destructive and dark transgression, and from all 
enemies, both visible and invisible, that seek to do us evil. Nail down our flesh with 
the fear of Thee, and incline not our hearts unto words or thoughts of evil, but pierce 
our souls with longing for Thee, that ever looking to Thee, and being guided by Thy 
Light as we behold Thee, the unapproachable and everlasting Light, we may send up 
unceasing praise and thanksgiving unto Thee, the Beginningless Father, with Thine 
Only-begotten Son, and Thine all-holy and good and life-creating Spirit, both now 
and ever and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
THE NINTH HOUR  
During the Ninth Hour, the deacon censeth the entire church.  
Reader: O come, let us worship ..., (Thrice)  
PSALM 92  
The Lord is King, He is clothed with majesty; the Lord is clothed with strength 
and He hath girt Himself. For He established the universe which shall not be shaken. 
Thy throne is prepared of old; Thou art from everlasting. The rivers have lifted up, O 
Lord, the rivers have lifted up their voices. The rivers will lift up their waves, at the 
voices of many waters. Wonderful are the surgings of the sea, wonderful on high is 
the Lord. Thy testimonies are made very sure. Holiness becometh Thy house, O 
Lord, unto length of days.  
PSALM 113  
When Israel went out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from among a barbarous 
people, Judea became His sanctuary, Israel His dominion. The sea beheld and fled, 
Jordan turned back. The mountains skipped like rams, and the hills like lambs of 
flocks. What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou Jordan, that thou didst 
turn back? Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams, and ye hills like lambs of flocks? 
At the presence of the Lord the earth was shaken, at the presence of the God of 
Jacob, Who turneth the rock into pools of waters, and the precipice into fountains of 
waters. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto Thy name give glory, for Thy 
mercy and Thy truth, lest haply the heathen say: Where is their God? But our God is 
in heaven and on earth; all things whatsoever He hath willed, He hath done. The idols 
of the nations are of silver and gold, the works of the hands of men. They have a 
mouth, but shall not speak; eyes have they, and shall not see. Ears have they, and shall 
not hear; noses have they, and shall not smell. Hands they have, and shall not feel; 
feet have they, and shall not walk; they shall make no sound in their throat. Let those 
that make them become like unto them, and all that put their trust in them. The 
house of Israel hath hoped in the Lord; their helper and defender is He. The house of 
Aaron hath hoped in the Lord; their helper and defender is He. They that fear the 
Lord have hoped in the Lord; their helper and defender is He. The Lord being 
mindful of us, hath blessed us. He hath blessed the house of Israel, He hath blessed 
the house of Aaron. He hath blessed them that fear the Lord, the little with the great. 
The Lord grant you increase, to you and to your children. Ye are blessed of the Lord, 
Who made heaven and the earth. The heaven of heaven belongeth to the Lord, but 
the earth He gave unto the sons of men. Not the dead shall praise Thee, O Lord, nor 
any that go down to Hades. But we the living will bless the Lord from henceforth and 
for evermore.  
PSALM 85  
Bow down Thine ear, O Lord, and hearken unto me, for poor and needy am I. 
Preserve my soul, for I am holy; save Thy servant, O my God, that hopeth in Thee. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for unto Thee will I cry all the day long; make glad the 
soul of Thy servant, for unto Thee have I lifted up my soul. For Thou, O Lord, art 
good and gentle, and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon Thee. Give ear, 
O Lord, unto my prayer, and attend unto the voice of my supplication. In the day of 
mine affliction have I cried unto Thee, for Thou hast heard me, there is none like 
unto Thee among the gods, O Lord, nor are there any works like unto Thy works. All 
the nations whom Thou hast made shall come and shall worship before Thee, O 
Lord, and shall glorify Thy name. For Thou art great and workest wonders; Thou 
alone art God. Guide me, O Lord, in Thy way, and I will walk in Thy truth; let my 
heart rejoice that I may fear Thy name. I will confess Thee, O Lord my God, with all 
my heart, and I will glorify Thy name forever. For great is Thy mercy upon me, and 
Thou hast delivered my soul from the nethermost Hades. O God, transgressors have 
risen up against me, and the assembly of the mighty hath sought after my soul, and 
they have not set Thee before them. But Thou, O Lord my God; art compassionate 
and merciful, long-suffering and plenteous in mercy, and true. Look upon me and 
have mercy upon me; give Thy strength unto Thy servant, and save the son of Thy 
handmaiden. Work in me a sign unto good, and let them that hate me behold and be 
put to shame; for Thou, O Lord, hast holpen me and comforted me.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia! Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
Lord have mercy! (Thrice) 
Glory ..., Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
At one time the River Jordan * was turned back by the mantle of Elisha * when 
Elijah was borne aloft, * and the waters were parted on either side, * and the path 
which before was wet became dry for him, * as a true image of baptism, * whereby 
we pass through the flow of life. * Christ hath appeared in the Jordan ** to sanctify 
the waters.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O Thou Who for our sake wast born of a Virgin, and didst suffer crucifixion, O 
Good One, and didst despoil death by death, and, as God, didst reveal the 
resurrection: Disdain not them which Thou hast fashioned with Thine hand; show 
forth Thy love for mankind, O Merciful One; accept the Theotokos who gave Thee 
birth, who intercedeth for us; and do Thou, our Savior, save a despairing people. 
Then these Stichera: 
In Tone VII: An awesome thing was it to behold the Creator of heaven and earth * 
naked in the river, * receiving from His servant baptism as a servant for our salvation. 
* The angelic choirs marveled in fear and joy; * and with them we worship Thee. ** 
Save us, O Lord! (Twice)  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Verse: Therefore will I remember Thee * from the land of Jordan and 
Hermoniem.  
In Tone II: When the forerunner beheld the Lord of glory coming to him, * he 
cried: “The Redeemer of the world hath arrived! * He delivereth us from corruption 
and tribulation! * He granteth forgiveness of sins, in that He is God on earth! * In His 
mercy He hath come forth from the pure Virgin. * He maketh children of God out of 
slaves, * and instead of darkness bringeth illumination to mankind * through the 
water of His divine baptism! * Wherefore, come ye, that together we may glorify Him 
** with the Father and the Holy Spirit!”  
Verse: The waters saw Thee, O God, * the waters saw Thee and were afraid.  
When the forerunner beheld the Lord ..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
When thy hand touched the most pure head of the Master, * and with thy finger 
thou didst point Him out to us. * Therewith do thou also point us out to Him, O 
Baptist, * for thou hast great boldness in so far as thou art greater than all the 
prophets, * since thou art borne witness to by Him. * Lift up to Him thine eyes, 
which beheld the all-holy Spirit * descending in the form of a dove, * O Baptist, 
render Him merciful unto us; * and come, stand with us, sealing our hymnody ** and 
helping us to celebrate His forefeast.  
And we make three full prostrations.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: The Lord is my light and my Savior; * whom then 
shall I fear?  
Verse: The Lord is the defender of my life; of whom then shall I be afraid?  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH 
 Thus saith the Lord: In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of 
salvation have I succored thee: and I have formed thee, and given thee for a covenant 
of the nations, to establish the earth, and to cause to inherit the desert heritages; 
saying to them that are in bonds: “Go forth!”, and bidding them that are in darkness 
to show themselves. They shall be fed in all the ways, and in all the paths shall be 
their pasture. They shall not hunger, neither shall they thirst; neither shall the heat nor 
the sun smite them; but He that hath mercy on them shall comfort them, and by 
fountains of waters shall He lead them. And I will make every mountain a way, and 
every path a pasture to them. Behold, these shall come from afar, and these from the 
north and the west, and others from the land of the Persians. Rejoice, ye heavens; and 
let the earth be glad: let the mountains break forth with joy; for the Lord hath had 
mercy on His people, and hath comforted the lowly ones of His people. But Sion 
said: The Lord hath forsaken me, and, The Lord hath forgotten me. Will a woman 
forget her child, so as not to have compassion upon the offspring of her womb? But 
if a woman should even forget these, yet I will not forget thee, saith the Lord.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
READING FROM THE EPISTLE TO TITUS (§302)  
Titus my child: The grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, 
teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, 
righteously and godly, in this present age, looking for that blessed hope, and the 
glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior, Jesus Christ, Who gave Himself 
for us, that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a people of 
His own, zealous of good works. But after the kindness and love of God, our Savior. 
toward mankind appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but 
according to His mercy He saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of 
the Holy Spirit, which He shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ, our Savior, 
that, being justified by His grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of 
eternal life.  
Deacon: Wisdom, upright! Let us hear the Holy Gospel.  
Priest: Peace be unto all.  
People: And to thy spirit.  
Priest: The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to St. Matthew. §6 
People: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee!  
Deacon: Let us attend. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, § 6  
At that time, Jesus came from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him. 
But John forbade Him, saying: “I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest 
Thou to me?” And Jesus, answering, said unto him: “Suffer it to be so now: for thus 
it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness. “ Then he suffered Him. And Jesus, when 
He was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and, lo! the heavens were 
opened unto Him, and He saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting 
upon Him: and, lo! a voice from heaven, saying: “This is My beloved Son, in Whom I 
am well pleased!”  
People: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee!  
Then, the following: 
Deliver us not up utterly, for Thy holy name‟s sake, and neither disannul Thou 
Thy covenant, and cause not Thy mercy to depart from us, for Abraham‟s sake, Thy 
beloved; and for Isaac‟s sake, Thy servant; and for Israel‟s, Thy holy one. 
The Trisagion through Our Father ...,  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: * Fear not to 
baptize Me, ** for I have come to save Adam the first-formed!  
Lord, have mercy! (Forty times)  
Thou Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art worshipped 
and glorified, O Christ God, Who art long-suffering, plenteous in mercy, most 

--- PAGE 21 ---
compassionate, Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on sinners; Who callest all 
to salvation through the promise of good things to come: Receive, O Lord, our 
prayers at this hour, and guide our life toward Thy commandments. Sanctify our 
souls, make chaste our bodies, correct our thoughts, purify our intentions, and deliver 
us from every sorrow, evil, and ill. Compass us about with Thy holy angels, that, 
guarded and guided by their array, we may attain to the unity of the faith and the 
knowledge of Thine unapproachable glory: For blessed art Thou unto the ages of 
ages. Amen. 
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice)  
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious than the 
Seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the very 
Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father, bless!  
Priest: O God be gracious unto us and bless us, and cause Thy face to shine 
upon us and have mercy on us.  
Reader: Amen. 
Then, the reader readeth this prayer:  
O Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God, Who art long-suffering in the face of our 
transgressions, and Who hast brought us even unto this present hour, wherein Thou 
didst hang upon the life-giving tree, and didst make a way into paradise for the wise 
thief, and by death didst destroy death: Be gracious unto us sinners and Thine 
unworthy servants; for we have sinned and committed iniquity, and are not worthy to 
lift up our eyes and behold the height of heaven, for we have abandoned the way of 
Thy righteousness, and have walked in the desires of our hearts. But we beseech Thy 
boundless goodness: Spare us, O Lord, according to the multitude of Thy mercy and 
save us for Thy holy name‟s sake; for our days were consumed in vanity. Rescue us 
from the hand of the adversary, and forgive us our sins, and mortify our carnal mind; 
that, putting aside the old man, we may be clad with the new, and live for Thee, our 
Master and Benefactor; and that thus by following in Thy commandments, we may 
attain to rest everlasting, wherein is the dwelling-place of all them that rejoice. For 
Thou art indeed the true joy and gladness of them that love Thee, O Christ our God, 
and unto Thee we send up glory, with Thy beginningless Father, and Thy Most-holy 
and good and life-creating Spirit, both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. 
Amen.  
THE TYPICA  
 (Not chanted, but read quickly) 
PSALM 102  
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless His holy name. Bless the 
Lord, O my soul, and forget not all that He hath done for thee, Who is gracious unto 

--- PAGE 22 ---
all thine iniquities, Who healeth all thine infirmities, Who redeemeth thy life from 
corruption, Who crowneth thee with mercy and compassion, Who fulfilleth thy desire 
with good things; thy youth shall be renewed as the eagle‟s. The Lord performeth 
deeds of mercy, and executeth judgment for all them that are wronged. He hath made 
His ways known unto Moses, unto the sons of Israel the things that He hath willed. 
Compassionate and merciful is the Lord, longsuffering and plenteous in mercy; not 
unto the end will He be angered, neither unto eternity will He be wroth. Not 
according to our iniquities hath He dealt with us, neither according to our sins hath 
He rewarded us. For according to the height of heaven from the earth, the Lord hath 
made His mercy to prevail over them that fear Him. As far as the east is from the 
west, so far hath He removed our iniquities from us. Like as a father hath compassion 
upon his sons, so hath the Lord had compassion on them that fear Him; for He 
knoweth whereof we are made, He hath remembered that we are dust. As for man, 
his days are as the grass; as a flower of the field, so shall he blossom forth. For when 
the wind is passed over it, then it shall be gone, and no longer will it know the place 
thereof. But the mercy of the Lord is from eternity, even unto eternity, upon them 
that fear Him. And His righteousness is upon sons of sons, upon them that keep His 
testament and remember His commandments to do them. The Lord in heaven hath 
prepared His throne, and His kingdom ruleth over all Bless the Lord, all ye His 
angels, mighty in strength, that perform His word, to hear the voice of His words. 
Bless the Lord, all ye His hosts, His ministers that do His will. Bless the Lord, all ye 
His works, in every place of His dominion. Bless the Lord, O my soul.  
Glory ...,  
PSALM 145  
Praise the Lord, O my soul. I will praise the Lord in my life, I will chant unto my 
God for as long as I have my being. Trust ye not in princes, in the sons of men, in 
whom there is no salvation. His spirit shall go forth, and he shall return unto his 
earth. In that day all his thoughts shall perish. Blessed is he of whom the God of 
Jacob is his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God, Who hath made heaven and the 
earth, the sea and all that is therein, Who keepeth truth unto eternity, Who executeth 
judgment for the wronged, Who giveth food unto the hungry. The Lord looseth the 
fettered; the Lord maketh wise the blind; the Lord setteth aright the fallen; the Lord 
loveth the righteous; the Lord preserveth the proselytes. He shall adopt for His own 
the orphan and widow, and the way of sinners shall He destroy. The Lord shall be 
king unto eternity; thy God, O Sion, unto generation and generation.  
Both now ..., 
O only-begotten Son and Word of God, Thou Who art immortal, yet didst deign 
for our salvation to be incarnate of the Holy Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, and 
without change didst become man, and was crucified, O Christ God, trampling down 
death by death. Thou Who art one of the Holy Trinity, glorified with the Father and 
the Holy Spirit, save us. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Then:  
We do not interpolate odes from the Menaion between the verses of the Beatitudes, 
neither do we read any epistle or Gospel.  
In Thy kingdom remember us, O Lord, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom.  
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.  
Blessed are they that weep, for they shall be comforted.  
Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.  
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.  
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall find mercy.  
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.  
Blessed are the peace-makers, for they shall be called the children of God.  
Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness‟ sake, for theirs is the 
kingdom of heaven.  
Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and say all manner of 
evil against you falsely for My sake.  
Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad, for great is your reward in the heavens.  
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Remember us, O Lord, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom!  
Remember us, O Master, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom!  
Remember us, O Holy One, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom!  
The choir of angels hymneth Thee, and saith: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of Sabaoth! 
Heaven and earth are full of Thy glory!  
Verse: Come unto Him, and be enlightened, and your faces shall not be 
ashamed.  
The choir of angels hymneth Thee, and saith: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of Sabaoth! 
Heaven and earth are full of Thy glory!  
Glory ...,  
The choir of the holy angels and archangels, with all the heavenly hosts, doth 
hymn Thee and saith: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of Sabaoth! Heaven and earth are full of 
Thy glory!  
Both now ..., the Symbol of Faith: 
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth and of all 
things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Only-
begotten, begotten of the Father before all ages; Light of Light, true God of true 
God; begotten, not made; of one essence with the Father, by Whom all things were 
made; Who for us men and for our salvation came down from the heavens, and was 
incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man; And was crucified 
for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered and was buried; And arose again on the third 

--- PAGE 24 ---
day according to the Scriptures; And ascended into the heavens, and sitteth at the 
right hand of the Father; And shall come again, with glory, to judge both the living 
and the dead; Whose kingdom shall have no end. And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, 
the Giver of life; Who proceedeth from the Father; Who with the Father and the Son 
together is worshipped and glorified; Who spake by the prophets. In One, Holy, 
Catholic, and Apostolic Church. I confess one baptism for the remission of sins. I 
look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the age to come. Amen.  
Then, the prayer:  
Remit, pardon, forgive, O God, our offenses, both voluntary and involuntary, in 
deed and word, in knowledge and ignorance, by day and by night, in mind and 
thought; forgive us all things, for Thou art good and the Lover of mankind. 
Then, Our Father ...,  
Our Father, Who art in the heavens, hallowed by Thy name. Thy kingdom come, 
Thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and 
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors; and lead us not into temptation, but 
deliver us from the evil one. 
After which we chant the Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: * Fear not to 
baptize Me, ** for I have come to save Adam the first-formed!  
Lord, have mercy! (Forty times)  
And this prayer:  
O all-holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible Kingdom, and 
cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a sinner; make steadfast my 
heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine every defilement; enlighten my 
mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: One is holy, One is Lord, Jesus 
Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen.  
Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and for evermore. (Thrice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
I will bless the Lord at all times, His praise shall continually be in my mouth. In 
the Lord shall my soul be praised; let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His name together. I sought the 
Lord, and He heard me, and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, and your faces shall not be ashamed. This 
poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, and will 
deliver them. O taste and see that the Lord is good; blessed is the man that hopeth in 
Him.  

--- PAGE 25 ---
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; for there is no want to them that fear Him. Rich 
men have turned poor and gone hungry; but they that seek the Lord shall not be 
deprived of any good thing.  
Come ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. What 
man is there that desireth life, who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Turn away from evil, 
and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.  
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and His ears are opened unto their 
supplication. The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, utterly to destroy the 
remembrance of them from the earth.  
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all 
their tribulations. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart, and He will 
save the humble of spirit.  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of 
them all. The Lord keepeth all their bones, not one of them shall be broken.  
The death of sinners is evil, and they that hate the righteous shall do wrong. The 
Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, and none of them will do wrong that 
hope in Him.  
Then the Megalynarion: 
It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, ever-blessed and most blameless, and 
Mother of Our God. More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, 
the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Choir: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, both now 
and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy! (Thrice) 
 
Choir: Master (Father), Bless. 
Priest: O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, for the sake of the prayers of Thy 
most pure Mother, of our holy and God-bearing fathers, of _____ (The Patron 
of the Temple ), of _____ (saints of the day), and all the saints, have mercy on 
us and save us, for Thou art good and the Lover of mankind.  
Choir: Amen. 
NB: Be it known that if the Eve of the Theophany falleth on a Saturday or Sunday, 
the Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom is celebrated, while on the feast itself we 
celebrate the Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great. If the Eve falleth on any other day 
besides Saturday or Sunday, we celebrate the Liturgy of Saint Basil on the Eve, and 
that of Saint John Chrysostom on the feast itself.  

--- PAGE 26 ---
 
NB: Be it likewise known that when the feasts of the Holy Theophany fall on 
Sunday, the hymns of the feast completely supplant those of the Resurrection from 
the Oktoechos.  
