--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 3rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY  
FOREFEAST OF THE THEOPHANY COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY PROPHET 
MALACHI & THE HOLY MARTYR GORDIUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy prophet, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O Lord, even though Thou didst stand before the tribunal ...”: 
Beholding the sayings * of thy divinely moved tongue * now fulfilled, O prophet, * 
truly marveling, I bless thee; * for with thy radiant voice * thou hast illumined the 
world, * proclaiming aloud ** the saving advent of the Lord.  
By thine angelic life * thou didst become an angel on the earth, * and thou wast 
most fittingly enriched * by being called an angel, * having joined together * beauty of 
soul * and beauty of body, ** O all-blessed Malachi.  
O Lord, * I set before Thee Thy prophet * as advocate and intercessor. * By his 
entreaties and prayers, * O Compassionate One, * loose Thou my wretched soul * 
from sins, * in that Thou art full of tender compassion, ** possessed of essential and 
natural goodness.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Seeing the vaunted darkness of deception, * fleeing, thou didst take thyself away, * 
O passion-bearer Gordius, * awaiting God; * and tested by manifold pangs, * wasted 
by starvation, * as a contender aware of his own power, * summoned, thou didst 
advance ** upon the adversary.  
Great in hope, * thou didst proceed to the multitude of adversaries, * O most 
glorious Gordius, * holding the assembly of the iniquitous to be as naught; * and, 
standing in their midst as a herald of free will, * thou didst proclaim Christ aloud, * 
the Creator and Lord, * Who is co-beginningless, consubstantial and everlasting ** 
with the Father and the adored Spirit.  
Beheaded by the sword, * thou didst most manifestly pass from life to life, * from 
death to immortality, * and from corruption to incorruption, * without awaiting the 
mortification of nature, * but led of thine own will to die. * O thy struggles, O 
passion-bearer Gordius, * whereby, O martyr, ** thou hast gladdened Christ, Who 
alone is compassionate!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Doxasticon of the forefeast, the composition of John the 
Monk, in Tone IV:  
O most glorious wonder! He Who baptizeth by the Holy Spirit and fire cometh to 
be baptized by John in the Jordan, neither simply God nor plainly a man, but in two 
natures, the one only-begotten Son, seeking baptism as a man from a mortal, and as 
God taking away the sin of the world, and granting great mercy unto all.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Behold the enlightenment of the faithful! Behold our purification desireth to enter 
into the streams of the river, that He might wash away the defilement of men’s evil 
and restore us who have been crushed.  
Verse: Therefore will I remember Thee * from the land of Jordan and 
Hermoniem.  
When he beheld thee approaching, and asking to be baptized by him, thy 
forerunner, O Lord, cried out with fear: “O my God, my Creator, how can I baptize 
Thee, Who art undefiled?”  
Verse: The waters saw Thee, O God, * the waters saw Thee and were afraid.  
Let us go down to the streams of the Jordan, O ye faithful, that we may clearly 
behold the great wonder; for the Creator of all hath manifested Himself as visible, 
and hath come to be baptized.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Christ our God cometh to the River Jordan to be baptized, desiring to cleanse us 
of our iniquities by His appearance, in that He alone is good and the Lover of 
mankind.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Gordius * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tormenters 
and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Zebulon! * Adorn thyself, O Nephthali! * O River Jordan, leaping 
up, * receive thou the Master Who cometh to be baptized! * Rejoice, O Adam, with 
our first mother! * Hide not yourselves as ye did before in paradise; * for He who 
beheld you naked hath appeared, * that He may clothe you in your primal raiment. ** 
Christ hath appeared, desiring to make all creation new!  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT COMPLINE  
Triodion I, the Irmos whereof is chanted twice, with 6 Troparia, the acrostic whereof 
is: “I chant the fourth”, in Tone II: 
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
Vain was the plot of Herod, who, seeking to find freedom, iniquitously slew the 
infants; for in being baptized Christ our Redeemer granteth life to all, which cannot 
be slain.  
Of old the cruel edict of Herod slew the new generation of infants, filling 
Bethlehem with blood; but now Christ cometh to create many children of the Church 
through baptism  
Triodion II, in Tone VI: 
ODE V  
Irmos: I seek Thee early in the morning, * Who for our sake didst mercifully 
empty Thyself * and willingly submit to be baptized by the hand of a servant, * 
O Word of God, * Grant Thy peace unto me the fallen one, * O Lover of 
mankind. 
Having purified our minds and cleansed ourselves by partaking of the Mystery of 
the awesome dispensation, let us go forth to meet Christ, all ye faithful, Who cometh 
to cleanse us with the streams of the Jordan.  
O friends, behold the voice of the Word, the luminary of the Sun, the friend of the 
Bridegroom, who crieth out to the people: “Repent and haste ye to purify yourselves 
to meet the Creator!”  
ODE VIII 
Triodion I  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Shedding streams of tears from our eyes, ye faithful, let us wash away all 
defilement of soul, and when Christ cometh to be baptized let us through light 
behold the Light within light. For the Father beareth witness to Him from heaven, 
and the appearance of the Holy Spirit shineth forth in the form of a dove.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Christ, Who taketh away every tear from every face, cometh forth, painlessly 
causing the greatly painful afflictions of our souls to cease through water, and 
restoring by regeneration mankind who fell prey to age, and who supremely exalteth 
Him throughout all ages.  
Souls are rendered sacred through the fire of the Spirit and the divinely bestowed 
font of baptism of Him Who purifieth us from the passions, Who burneth up all the 
dross of vile wickedness, and giveth us the grace to cry out in compunction: Thee do 
we supremely exalt, O Christ, throughout all ages!  
Triodion II 
Irmos: All ye the faithful, who have mocked cruel Herod, * the pillar of wick-
edness! * let us go to the Jordan, * that we may behold Christ the Redeemer, * 
baptized in the flesh by the forerunner in its streams. * He Whom all creation 
doth bless, glorifying Him unto the ages.  
Having shaken off the sleep of evil from the eyelids of our souls, let us remove 
wickedness from our hearts, O ye faithful, and bathe our minds with fervent tears, 
that we may be shown to behold Christ Who hath appeared, glorifying Him 
throughout the ages.  
Let us not bear within us the abominable discourse of evil thoughts, but, having 
learned divine discourse, let us offer hymns to the Word Who for our sake hath 
appeared in the flesh and enlighteneth those in darkness. Him doth all creation bless, 
glorifying Him throughout the ages.  
The depths of the hidden mystery of wisdom is now revealed to men, the abyss of 
the judgments of God is now disclosed to the faithful as God appeareth in the flesh 
on earth for the restoration of the human race. Him doth all creation bless, glorifying 
Him throughout the ages.  
“Thou dost refuse, O John, that thou mightest accomplish it more readily, 
submitting to Me. Cease now, for thus it becometh us truly to fulfill all 
righteousness,” the Master said to the servant. Him doth all creation bless, glorifying 
Him throughout the ages.  
Then: We praise, we bless, and we worship the Lord, hymning and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Irmos: All ye the faithful, who have mocked cruel Herod, * the pillar of wick-
edness! * let us go to the Jordan, * that we may behold Christ the Redeemer, * 
baptized in the flesh by the forerunner in its streams. * He Whom all creation 
doth bless, glorifying Him unto the ages.  
ODE IX  
Triodion I  
Irmos: With pure souls and undefiled lips, * come let us magnify the undefiled 
and most holy Mother of Emanuel, * and through her let us bring our prayer to 
the Child she hath born: * Spare our souls, O Christ God, and save us. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 
Let no one be foolish and ungrateful to Christ, despising His long-suffering 
patience and goodness, lest He be offended; but with fear and joy let us become His 
servants, chanting: Take pity on our souls, O Christ God, and save us!  
The forerunner saith to the disobedient people: “Who hath shown you how to 
escape the coming wrath, ye spawn of vipers? Wherefore, show forth fruits worthy of 
repentance, crying out: Take pity on our souls, O Christ God, and save us!”  
O the arrogance of blind ignorance! For people from foreign lands have done 
homage to Christ as the Redeemer, honoring Him with gifts; but His own people 
savagely sought to slay Him when He was born. Take pity on our souls, O Christ 
God, and save us!  
Triodion II  
Irmos: More honorable than the cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the seraphim, * who without corruption hast given birth to God 
the Word: * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Fulfilling the law and the prophets and effecting righteousness, the Savior of all 
now boweth His head beneath the hand of His servant, rescuing mankind from 
slavery to the enemy.  
A great light hath dawned upon the nations, a divine ray hath illumined the 
darkened: Christ, the Sun of righteousness, hath shone forth upon those who from of 
old have sat in the shadow of death.  
Armies of angels surrounded the Redeemer baptized in the Jordan, and with 
trembling they hymned the great mystery of His ineffable condescension.  
Then, the Irmos: More honorable than the cherubim, * and beyond compare 
more glorious than the seraphim, * who without corruption hast given birth to 
God the Word: * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Zebulon! * Adorn thyself, O Nephthali! * O River Jordan, leaping 
up, * receive thou the Master Who cometh to be baptized! * Rejoice, O Adam, with 
our first mother! * Hide not yourselves as ye did before in paradise; * for He who 
beheld you naked hath appeared, * that He may clothe you in your primal raiment. ** 
Christ hath appeared, desiring to make all creation new! (Twice) 
Glory ..., the Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Gordius * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tormenters 
and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Both now ..., the Troparion of the forefeast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
He Who is infinite in His divinity, but Who hath been circumscribed by the matter 
of the flesh, desireth to come and be baptized in the waters of the Jordan. Let us 
receive Him with noetic purity, for He desireth to accomplish the restoration of all. 
To Him let us cry aloud with fear: glory to Thine appearance, O Christ!  
Glory ...,Both now ..., Another Sessional Hymn, in the same melody: 
When Thou didst appear in the Jordan, to be baptized in the flesh in its waters, O 
Savior, the angelic armies stood in awe, beholding the Master of creation standing 
before a servant and the beginningless Father proclaiming Thee from on high. 
Wherefore, we cry out to Thee with gladness: Glory to God Who hath been baptized!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
Beholding the Word, Who is equal in honor with the Father and the Spirit, and 
Who in His loving-kindness became incarnate and is baptized, the angelic choirs 
trembled; and the River Jordan, abashed and afraid, turned back, bearing up to the 
heights of salvation us who have become corrupted by the passions.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Another Sessional Hymn, in the same melody: 
The Word Who is co-beginningless with the Father and the Spirit, Who in His 
tender compassion took on a form foreign to Him, is now come to be baptized for 
our sake. Let us greet Him with pure minds, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Christ, our 
Savior and Benefactor, Who art come to sanctify us!  
Canon of the forefeast, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and two canons of the 
saints, with 8 Troparia.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE I  
Canon of the forefeast, the acrostic whereof is the Greek alphabet, the composition 
of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O Lord Who lovest mankind, Who created the depths by Thy command and 
suspended the earth upon the waters: humbling Thyself, Thou comest forth to be 
baptized in the river’s streams, washing me clean of the vile passions.  
Thou didst willingly beggar Thyself, enriching me who of mine own will am 
become a pauper through evil deeds, O sinless Christ, and Thou comest forth to the 
waters of the Jordan, asking baptism.  
Restoring the world which hath grown old through transgressions, O Lover of 
mankind, Thou comest to accomplish a strange regeneration for men through water 
and the Spirit. Wherefore, we glorify Thine appearance.  
Proclaiming in prophecy through the divine Spirit, David exclaimed: “What aileth 
thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou, Jordan, that thou didst turn back, 
beholding Christ standing, naked, within thee?”  
Canon of the holy prophet, the acrostic whereof is: “Let the glory of Malachi be 
glorified by me”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified! 
Rejoicing with the choir on high, and joining chorus gladly therewith, and 
delighting as is meet in divine enlightenment, O thou who art inspired by God, by thy 
supplication preserve those who celebrate thine honored memory with faith and 
chant unto the Lord.  
Resplendent with the beauty and comeliness of thine angelic soul and thy body, O 
divinely eloquent son, thou didst splendidly receive the heavenly effulgence of divine 
radiance, and, rejoicing, didst cry aloud: Let us chant unto the Lord, for gloriously 
hath He been glorified!  
Leading a blameless life, adorned with magnificence, and cleansing thyself with 
goodly traits, O most blessed one, thou didst become a prophet of true piety, crying: 
Let us chant unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: O pure Mother of Almighty God, O Sovereign Lady sprung forth 
from the root of royalty, who gavest rise to the One God Who reigneth over all, and 
hast given birth to Him supra-naturally in the flesh: Save me from misfortunes, who 
chant to thy Son: For gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Canon of the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the martyr Gordius with 
sweet hymnody”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
O all-blessed Gordius who art known to be a witness of the Truth, by thy 
supplications grant me radiant grace from heaven.  
Let us chant unto the Lord Who strengthened the passion-bearer against the 
adversary and hath adorned him with a crown of victory.  
Made strong by the power and full armor of the King of all, O most glorious one, 
thou didst set at naught the malice of the tyrants.  
Theotokion: O Bride of God, thou wast shown to be the habitation of Him Who 
poureth forth upon all men life, the waters which flow unto immortality.  
ODE III  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Be glad, O human nature, thou arid desert; for, lo! Christ, the restoration of all, the 
Water of life, hath appeared, watering thee with grace newly sprung forth!  
Thou comest forth to the waters to seek me out who have gone astray in mind, O 
Christ; and entering them, Thou drownest my transgressions, leading me up from the 
abyss of all evil, in that Thou art compassionate.  
Having beheld Thee naked, O Word, the sun hid its rays; for Thou comest to 
clothe in the garment of salvation, through honored baptism, me who have been 
stripped naked through the deception of the serpent.  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Rejoice now, O blessed and God-pleasing Malachi, beholding the fulfillment and 
accomplishment of thy prophecies!  
The noetic Sun of righteousness hath shone forth, Who hath healing on His 
wings, as Thou didst foretell, O divinely inspired one.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: All my hope do I place in thee, O all-immaculate one, and, rejoicing, I 
stretch forth my soul and mind toward thee.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as our God, 
* Whom the whole of creation hymns: * There is none more righteous than 
Thee, O Lord. 
Mindful of the inconstancy of transitory things, and pondering the constancy of 
those things which are abiding, O blessed and glorious martyr, thou didst fearlessly 
enter the arena of suffering.  
Thou didst put away fleeting vainglory, O thou who art spiritually rich, and didst 
cleave unto those things which are everlasting; and, fleeing from fallen mankind, O 
divinely wise one, thou didst earn the right to dwell with the angels.  
Putting aside earthly knowledge, O martyr, thou didst find a heavenly life; for, 
unable to endure the sight of the arrogance of delusion, thou didst withdraw into the 
wilderness.  
Theotokion: There is none as blameless as thee, O Sovereign Lady, and none more 
pure than thee, O all-immaculate one; for in thy womb thou didst contain the Creator 
of all, Who alone is greatly merciful.  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
Enriched by the gift of prophecy, O prophet, * thou didst manifestly proclaim the 
advent of Christ and salvation to the world, ** by Whose radiance the world hath 
been illumined.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “As first-fruits ...”:  
The drops of thy sweat have watered the whole earth, O most glorious Gordius, * 
and thou hast gladdened the whole world with thy precious blood. * By thy 
supplications, O divinely wise one, save all who hymn and bless thee with faith, ** 
crying out a worthy hymn to thee, O all-praised one, as a great athlete.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy prophet, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Enriched by the grace of prophecy, by the Spirit thou wast divinely taught the 
knowledge of things to come, O divinely inspired and most noetically rich Malachi, 
foretelling to all the advent of Christ and the divine summoning of the nations. 
Wherefore, celebrating thine honored memory, we sing to thee with love and bless 
thee with faith, crying out to thee, O glorious one: Entreat Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of sins to those who honor thy holy memory with love.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in the same melody:  
Aflame with the love of Jesus, O wise martyr, of thine own will thou didst 
zealously give thyself over to death, and stand in the midst of the tribunal, crying 
aloud to the tyrants: “Behold, I am come!” Wherefore, having denounced falsehood 
with boldness, thou wast beheaded by the sword, O glorious one, and passed over to 
life everlasting. O all-praised one, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of 
sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the shepherds ...”:  
The choir of the prophets rejoiceth, proclaiming the baptism of Christ which 
poureth forth life. Isaiah saith: “Draw forth the purifying water!” And the ancestor of 
God writeth: “Why doth the sea flee from before the face of God Who of His own 
will saveth the human race?”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Heaven and the angelic armies were stricken with awe, beholding Thee as a 
servant, O Christ, coming to Thy servant and asking baptism.  
Leap up, O John! For The Lord Who delivereth all hath come to bow down 
humbly beneath thy hand, that through divine baptism He might raise me, the lowly 
one.  
Bowing down the heavens, Thou didst descend into the Virgin, O Lover of 
mankind, and bowing Thy head before John, asked for baptism. Glory to Thy 
surpassing loving-kindness!  
Loosing the countless bonds of mine sins, O Word, Thou dost hasten to come to 
the waters of the Jordan to be baptized. O Master, glory to Thy surpassing loving-
kindness!  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
As a prophet of the goodness of the Godhead, O blessed one, thou didst proclaim 
to all the nations the deliverance which hath taken place.  
Having learned through the Spirit of the supra-natural incarnation of the Word, O 
blessed Malachi, thou didst proclaim the ineffable mystery.  
Theotokion: On thee have I set mine every hope of salvation and the direction of 
my life, O joyous Virgin Mary.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Having heard the words of Christ, rejoicing, thou didst leave the corrupt army and 
enroll in the army of the King of heaven, O blessed crown-bearer, martyr Gordius.  
The mountains of the tyrants and the hills of the idols were broken, O martyr, by 
the patient suffering of thee who approached them with boldness, O crown-bearer.  
Thou wast strengthened by the divine power of the Cross, that thou mightest cry 
aloud against the ungodly council: “For those who seek me not, I am found! And 
trusting now, I appear to those who ask not!”  
Thou didst wholly incite the wrath of the tyrant against thee, O divinely wise one, 
and he marveled at the intention and the uprising of thy soul.  
Theotokion: O Mary Theotokos, Bride of God, deliver me from cruel 
transgressions and misfortunes, and by thy supplications guide me toward the calm 
haven of salvation.  
ODE V  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Taking pity on human nature, which had fallen far away from God, the Word of 
God manifested Himself as a man and through God-given baptism doth divinely 
unite it to Himself, restoring it to its original dignity.  
O most compassionate Bestower of life, thou comest to bring life, through the 
streams of the Jordan, to us who have become mortal through disobedience. 
Wherefore, we now faithfully glorify Thine appearance and ineffable mercy.  
Every soul doth marvel, pondering Thine awesome dispensation, O Word: how, 
desiring to restore all, Thou Who art clothed with light comest to enter the river’s 
streams naked.  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
Illumined by the divine Spirit, thou didst proclaim the awesome day of the advent 
of Christ, O divinely wise Malachi.  
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
He Who removeth and washeth away the defilement of men’s souls with grace, as 
with medicinal herbs, hath thus glorified thee, O divinely wise one.  
 
Theotokion: By thy Life-bearing birthgiving thou didst destroy the might of death, 
O all-holy Virgin Maiden, pouring forth life indestructible.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
Entering the arena fearlessly and valiantly like a lion, O blessed one, thou didst 
regard the mindless idols as stones devoid of souls.  
Instructed by the teachings of the divinely inspired Scriptures, O martyr Gordius, 
thou didst find them all conducive to salvation.  
Perceiving thy firm opposition, O divinely wise one, the tyrant was broken by thy 
steadfastness, as a wave is broken upon a rock.  
Theotokion: He Who transcendently became incarnate from thy womb, O most 
pure Virgin, hath illumined the world with the radiance of divine knowledge.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
O ye who from of old have sat in the darkness, beholding the Light Which is 
come, be ye filled with joy! Lo! the Lord hath appeared, clothed in the streams of the 
Jordan.  
How is it that the forerunner beheld Thee coming and asking for divine baptism, 
O Savior? How is it that the waters of the Jordan received thee, Who art the Water of 
forgiveness?  
In gladness let the clouds drop forth noetic joy, for lo! the Lord hath come to be 
baptized, removing the clouds of darkness from our hearts.  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O my 
God. 
Thy wise mind illumined by the very effulgence of God, thou didst set thyself 
apart from things here below and wast granted knowledge of things to come; for thou 
didst foretell the calling of the gentiles and the ending of the force of the law.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Truly the Lord, Whom we sought in joy, hath come into the temple which He 
Himself wisely made of the blessed Virgin, as He said, shining forth from God, O 
glorious Malachi.  
Theotokion: He Who is beginningless and consubstantial with the Father hath 
ineffably been born, assuming flesh as the only-begotten Child of the Virgin, and hath 
preserved as Virgin her who gave Him birth; for He is truly God, even though He 
hath assumed human nature.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: As Thou didst deliver the prophet from the depths * of the abyss, O 
Christ God, * so deliver me also from my sins, * O Lover of mankind, * and 
guide my life, I pray Thee.  
Shedding his blood, O Master, Gordius maketh himself a sacred sacrifice and 
offereth himself to Thee as a pleasing oblation, emulating thy voluntary suffering.  
He who is senseless in mind promised corruptible glory to thee who wast rich in 
incorruptible glory and had laid up a wealth of immortality, O Gordius.  
Directing thy hope toward God, thou didst pass through the inconstancy of life, 
and, beheaded by the sword, thou didst pass over to the broad expanse of heaven.  
Theotokion: Raise up my mind which hath been slain by the threefold waves of 
the passions, O thou who hast given birth to Christ, the eternal Life, Who bestoweth 
healings upon all.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: * Fear not to 
baptize Me, ** for I have come to save Adam the first-formed!  
Ikos: “I do not require thee to transgress the bounds of what is meet, O Baptist; I 
am not saying unto thee: Tell Me what thou tellest the iniquitous, and what thou 
teachest sinners. Only baptize Me in silence, awaiting those things which come 
through baptism; for it is for the sake of this that thou hast received a dignity which 
even the angels do not possess; for I have made thee greater than all the prophets. 
Thus, not one of them beheld Me plainly, but only in images, shadows and 
reflections; but thou beheldest Me standing before thee. For I am come to save Adam 
the first-formed!”  
ODE VII  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Having had mercy on me, who am broken by transgressions and lie in the 
darkness of disobedience, O Lord, thou didst take pity on me in Thy goodness, and 
came to be baptized in the waters of the Jordan, O Master.  
“What is this awesome sight?” the ranks of the angels cried aloud. “He Who 
created the lakes and rivers by His command hath come to clothe Himself in the 
rivers of the Jordan; for thereby He restoreth Adam!”  
Ineffable are the heights and unfathomable is the abyss of Thy dispensation, O 
Master, transcending every attainment of the mind. How is it that Thou cleansest 
mortals with water and the all-holy Spirit?  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
O glorious Prophet Malachi, thou didst foretell the most honored advent of Him 
Who hath dominion over all things, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages!  
O Compassionate One, accept Thou the glorious Prophet Malachi, who prayeth 
for those who piously chant and cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: O compassionate Word of God, Who didst clothe Thyself in me 
through the pure Virgin, without commingling Thou didst wholly unite Thyself 
hypostatically with all of me. Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thou didst bedew the Children in the furnace, * and Thou didst 
preserve Thy Mother as a Virgin after childbirth: * Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
God of our fathers. 
Having attained the glory of martyrdom, O crowned one, thou hast joined chorus 
with the angels, crying out to Christ: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Possessed of the boldness of piety, thou didst denounce the wicked, chanting 
aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Pray thou now, that they be delivered from transgressions who honor thy precious 
memory with faith and chant aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: O all-pure and blessed Birthgiver of God, having given birth to God 
without seed, thou dost cleanse the poisonous wounds inflicted by the thorns of sins 
by thine outpouring of healings.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: The offspring of the Theotokos * saved the Holy Children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The voice of the Father beareth witness from on high to Thee, the consubstantial 
Son, Who entereth the waters and hath thereby sent forth Thy blessing, O blessed 
Christ; and the Holy Spirit proclaimeth Thee to all as God incarnate.  
Dance, O creation, beholding the holy epiphany of God! Chant, ye angels! Rejoice, 
O sea! Ye lands and well-springs, leap up! Ye rivers, mystically clap your hands in 
hymnody! Christ hath stood forth, illumining you with blessings!  
Let us sing in laudation to the Lord Who hath appeared in the waters, thereby 
mending our broken state and crushing the heads of the invisible foe; and let us cry 
aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
O wonder of wonders! How is it that our God, Who is above all creation, taketh 
on our guise and is made new through the Theotokos? How is it that of His own will 
the only Benefactor restoreth and reneweth us through water and the Spirit in a 
wondrous restoration?  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Having made thyself a stranger to every material manifestation, O sacred one, thou 
didst show thyself to be an undefiled mirror of divine radiance, chanting: Bless the 
Lord!, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou wast a beholder of ineffable glory, O blessed one, and a proclaimer of the 
mysteries of heaven, chanting unceasingly: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Acknowledging thee as the Mother of Life and Bearer of God, O 
Virgin Mother, we all bless thee with Orthodox faith, blessing and supremely exalting 
thine Offspring throughout all ages, O pure one.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * ‘Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord’. 
The grace which followed thee, shining forth invisibly, O martyr, filled thee with 
valor, who criest: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Running thy course quickly, O athlete, thou didst reach the kingdom, thy desired 
end, crying out: Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord!  
The glory and the immortal praise of Thy martyrs abideth throughout all ages! O 
all ye works, let us bless the Lord!  
Theotokion: Conceiving the incarnate Word, Who before was incorporeal, O 
virgin, thou didst abolish the ancient curse of Eve, giving birth to the Blessing of the 
world.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Behold, the Lamb Who taketh away the transgressions of mankind hath come and 
stood before His servant, asking baptism; and He standeth forth like a servant, 
seeking to set us free, who have been enslaved by the deceiver, having destroyed our 
pristine beauty.  
God Who became incarnate in His goodness hath manifestly appeared! He Who 
hath truly clothed the heavens in clouds cometh forth to be clothed in the waters of 
the Jordan! Wherefore, with joy we now celebrate the honored forefeast of His 
epiphany.  
Leap up with joy and prepare thyself to embrace the Water which floweth to life 
everlasting, O Jordan! Ye rivers, join chorus, beholding now the Torrent of 
nourishment entering the streams of the Jordan and drying up the outpourings of 
evil.  
The day of salvation hath now dawned upon us who ever sleep in the night of 
evils! For Christ the Lord, Who is understood to be the Sun of righteousness, hath 
stood forth to bow His head before His servant and to be baptized in the flesh of His 
own will.  
O all-immaculate one, the cherubim and all the heavenly beings are in awe of thy 
precious birthgiving, which surpasseth all understanding, to Him Who became like 
unto us in His ineffable compassion and hath been baptized in the flesh. His divine 
epiphany do we all now celebrate, rejoicing.  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: All are awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * for the 
Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man in the 
Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure Theotokos. 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
The divinely radiant and honored feast of the prophet hath dawned, illumining 
with the splendors of prophecy those who come with faith and chant hymns; and it 
poureth forth healings upon all souls, manifestly enlightening the divinely wise.  
By Thy life-creating and mighty right hand, O greatly merciful one, preserve Thy 
Church through the entreaties of Thy favored one, Who foretold to us that Thou 
wouldst become a man, thereby shining forth salvation and deliverance upon our 
souls. 
Theotokion: I embrace mature life, unharmed by the tree of knowledge; for thou, 
O all-immaculate one, hast budded forth Christ, the Tree of life, Who showeth to all 
how to enter into life. Wherefore, O most pure one, we the faithful declare thee to be 
the Theotokos.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire of 
the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the salvation 
of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we magnify thee. 
Entreat the Master to be merciful unto those who honor thee with faith and 
celebrate thy radiant and honored festival, O Gordius, adornment of the martyrs.  
Delighting now in incorruptible food, in the vision of God and never-waning light, 
O Gordius, thou receivest the fruits of thy struggles in the eternal mansions.  
Disdaining fleeting glory which is corrupt and worthy to be trampled underfoot, O 
divinely wise martyr, thou dost truly delight now in everlasting glory and joy, standing 
before the throne of the Master.  
Theotokion: Saved from the ancient curse by thy divine birthgiving, O Virgin, and 
hymning it as is meet, we cry aloud with unceasing voices: Rejoice, O Theotokos, our 
hope!  
Exapostilarion of the forefeast: 
 Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
Leaving Bethlehem, the most glorious wonder, let us hasten with fervor of soul to 
the Jordan, and there let us behold an awesome mystery; for my Christ, having 
stripped Himself naked, standeth forth divinely, clothing me in the raiment of the 
heavenly kingdom.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “The angelic hosts ...”: 
The Master, Who hath heaven for His throne, hath come to earth, incarnate of the 
Virgin; and, standing forth in the Jordan, He asketh of John the cleansing of all. O all 
ye lands of the earth, let us chant to Him: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O 
our God, glory be to Thee!  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Christ arriveth at the streams of the Jordan; He Who washeth sins away asketh 
baptism. Let all the earth leap up, and let the heavens be glad! Rejoice, O Church of 
the nations, having been wedded to the King, and cry out with faith: Blessed art Thou 
Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!  
Let the mountains exude the sweetness of gladness! Clap your hands now mysti-
cally, O ye nations! Let the desert burst into bloom! Leap up, O Jordan! Come thou, 
O Baptist, and, rejoicing, minister to the mystery of the Redeemer! O ye people, let us 
chant: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!  
O Light Who shone forth from the Light before time began, Who hast appeared 
to those who sit in the night: cleanse away the darkness of sin and shine forth the 
light! Dance, O Adam, and be glad, O Eve! Christ our deliverance is come! Cry out, 
O David: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!  
Glory ..., in the same melody: 
A star hath shone forth from Jacob upon the world, and, taking the flaming sin of 
mankind, He burieth it in the waters of the Jordan, shining forth with the radiance of 
divinity and granting the enlightenment of divine knowledge to the nations. Blessed 
art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!  
Both now ..., in the same melody: 
As the fulfillment of the law in the flesh, in that He is full of loving-kindness 
Christ hath come to the Jordan to bring about the first-fruits of salvation; and He 
boweth His head before the Baptist, who crieth out with faith: “O ye people, let us 
cry aloud: Blessed art Thou Who hast appeared! O our God, glory be to Thee!”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Leaving Bethlehem, * let us pass over * to the Jordan, * for there the Light 
beginneth to shine ** upon those in darkness.  
Verse: Therefore will I remember Thee * from the land of Jordan and 
Hermoniem.  
O lands of Zebulon, * which lie on either bank * of the Jordan, * hear yet Christ 
approacheth, ** our salvation, light and deliverance!  
Verse: The Hermoniem waters saw Thee, O God, * the waters saw Thee and 
were afraid.  
O River Jordan, * prepare thou thy streams, * for He Who baptizeth with fire * 
approacheth to restore ** His creation, which had been broken.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody: 
The effulgence of the Father’s glory * hath appeared * in the streams of the 
Jordan, * washing away with baptism ** the defilement of our souls.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia: 3 from ODE III and 3 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the forefeast.  
Be glad, O human nature, thou arid desert; for, lo! Christ, the restoration of all, the 
Water of life, hath appeared, watering thee with grace newly sprung forth!  
Thou comest forth to the waters to seek me out who have gone astray in mind, O 
Christ; and entering them, Thou drownest my transgressions, leading me up from the 
abyss of all evil, in that Thou art compassionate.  
Having beheld Thee naked, O Word, the sun hid its rays; for Thou comest to 
clothe in the garment of salvation, through honored baptism, me who have been 
stripped naked through the deception of the serpent.  
O ye who from of old have sat in the darkness, beholding the Light Which is 
come, be ye filled with joy! Lo! the Lord hath appeared, clothed in the streams of the 
Jordan.  
How is it that the forerunner beheld Thee coming and asking for divine baptism, 
O Savior? How is it that the waters of the Jordan received thee, Who art the Water of 
forgiveness?  
In gladness let the clouds drop forth noetic joy, for lo! the Lord hath come to be 
baptized, removing the clouds of darkness from our hearts.  
Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Zebulon! * Adorn thyself, O Nephthali! * O River Jordan, leaping 
up, * receive thou the Master Who cometh to be baptized! * Rejoice, O Adam, with 
our first mother! * Hide not yourselves as ye did before in paradise; * for He who 
beheld you naked hath appeared, * that He may clothe you in your primal raiment. ** 
Christ hath appeared, desiring to make all creation new!  
Troparion of the Temple: (Theotokos or Saint) 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Gordius * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tormenters 
and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone IV:  
Enriched by the gift of prophecy, O prophet, * thou didst manifestly proclaim the 
advent of Christ and salvation to the world, ** by Whose radiance the world hath 
been illumined.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Kontakion of the Temple: (Theotokos or Saint) 
Glory ..., Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII:  
The drops of thy sweat have watered the whole earth, O all-glorious Gordius, * 
and thou hast gladdened the whole world with thy precious blood. * By thy 
supplications, O divinely wise one, save all who hymn and bless thee with faith, ** 
crying out a worthy hymn to thee, O all-praised one, as a great athlete.  
 Both now ..., Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
In the streams of the Jordan the Lord crieth out to John today: * Fear not to 
baptize Me, ** for I have come to save Adam the first-formed!  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
EPISTLE OF PAUL TO TIMOTHY §292; (Tim, 2:1-10)  
Timothy my child: Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things 
that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful 
men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a 
good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs 
of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man 
also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The hus-
bandman that laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and 
the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the 
seed of David was raised from the dead, according to my gospel: wherein I suffer 
trouble, as an evildoer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. 
Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sake, that they may also obtain the 
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, and like 
a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God 
they shall blossom forth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §36 (10:16-22)  
The Lord said to His disciples: Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of 
wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: 
for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 

--- PAGE 21 ---
synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a 
testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end 
shall be saved.  
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
