--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 1st DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY  
AKATHIST HYMN TO OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS BASIL THE GREAT,  
ARCHBISHOP OF CAESAREA IN CAPPADOCIA  
KONTAKION I 
O chosen and supremely radiant beacon of the whole world, most wise 
teacher of the Church of Christ, first to write the rules of monasticism, O great 
Basil, fervent and faithful servant of the most holy Trinity, pray to the Lord for 
us who praise thee in faith, and who cry out to thee with compunction:  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the whole world!  
IKOS I  
O holy hierarch Basil, the Creator of the angels showed thee forth on earth 
as an equal to the angels who hath shown us the angelic path which leadeth to 
Heaven through setting forth monastic rules by which we are instructed daily, 
rendering thanks therefore unto God, the Creator of all. And with 
compunction we cry out to thee thus:  
Rejoice, O Basil, namesake of regal authority!  
Rejoice, renowned patriarch of monastics!  
Rejoice, most wondrous preserver of purity and chastity!  
Rejoice, true lover of the life of solitude!  
Rejoice, shepherd who didst receive from God Himself the authority to 
tend the reason-endowed sheep!  
Rejoice, thou who didst drive away from His flock the ravening wolves of 
heresy!  
Rejoice, lamp which dispelleth the gloomy darkness of idolatry!  
Rejoice, brilliant lightning flash which illumineth all the world with 
gladness!  
Rejoice, zealous teacher of the truth of the Gospel!  
Rejoice, courageous up-rooter of the most pernicious delusion of Arius!  
Rejoice, faithful and renowned guide along the path of salvation!  
Rejoice, ready defender of all that call upon thee for protection!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  
KONTAKION II  
The Orthodox people of Caesarea, perceiving thee to be a fervent defender 
of the Holy Trinity, elevated thee to the hierarchal throne; and though at first 
thou wast unwilling and forbade it, taking thy seat thereupon thou didst thunder 
forth divine teachings, preaching the three-Sunned, indivisible light of the 
Godhead. Wherefore, illumined by thy divinely inspired teachings, and 
worshipping the most holy Trinity, we chant with compunction: Alleluia!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
IKOS II  
With fiery mind and tongue thou didst utterly consume the pernicious 
arrogance of the heretics who fought against God, and illumining the faithful 
with the light of the threefold Sun, thou hast taught us to praise the One God in 
three Hypostases. And praising Him with our lips of clay, we cry out to thee:  
Rejoice, harp and cithara, which sweetly soundeth forth the praise of the 
Trinity!  
Rejoice, cape of gold and purple which magnificently adorns the Church!  
Rejoice, book filled to overflowing with the doctrines of theology!  
Rejoice, unfathomable abyss of orthodox doctrines!  
Rejoice, incense kindled by the fire of the Holy Spirit!  
Rejoice, thou who hast filled the whole world with the sweet fragrance of 
Christ.  
Rejoice, thou who hast driven away the stench of idolatrous sacrifices by 
the power of the Spirit of God!  
Rejoice, thou who didst call idolatrous people to the true God!  
Rejoice, thou who hast skillfully plumbed the depths of Orthodox law!  
Rejoice, most wise and skillful uprooter of the fables of heretics!  
Rejoice, abyss which hath drowned the impious Arius and those of like 
mind with him in the depths of Hades!  
Rejoice, height which hath clearly revealed the light of the three-fold Sun 
to the world!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  
KONTAKION III  
The power of the Most High showed thee to be an invincible warrior, O 
holy hierarch Basil, who mightily and manfully contended against the apostate 
Julian and his wicked idolaters, whose evil pagan doctrine thou didst cut to 
pieces with the sword of the Faith, commanding us to chant to the Holy Trinity 
in the unity of the Godhead: Alleluia!  
IKOS III  
Possessed of the divinely radiant splendor of theology, O most blessed 
father Basil, thou didst dispel the dark cloud of the impiety of Julian the 
apostate; and, instructed by thee, we cry aloud saying:  
Rejoice, thou who art another Moses, freeing us from the slavery of 
idolatry!  
Rejoice, pillar of fire which sheddeth light upon the night of idolatry!  
Rejoice, clear light which illumines the way to the promised land!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Rejoice, wellspring which doth refresh thirst with the heavenly waters of 
the monastic life!  
Rejoice, nurturer, feeding the faithful with the food of the Word of God!  
Rejoice, for thou hast guided to chastity those who offer up in sacrifice 
the fruits of bitter desire!  
Rejoice, for thou hast guided all to the safe harbor of Orthodoxy  
Rejoice, for by the Cross of Christ thou hast sweetened the labors of strict 
abstinence!  
Rejoice, for thou didst teach us to follow after Him Whom the serpent 
prefigured in the desert!  
Rejoice, for thou steadfastly commanded all to hold to the tablets of the 
commandments of Christ!  
Rejoice, mighty and invincible leader of the new Israel!  
Rejoice, thou who utterly vanquished the enemies who ever rise up 
against God!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  
KONTAKION IV  
By the power of the divine Spirit thou didst dispel the tempest of the 
impious Emperor Valens, possessed by the impiety of Arius, and by the power 
of thy prayer didst assuage his savage assault upon the Orthodox, thereby 
returning the church which had been seized by the heretics, back to the faithful. 
Wherefore thou didst cry aloud to the Holy Trinity with the ineffable joy of the 
Orthodox: Alleluia!  
IKOS IV  
O Basil, holy hierarch of Christ, when the heretical assemblage heard thy di-
vinely inspired teachings concerning the most holy Trinity, immeasurably cut to 
the heart, they spake iniquity and unrighteousness against thee; the just man; 
but manfully struggling on behalf of the Holy Trinity, like an invincible warrior, 
undaunted by their calumnies, thou didst mock their mindless babbling, and 
proclaim aloud the super-substantial Trinity, the Unity in three Hypostases. 
Wherefore praising Him, we cry out to thee:  
Rejoice, O Basil, teacher given to the Holy Church by God!  
Rejoice, O Basil, instructor of those seeking God!  
Rejoice, holy and fore-chosen hierarch of God!  
Rejoice, protector of the doctrines of God!  
Rejoice, for thou didst teach in thy theology that the Son is co-
beginningless with the Father!  
Rejoice, for thou didst make clear for the faithful the pre-eternal Light 
which hath shone forth from pre-eternal Light!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Rejoice, for thou didst say that the Savior of all mankind is God incarnate!  
Rejoice, for thou didst confess the same Lord Jesus to be the Creator of 
all the ages!  
Rejoice, for with material fire thou didst punish Valens, the false hater of 
Christ, like Arius, the blasphemer of the Son of God!  
Rejoice, for with the sling of thy words thou didst bring down the 
impious Arius!  
Rejoice, vigilant champion of Orthodoxy and most exalted intellect!  
Rejoice, most sweet teacher of the manifestations of Christ!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  
KONTAKION V  
Thou hast been shown to be a divinely guided star of the spiritual East, O 
Basil, holy hierarch of Christ, dispelling with the most brilliant rays of theology 
the fetid gloom of heretical teaching and godless blasphemy against our Lord 
Jesus, and revealing the same Son of God as consubstantial, equal in honor and 
co-enthroned with the Father and the Spirit. To Him, as true God and perfect 
man, we ever chant: Alleluia!  
IKOS V  
Thy reason-endowed flock, seeing the quickly accomplished destruction of 
the wicked and Christ-hating emperors which had been foretold by thee, were 
gladdened with inexpressible joy and chanted hymnody of thanksgiving to the 
Lord in three Hypostases Who had brought peace again to His Church through 
thy holy and fervent supplications. And commending ourselves thereto, we cry 
out to thee:  
Rejoice, O Basil, pillar of fire touching the heights of heaven!  
Rejoice, eagle borne aloft on its pinions to gaze upon the light of the 
Trinity!  
Rejoice, for thou dost bear aloft the fledglings of this earthly nest to the 
light of the Trinity!  
Rejoice, for thou dost foretell outer darkness for those blinded by heresy!  
Rejoice, winged eagle traversing the whole world by thy doctrines!  
Rejoice, thou who utterly destroyed the false faith of the dark ravens!  
Rejoice, wellspring of the living waters of the Spirit Paraclete!  
Rejoice, thou who pourest forth a stream of teaching upon all the ends of 
the earth!  
Rejoice, melodious nightingale who doth gladden the hearts of the faithful!  
Rejoice, sweet-voiced thrush glorifying God with unceasing song!  
Rejoice, river of Paradise issuing forth from Eden!  
Rejoice, torrent of sweet teachings by which all the earth is watered!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
KONTAKION VI  
Thou wast shown to be a divinely eloquent preacher with a divinely inspired 
tongue sweeter than honey, O Basil, holy hierarch of Christ, at a time when 
there was great turmoil in the Orthodox Church; for, like a trumpet-voiced 
trumpet, thou didst thunder forth the salvation of our God to all the ends of the 
earth, maintaining and preserving the holy Orthodox faith unadulterated and 
inviolate. Therein do thou also preserve us who chant unto God: Alleluia!  
IKOS VI  
O Basil, holy hierarch of Christ, shining forth like a radiant sun upon those 
abiding within the darkness of false belief and dreadful error, thou wast chosen 
by the Lord Christ, the Effulgence of the essence of the Father, to illumine the 
earth with the teaching of thy radiant words, wherefore, through thee many 
have been united in oneness of mind in the Orthodox Faith, and standing 
immovably therein, with one heart they chant with us to thee:  
Rejoice, divinely splendid ray of the mystic Light!  
Rejoice, golden trumpet of the Truth of the Gospel!  
Rejoice, lamp of the Church enlightening the world with thy teaching!  
Rejoice, proclamation filling all the world with divinely inspired words!  
Rejoice, organ of the most holy Spirit, playing hymns of salvation for us!  
Rejoice, wellspring filling the ecumene with sweet music!  
Rejoice, orator of sweet eloquence expounding the mysteries of heaven!  
Rejoice, theologian who understood the truth that the Hypostases of God 
are three in number!  
Rejoice, establisher of monastic rules and habitations!  
Rejoice, most exalted ruler of the see of Caesarea!  
Rejoice, divinely planted olive tree sprouting forth virtuous sons of the 
Church!  
Rejoice, vine bearing divinely wise teachers and defenders of Orthodoxy!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  
KONTAKION VII  
Christ the Lord, the supreme High Priest, desiring to invest thee with 
hierarchal authority, first adorned thee with the gifts of the Holy Spirit as with 
precious stones; whereupon crushing the false myths of the heretics, thou didst 
shepherd the flock entrusted to thee in the life-bearing pastures of holiness and 
righteousness, teaching them to chant unto the One God in Trinity: Alleluia!  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
IKOS VII  
O holy hierarch Basil, we praise thee as a new Aaron, yet not arrayed and 
adorned in the vesture of the Old Testament, resplendent with the twelve 
precious stones, but with that of Christ, wrought with angelic confession 
instead of the array of twelve stones; and therein thou didst perform the angelic 
divine Mysteries. And we, weaving hymns with precious pearls, cry out today:  
Rejoice, sardis of the true Faith, shining with heavenly brilliance!  
Rejoice, never fading emerald ever verdant with good works!  
Rejoice, ruby resplendent with zeal for man’s salvation!  
Rejoice, sapphire who remaining on earth, hath been lifted up in heart to 
heaven!  
Rejoice, agate utterly annulling the poison of heretical doctrine!  
Rejoice, hyacinth turning the hearts of the contentious to unity and 
concord!  
Rejoice, amethyst possessing ever wakeful vigilance in the service of God!  
Rejoice, chrysolite raising eyes and hearts up to heaven!  
Rejoice, onyx turning to repentance those weighted down with sins!  
Rejoice, diamond which meekly and manfully endured persecutions!  
Rejoice, pearl more costly and precious than all other pearls!  
Rejoice, most holy hierarch of the High Priest of heaven!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  
KONTAKION VIII  
The holy Ephraim saw in thee strange and most glorious things, O holy 
Basil, hierarch of Christ. For he perceived thee aflame with the seraphic fire of 
the mercy of God, which reached to the heights of heaven. Deem us, thy 
children, also worthy, O most honorable father, of unceasingly burning with 
the virtue of the mercy of God, of never being quenched, and of ever chanting 
unto God in the fervor of our hearts: Alleluia!  
 
IKOS VIII  
Thou wast filled to overflowing with the light of the threefold Sun, O 
venerable father Basil, in so far as thy lips were fiery, thy words like lightning, 
thy voice like thunder, thy teaching ever bedewing the faithful like a gentle rain, 
and strengthening their hearts; bedew also our hearts, which have been 
desiccated by our sins, that we may chastely cry out to thee:  
Rejoice, O Basil, burning with the seraphic fire of the mercy of God!  
Rejoice, Wise revealer of the mysteries of heaven to the Holy Church!  
Rejoice, O Basil, flame consuming pernicious heresies!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Rejoice, thou who shamed the accursed pride of arrogant Eunomius!  
Rejoice, courageous denouncer of the shameful heresy of Nestorius!  
Rejoice, earnest defender of the honor of the most pure Mother of God!  
Rejoice, thou who commanded all creation to rejoice and be glad in her!  
Rejoice, supplicant for victories of the faithful Orthodox over infidel 
barbarians!  
Rejoice, thou who blamelessly offered up un-bloody sacrifices to God!  
Rejoice, thou who taught other priests to offer them up!  
Rejoice, thou who honored the martyrs with panegyric discourses!  
Rejoice, intercessor, beseeching that together with them, we also may 
stand before the throne of God!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  
KONTAKION IX  
The multitude of demonic hosts cannot withstand thine insuperable power, 
O venerable father; for by the power of thy prayer thou didst wrest from the 
jaws of Hades the youth who had fallen therein through signing a pernicious 
document; for after repenting forty days, thou didst tear asunder the document 
which thou didst receive, and didst reconcile and unite the youth to his Creator, 
and teaching him to chant in compunction of heart: Alleluia!  
IKOS IX  
The vain-minded heretical orators, beholding the most glorious wonder 
wrought upon the youth, were seized with great fear; and beholding this, they 
united themselves to the noetic unity of the Orthodox Church and raising 
hymns of thanksgiving with thee unto the One God in Trinity, with one voice 
they cried out in compunction to thee, the exorcist whom the demons feared:  
Rejoice, O Basil, annihilator of the cruel serpent by thy dreadful thunder!  
Rejoice, planter of the Tree of the Cross in his prideful heart!  
Rejoice, dispeller of the power of demons as though smoke!  
Rejoice, thou who before all tore asunder the scroll which fell from above!  
Rejoice, thou who returned the lost son to God the Father!  
Rejoice, thou who by the Body and Blood of the Son of God satisfied him!  
Rejoice, thou who filled all the faithful with ineffable joy!  
Rejoice, thou who led the lost sheep to the meadows of paradise!  
Rejoice, for the angelic hosts in the heavens rejoice over him!  
Rejoice, for the weaknesses of the serpent of Hades have been mocked 
and put to shame!  
Rejoice, fervent lover of souls ransomed by the precious Blood of Christ!  
Rejoice, intercessor, beseeching that we too may be numbered among the 
choirs of the saints!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
KONTAKION X  
The Creator, desiring to save His creation, led forth many from the darkness 
of unbelief into the light of Orthodoxy by thee; for even when sick and 
approaching thy blessed repose, thou didst enlighten with holy baptism the 
Jewish physician and his wife and children, teaching them how to fittingly chant 
with a pure heart unto the Holy Trinity: Alleluia!  
IKOS X  
O Basil, holy hierarch of Christ, thou art a rampart and firm bulwark of the 
Church of the faithful, for the assault of the impious ones was unable to move 
thee; since thou wast founded on the immovable rock of the confession of 
Christ, from which, as from solid stone, their evil darts were deflected, turning 
back upon them. Truly, the Orthodox Faith was glorified and strengthened by 
thy wondrous works, for at the end of thy temporal life, thou didst enlighten a 
Jew with holy baptism, and now having departed to the mansions of heaven, 
look down and supplicate on behalf of us who cry out to thee such things as 
these:  
Rejoice, most wondrous adornment of the see of Caesarea!  
Rejoice, thou who by thy governance didst wisely legislate its organization!  
Rejoice, thou who emitted a heavenly light in the presence of the 
unbelieving Jew!  
Rejoice, thou who, near death, became the cause of his salvation!  
Rejoice, great wonder-worker even at the time of thy repose!  
Rejoice, thou who prevented him from dying in the unbelief of the Jews!  
Rejoice, dread dispeller of demonic hordes!  
Rejoice, brave conqueror of their evil attacks and assaults!  
Rejoice, thou who dispelled all tribulations and grief from all!  
Rejoice, bestower of ready help to all who call upon thee!  
Rejoice, nurturer of orphans and ready intercessor for those in need!  
Rejoice, visitation and help of those who suffer from the passions!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  
KONTAKION XI 
It is not possible to offer up hymns worthy of thee, O all-wondrous Basil; 
for looking down from the heavens upon us, thou dost earnestly entreat that 
we be deemed worthy of divine grace, and since thou art crowned with a never-
fading wreath by the most merciful right hand of Christ God, the Chief Shep-
herd, thou dost hymn Him as true God in the company of the angelic hosts 
chanting: Alleluia!  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
IKOS XI  
O Basil, radiant lamp and great favorite of Christ, light of godly intelligence 
illumining the hearts of the faithful; shining with a multitude of virtues, thou 
hast entered into the holy of holies of heaven, and as a true hierarch and 
faithful servant of God, taken thy place before the Holy Trinity, where do thou 
be mindful of us who cry out to thee:  
Rejoice, unfading splendor of noetic brilliance!  
Rejoice, thou who hast illumined earthly kings with the radiance of thy 
divinely inspired words!  
Rejoice, morning star which hath arisen in the lands of the East!  
Rejoice, thou who hast reached even unto the West in thine effulgence!  
Rejoice, lightning flash enlightening the north and the coasts of the sea!  
Rejoice, luminous pearl adorning the world with the wondrous deeds of 
thy life!  
Rejoice, living fount refreshing those who are in the burning heat of sins!  
Rejoice, helmsman and pilot for those sailing upon the sea of life!  
Rejoice, lily which blossomed forth from the good earth of holy parents!  
Rejoice, thou who perfumes the world permeated with the stench of 
unbelief!  
Rejoice, fragrant rose abiding in the garden of Paradise!  
Rejoice, intercessor, ever pray unto God on behalf of thy beloved flock!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  
KONTAKION XII  
The grace of the Godhead, which is One in Three, blessed thy struggles, 
pangs and labors, O holy hierarch Basil, with the vision of ineffable glory and 
inexpressibly beautiful goodness; for He deemed thee worthy to abide with the 
saints and to reign with them everlastingly. Do thou be mindful of us who 
glorify thy holy repose and chant unto God: Alleluia!  
IKOS XII  
All of the angelic choirs praise thee in hymns, and the company of saints 
celebrate with thee O father, for living angelically on earth, thou didst amaze 
the ends of the earth with the greatness of thy labors, and on earth the 
assemblies of the faithful ever bless thee, for thy much-healing relics cure 
divers ailments and heal diseases. Wherefore, rejoicing, we cry out to thee such 
things as these:  
Rejoice, royal priesthood, all-praised and most blessed Basil!  
Rejoice, pure and honored habitation of the super-essential Trinity!  
Rejoice, converser with angels, honored with the patriarchs!  
Rejoice, equal to the prophets and apostles in thy labors and struggles!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Rejoice, sharer of the throne of holy hierarchs and chief among monks!  
Rejoice, model for monastics, and boast and glory of virgins!  
Rejoice, dweller in the mansions of heaven with all the saints!  
Rejoice, our vigilant protector from the deceitful assaults of Hades!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, crowned in the heavens with a teacher’s wreath!  
Rejoice, fervent mediator given to all the Orthodox by God!  
Rejoice, ready helper of all, especially in times of battle!  
Rejoice, faithful preserver of us all amid every tribulation and sorrow!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  
KONTAKION XIII  
O Basil, most holy and exceedingly great hierarch of Christ, comfort of the 
sorrowful and seeker of the lost! Accept from us this present supplication, and 
bear it before the throne of the most holy Trinity, that, by thy holy prayers, we 
may become heirs of the kingdom of heaven, and, with thee and all the saints, 
may be deemed worthy to chant unto God: Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia! (Thrice) 
This Kontakion is chanted thrice; whereupon Ikos I and Kontakion I are repeated.  
IKOS I  
O holy hierarch Basil, the Creator of the angels showed thee forth on earth 
as an equal to the angels who hath shown us the angelic path which leadeth to 
Heaven through setting forth monastic rules by which we are instructed daily, 
rendering thanks therefore unto God, the Creator of all. And with 
compunction we cry out to thee thus:  
Rejoice, O Basil, namesake of regal authority!  
Rejoice, renowned patriarch of monastics!  
Rejoice, most wondrous preserver of purity and chastity!  
Rejoice, true lover of the life of solitude!  
Rejoice, shepherd who didst receive from God Himself the authority to 
tend the reason-endowed sheep!  
Rejoice, thou who didst drive away from His flock the ravening wolves of 
heresy!  
Rejoice, lamp which dispelleth the gloomy darkness of idolatry!  
Rejoice, brilliant lightning flash which illumineth all the world with 
gladness!  
Rejoice, zealous teacher of the truth of the Gospel!  
Rejoice, courageous up-rooter of the most pernicious delusion of Arius!  
Rejoice, faithful and renowned guide along the path of salvation!  
Rejoice, ready defender of all that call upon thee for protection!  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the ecumene!  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
KONTAKION I 
O chosen and supremely radiant beacon of the whole world, most wise 
teacher of the Church of Christ, first to write the rules of monasticism, O great 
Basil, fervent and faithful servant of the most holy Trinity, pray to the Lord for 
us who praise thee in faith, and who cry out to thee with compunction:  
Rejoice, O great Basil, beacon of the whole world!  
PRAYERS TO THE HOLY HIERARCH BASIL THE GREAT  
PRAYER I.  
O most blessed father Basil, divinely wise teacher of the whole world, who 
art great among hierarchs! Great were the struggles and labors which thou didst 
accomplish for the glory of the Holy Church! Thou wast a steadfast confessor 
and beacon of the Faith of Christ on earth, illumining the faithful with the light 
of the knowledge of God, burning up false doctrines, and proclaiming the word 
of the truth of salvation to the whole world. And now, as thou possessest great 
boldness before the Holy Trinity in the heavens, help us who fall down before 
thee in humility, that we may firmly and unalterably preserve the holy 
Orthodox Faith until the end of our lives; keep us from lack of faith, doubts 
and wavering in the Faith, that we be not deceived by the words of soul-
destroying teachings which are hateful to God. O most glorious pastor of the 
Church of Christ, by thine intercession enkindle within us the spirit of that holy 
zeal wherewith thou wast aflame, for Christ hath ordained us to be pastors, that 
we may with all diligence enlighten and confirm in the right Faith the reason-
endowed flock of Christ. Entreat thou the King of kings, that He grant unto 
them that have authority over us length of days, health and prosperity in all 
things. O merciful and holy hierarch, ask thou of the Father of lights every gift 
which is right needful for all: for children, good upbringing in the fear of God; 
for the young, chastity; for the elderly and infirm, strengthening; for the 
sorrowful, consolation; for the sick, healing; for them that are in error, 
admonition and correction; for the oppressed, help; for orphans and widows, 
protection; for the tempted, grace-filled aid; and for our fathers and brethren 
who have departed this transitory life, blessed repose. Yea, O saint of God, 
look down with mercy from the mansions of heaven upon us, the lowly, who 
are tempest-tossed by many temptations and dangers, and lift up to the heights 
of heaven them that have been cast down to earth. O supremely good father, 
bestow upon us thine arch-pastoral and holy blessing, that, under the 
protection thereof, during this new year and all throughout the rest of our life, 
we may live in peace, repentance and obedience to the Holy Orthodox Church, 
diligently following the commandments of Christ and fighting the good fight of 
the Faith; and may thus attain unto the kingdom of heaven, where do thou 

--- PAGE 12 ---
count us worthy, with thee and all the saints, to hymn and glorify the holy, 
consubstantial and indivisible Trinity, unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
PRAYER II.  
O great and most holy hierarch, most glorious father Basil, teacher of the 
universal Church, most diligent champion of the glory of the most holy Trinity, 
forechosen confessor of the Mother of God and her immaculate virginity, most 
splendid model of purity, humility and patience! Behold, I, who am greatly 
sinful and unworthy to look upon the heights of heaven, do humbly entreat 
thee, O most wise teacher of the Church of Christ: teach me to lead my life in 
God-fearing manner, that I may never wander onto the path which is contrary 
to the commandments of God or go astray. By thy greatly powerful 
intercession keep and deliver me from the temptations of the world and the 
wiles of the devil, as thou didst deliver the young man therefrom who had 
apostatized from our sweet Savior and had fallen under the authority of Satan. 
Grant me strength of soul, that I may become a diligent emulator of thy lofty 
virtues; render me steadfast and unshakable in the right Faith; strengthen me 
who am timid in endurance and trust in the Lord; enkindle within my heart true 
love for Christ, that I may desire the good things of heaven above all else and 
may delight in them. Ask of the Lord that I be given sincere contrition for my 
sins, that I may spend the remaining time of my life in peace, repentance and 
the fulfillment of the commandments of Christ. And when the hour of mine 
end draweth nigh, do thou then, O supremely good father, together with the 
most blessed Virgin Mary, make haste to mine aid: defend me from the wicked 
assaults of the enemy, and vouchsafe me to be an heir to the mansions of 
paradise, that, with thee and all the saints, I may stand before the throne of the 
unapproachable majesty of God, and may glorify and hymn the life-bestowing, 
consubstantial and indivisible Trinity, always and for endless ages. Amen.  
PRAYER III.  
O great and most glorious holy hierarch of Christ, divinely wise teacher of 
the whole universal Church, steadfast confessor and champion of Orthodoxy, 
most blessed father Basil! Look down from the heights of heaven upon us who 
humbly fall down before thee, and entreat the Lord Who ruleth over all, Whose 
faithful servant thou wast on earth, that He grant us a steadfast and immutable 
preservation of the true Faith, obedience to the Holy Church, correction of our 
life, ready help in all our needs, tribulations and temptations, patience and 
fortitude. Grant us thy holy blessing, that, overshadowed thereby, we may live 
all our days in peace and repentance, in a manner pleasing unto God, and, 
together with thee and all the saints, may be accounted worthy to hymn and 
glorify the Trinity, the Origin of life: the Father, and the Son, and the Holy 
Spirit, in the kingdom of heaven, unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
