--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 10th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS THEOPHANES, 
RECLUSE OF VYSHENSK  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 3 of the feast, the composition of John the 
Monk, in Tone II:  
The Forerunner, beholding our Enlightener, Who illumineth every man, coming to 
be baptized, rejoiceth in soul and trembleth. He pointeth to Him with his hand and 
saith to the people: “This is He Who delivereth Israel, Who freeth us from corrup-
tion! O sinless Christ our God, glory be to Thee!”  
When our Redeemer was baptized by His servant and borne witness to by the 
coming of the Holy Spirit, the angelic armies, looking on, were stricken with awe; and 
a voice was borne down from the Father in heaven: “He Whom the Forerunner 
baptized with his hand is My beloved Son, in Whom I have been well-pleased!” O 
Christ our God, glory be to Thee!  
The currents of the Jordan received Thee, the Wellspring, and the Comforter 
descended upon Thee in the form of a dove. Thou Who bowed down the heavens 
dost bow Thy head, and clay crieth out to the Potter: “What dost Thou command me 
to do, O Thou Who art greater than I? It is I who must needs be baptized of Thee! O 
sinless Christ our God, glory be to Thee!”  
And 5 of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: 
Come, O ye faithful, and let us piously bless Theophanes, the holy hierarch of 
Christ, the good shepherd, the teacher of golden discourse, the comforter of the 
sorrowful, the guide of all who have recourse unto him with faith, and who now 
prayeth on behalf of our souls. (Twice)  
O holy hierarch Theophanes our father, thy memorial hath shone forth on us like 
the radiant sun, enlightening those who approach thee with faith and earnestly entreat 
thee: Pray that our souls may be saved! (Twice)  
O most blessed father Theophanes, man of God and faithful servant, chosen 
vessel of the Holy Spirit, heir to the kingdom of God: Ask peace for the Orthodox 
Church, prosperity for our land, and for all the faithful confirmation in the Faith, 
forgiveness of sins and deliverance from misfortunes.  
Glory ..., in Tone I: 
O divinely wise father Theophanes, even though thou didst run the race in secret 
struggles, yet wast thou shown to the people to be a most radiant beacon, 
enlightening us with the rays of thy words; and thou dost teach all to know Christ. 
Wherefore, joyfully bowing down before the shrine of thy precious relics, we cry out 
with compunction: Glory to Him Who glorifieth His saints!  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., of the feast, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone II:  
Thou didst bow Thy head before the Forerunner, and didst crush the heads of the 
serpents. Having come to the streams, thou didst illumine all things, that they may 
glorify Thee, O Savior, the Enlightener of our souls.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the Day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones; no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory; out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; those who seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
The righteous man if he happen to die early shall be at rest, and the dying 
righteous man shall bring judgment unto the wicked living, for they will see the end 
of the righteous one and will not understand what is destined for him. And the Lord 
will hurl the wicked down voiceless and will remove them from their foundations, 
and they shall pass away unto the last in sorrow and their memory shall vanish, for 
they shall come in dread unto the realization of their sins, and their transgressions 
shall convict them to their faces. Then the righteous man will stand up in great 
boldness before those who offended him and despised his works. At the sight of him 
they will be agitated with great fear and will feel astonished at his glorious salvation; 
for, repenting and sighing from the oppression of the spirit, they shall speak within 
themselves, saying: this is he whom we laughed at and held in scorn; we were so 
foolish as to account his life as madness and his end dishonorable; how, then, is he 
now numbered unto the sons of God and his lot is cast among the holy? We have 
therefore wandered away from the right path, and the light of truth bath not 
illumined us, and the sun hath not shone unto us; we were full of the wicked ways 

--- PAGE 3 ---
and perdition, and walked in the unpassable paths, but did not comprehend God’s 
ways.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is 
immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the 
Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. 
For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that 
ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of 
God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master 
of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is 
a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image 
of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more beau-
tiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the 
light, she is found preeminent. She hath delivered from pain those who please her, 
and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them 
from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that 
godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall 
judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, 
reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his 
holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our 
strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing 
to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and 
denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have 
the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a 
reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like 
other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery, 
and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. 
Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine 
him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his 
forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall 
he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own 
wickedness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither 
bethought them that Thou alone art God, who hast the power of life and death, 
savest in time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and 
merciful, givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone III:  
O most blessed Theophanes, most glorious wonder-worker and helper of the 
faithful, vessel full to overflowing with grace, and wellspring of mercy: Pray to the 
Lord on our behalf, that our souls may find mercy.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
O divinely wise father Theophanes, good and faithful friend of the Lord, 
adornment of hierarchs and glory of the fathers: As when thou wast alive, so after thy 
repose hath God, Who is wondrous in His saints, given thee the grace of healings. 
Pray now unceasingly to the Lord on our behalf, that our souls may find mercy.  
O most blessed Theophanes, faithful keeper of the words of the Gospel, who 
didst take up voluntary poverty as it were a treasure, and didst preserve the purity of 
the monastic life, providing a model of humility after the example of thy Lord: 
Standing now before the throne of the Almighty, pray thou earnestly on behalf of us 
who keep thy sacred memory.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Today the Monastery of Vyshensk is adorned, and the whole Orthodox Church 
keepeth festival, celebrating thy memorial, O holy hierarch Theophanes; for through 
thee the Lord revealed wondrous and most glorious miracles when He was pleased to 
glorify thy precious relics. Wherefore, we hasten to thee and pray: Make entreaty for 
us unto the Lord, that our souls may find mercy.  
Both now ..., of the feast, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII:  
Today creation is enlightened! Today all things are glad, those of heaven and those 
on earth! Angels and men mingle together! For where the King arriveth, there doth 
order prevail. Wherefore, let us all hasten to the Jordan and see how John baptizeth 
the sinless head which no man fashioned. And, chanting the cry of the angel, let us 
exclaim together: The grace of God hath appeared, saving all, illumining and granting 
mercy unto the faithful!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Rejoice, O Theophanes our father, swift consoler amid sorrows! Rejoice, guide of 
monks and nuns! Rejoice, thou who leadest all to God by thy words and deeds! And 
now, standing before the throne Of the Holy Trinity, pray thou earnestly on behalf of 
us who celebrate this radiant solemnity.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Rejoice, O holy hierarch Theophanes, most glorious adornment of the Church of 
Russia, bright boast of the Monastery of Vyshensk, unshakable pillar of Orthodoxy! 
Rejoice, O our advocate before God, before Whom thou standest with all the saints! 
Pray for us who honor thy holy memory.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Rejoice, O hierarch of God, image of humility and meekness, inexhaustible 
treasury of love! for even if thou didst abide in seclusion, thou didst not forsake those 
who thirsted for spiritual consolation. Wherefore, we flee to thee as to our father, and 
cry out with love: Pray unto the Lord on our behalf, that our souls may find mercy!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
O most blessed father Theophanes, having acquired purity of mind, thou wast 
shown to be a dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit, abiding in seclusion for many years in 
the Monastery of Vyshensk; and with thy writings thou hast enlightened all who have 
recourse to thee with faith. And now, never cease to offer entreaties on behalf of us 
who honor thy sacred memory.  
Both now ..., of the feast, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI:  
Beholding the Sun Who shone forth from the Virgin asking for baptism in the 
Jordan, the radiant luminary who shone forth from the barren woman cried out to 
Him with fear and joy: “Do Thou sanctify me by Thy divine epiphany, O Master!”  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O guide of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, * ascetic of Vyshensk, divinely 
wise and holy hierarch Theophanes: * By thy writings thou didst explain the Word of 
God, * and hast shown the way to salvation unto all the faithful. ** Entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee! (Twice) 
 Glory ..., that of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O guide of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, * ascetic of Vyshensk, divinely 
wise and holy hierarch Theophanes: * By thy writings thou didst explain the Word of 
God, * and hast shown the way to salvation unto all the faithful. ** Entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., that of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Resting in thee, O holy hierarch Theophanes, Christ the Lord, the Light from 
Light which is unapproachable, showed thee forth to the world as most radiant, for 
thou art indeed radiant in thy splendid life, shedding rays of doctrines, and shining 
forth with miracles. Wherefore, we now celebrate thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Thou didst sanctify the streams of the Jordan and didst crush the might of sin, O 
Christ our God; Thou didst bow Thy head beneath the hand of the Forerunner and 
hast saved the human race from deception. Wherefore, we entreat Thee: Save Thou 
our souls!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Resting in thee, O holy hierarch, Christ the Lord, the Light from Light which is 
unapproachable, showed thee forth as a zealous witness to the Truth in His Church, 
unto the joy and salvation of all who honor thy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Wherefore didst thou marvel, O River Jordan, seeing the Invisible One naked? “I 
beheld and trembled,” it said, “for how could I have desired not to be filled with awe 
of Him and withdraw?” The angels were filled with fear, beholding Him; heaven was 
affrighted, and the earth quaked; the sea, and all things visible and invisible, were 
troubled. Christ appeared in the Jordan, to sanctify the waters.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch 
Theophanes, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God 
on our behalf.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God(Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
O most wise teacher, steadfast champion of the Truth of Christ; make our hearts 
steadfast in the Orthodox Faith, for to thee do we flee and to thee do we pray: 
Entreat the Lord on our behalf, O holy hierarch Theophanes our father.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O most pure Birthgiver of God, invincible intercessor for the afflicted and fervent 
help of those who trust in thee. Deliver us from misfortunes and temptations.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, §35 (MIDPOINT) (JN. 10: 1-9)  
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: ‘‘Verily, verily, I say unto you: He 
who entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, 
the same is a thief and a robber. But he who entereth in by the door is the shepherd 
of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth 
his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own 
sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And 
a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of 
strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things 
they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: ‘‘Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All who ever came before Me are 
thieves and robbers: but .the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by Me if any 
man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Grace poured forth in thy lips, O holy hierarch Theophanes, and thou wast truly 
shown to be a preacher of the revelation of God in the land of Russia; for by thy 
writings thou teachest all to believe in the Trinity, the one Godhead.  
Canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia; and that of the holy hierarch, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon I of the feast, the acrostic whereof is: “Baptism is the cleansing of mortals’ 
sins”, the composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone II: 
Irmos: The Lord mighty in battle * uncovered the foundation of the deep * 
and led His servants on dry ground; * but He covered their adversaries with 
the waters, * for He hath been glorified. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
The Lord, the King of the ages, restoreth corrupted Adam with the streams of the 
Jordan and crusheth the heads of the serpents who make their nest therein, for He 
hath been glorified.  
The Lord Who became incarnate of the Virgin, clothing material flesh in the 
immaterial fire of the Godhead, doth wrap Himself in the water of the Jordan, for He 
hath been glorified.  
He Who washeth away the defilement of men, cleanseth Himself for them in the 
Jordan, desiring to make Himself like unto them, yet remaining as He was before, the 
Lord Who enlighteneth those in darkness, for He hath been glorified.  
Canon of the saint, the acrostic whereof is “Rejoice, O Theophanes, ascetic of 
Vyshensk”, with 8 Troparia, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us now sing. 
Joyfully offering up praise, and falling down humbly before thee, we ask: Accept 
our unworthy supplication, O holy hierarch Theophanes our father.  
O earthly angel and heavenly man, abiding in seclusion in the Monastery of 
Vyshensk, and praying unceasingly to the Lord, thou didst make plain for all, the path 
to salvation.  
Having assembled today, O ye faithful, with hymns and spiritual songs let us praise 
the holy hierarch Theophanes, our true advocate before God.  
Theotokion: Make us steadfast, O Mother of God, in belief in thy Son and God, 
Who wondrously glorifieth His saints and calleth them His friends.  
ODE III  
Canon I of the Feast  
Irmos: The Lord who granteth strength unto our kings, * and exalteth the horn 
of His anointed, * is born of a Virgin and cometh unto baptism. * Therefore 
let us, the faithful, cry aloud: * None is as holy as our God. 
O Church of Christ, who of old wast barren and grievously childless, be glad 
today; for by water and the Spirit children have been born unto thee, who cry out 
with faith: There is none as holy as our God!  
In the wilderness the Forerunner crieth out with a loud voice: “Prepare ye the 
ways of Christ and make straight the paths of our God, crying out with faith: There is 
none as holy as our God!”  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
O holy hierarch Theophanes, thy name hath perfumed our land like myrrh, 
delighting the hearts of the faithful, and calling all to spiritual joy and salvation.  
O Theophanes, saint of God well-pleasing to Christ, look upon our infirmities, 
and heal thou our souls, which are ever tempest-tossed by the passions.  
Like an industrious bee thou hast gathered for us the honey of the writings of the 
fathers from the meadow of the Spirit, O holy hierarch, for the salvation of those 
who have recourse to thee in prayer.  
Theotokion: O holy hierarch Theophanes, come and stand with us, that together 
we may glorify the most holy Virgin who gave birth to Christ God.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, * and Thy light, O Lord, hath been 
signed upon us * who with understanding hymn Thee. * Thou hast come, Thou hast 
appeared, ** the Light unapproachable.  
Ikos: Upon Galilee of the nations, upon the land of Zebulon and the land of 
Naphthali, as the prophet said, a great Light hath shone, even Christ. A radiant 
darkness hath dawned upon those who sat in darkness, shining forth from 
Bethlehem. The Lord born of Mary, the Sun of righteousness, shineth forth with 
splendor upon the whole world. Come, therefore, all ye naked children of Adam, and 
let us clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warmed; for He Who covereth the 
naked and enlighteneth those in darkness, hath come. He hath appeared, the Light 
unapproachable!  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Thy life was glorious, and thy repose is with the saints, O Theophanes, saint of 
God; and standing now at the throne of the Almighty, pray for us, O most blessed 
one, that the Lord may save our souls.  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Jesus had been born of the Virgin Mary and was baptized by John in the 
Jordan, the Spirit, seen in the form of a dove, descended upon Him. Wherefore, the 
prophet said with the angels: “Glory to Thy coming, O Christ! Glory to Thy 
kingdom! Glory to Thy dispensation, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind!”  
ODE IV  
Canon I of the Feast  
Irmos: I heard, O Lord, Thy voice, * which Thou didst call the voice of one 
crying in the wilderness, * for Thou didst thunder over the multitude of waters, 
* bearing witness to Thy Son. * And, wholly filled with the Spirit which had 
descended, * He cried aloud: * Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of 
God! 

--- PAGE 10 ---
“Who hath ever seen the sun cleansed, which is dazzling by nature?” the herald 
crieth out. “Am I then to wash with water Thee, the effulgence of glory, the Image of 
the eternal Father? Am I, who am grass, to touch Thy divinity? For Thou art Christ, 
the Wisdom and Power of God!”  
“When he happened upon Thee, Moses showed the divine reverence he felt, for 
he understood that it was Thee Who spake out of the bush; and he straightway 
averted his face. How, then, can I gaze directly at Thee? How can I touch Thee with 
my hand? For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”  
“Wisely doing what is spiritual, and being honored with speech, yet stand I in awe 
before inanimate things. For if I baptize Thee, the mountain which smoked with fire, 
the sea which parted in twain and this Jordan which turned back will be mine 
accusers. For Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God!”  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
O holy hierarch Theophanes, thou didst wisely commit thine understanding unto 
Christ and wast granted the eternal kingdom. Beseech Him now Who hath created all 
things in His wisdom, that He save our souls.  
Entreat now Him Whom thou didst love, Whom alone thou didst desire, and for 
Whose sake thou didst struggle in seclusion, that He save our souls.  
For the flock given thee by God thou wast a model in word, life, love, spirit, faith 
and purity; wherefore, we honor thee as a true pastor, O Theophanes our father.  
Theotokion: O divinely wise Theophanes, make supplication on our behalf to the 
most holy Sovereign Lady, the Theotokos, that by her omnipotent intercession she 
may beseech Christ to save our souls.  
ODE V  
Canon I of the feast  
Irmos: Jesus, the Prince of Life, * hath come to set loose from condemnation * 
Adam the first-formed man; * and though as God He needeth no cleansing, * 
yet for the sake of fallen man He is cleansed in the Jordan. * In its streams He 
slew the enmity * and bestoweth the peace that passeth all understanding. 
When countless people went down to be baptized of John, Thou Thyself didst 
stand in their midst. And he announced to those present: “Who hath told you, O 
rebellious ones, to avoid the impending wrath? Bring forth fruits worthy of Christ; for 
He standeth before you, granting peace.”  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Standing in their midst, the Creator and Fashioner alone trieth the hearts of all; 
and taking his winnowing-fan in His hand, He all-wisely doth separate the harvest of 
the whole world, letting the chaff fall away; and He granteth eternal life to the fruitful.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why has the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
The angels rejoice in heaven, and men keep spiritual festival on earth, celebrating 
the memory of the holy hierarch Theophanes, the wondrous advocate for us all.  
O blessed Theophanes, teach us to know Christ, the Light of truth, Who 
enlighteneth every man that cometh into the world.  
Him Whom the armies of heaven glorify thou didst unceasingly glorify in thy life. 
O saint of God, teach us also to glorify the Lord with the virtues.  
Theotokion: With hymns let us honor the Sovereign Lady of the world, who is 
more exalted than the heavens and more pure than the rays of the sun, and hath 
delivered us from the curse.  
ODE VI  
Canon I of the feast  
Irmos: The Voice of the Word, the Candlestick of the Light, * the Morning 
Star and Forerunner of the Sun, * cried in the wilderness to all the peoples: * 
‘Repent and be cleansed beforehand. * For lo, Christ is at hand, * Who 
delivereth the world from corruption. 
Christ, Who was begotten incorruptibly of God the Father, is incarnate of the 
Virgin without defilement. The Forerunner teacheth that it is not possible to loose 
the sandals; the bond between the Word and us, of Him Who delivereth mortals from 
deception.  
With the uttermost fire shall Christ baptize His enemies, who do not acknowledge 
Him as God; but He shall restore with the water of grace those who accept His 
divinity, delivering them from their transgressions.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened to me, * O God of my salvation.  
Thou didst tread the narrow path to salvation, and as one meek didst cry 
unceasingly to the Meek One: It is good for me to cleave unto God!  
Desiring the Truth of Christ, thou didst joyfully endure tribulations and afflictions, 
ever mindful that as there is no crown save there be a victory, so is there no victory 
except there be struggle.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
As thou abidest in the house of the heavenly Father, O father Theophanes, forget 
not us, thy children, but by thy supplications grant that we also may enter the 
wedding-chamber of the Lord of glory.  
Thou didst spurn the glory and all the riches of the world, setting thy steps 
unwaveringly toward the world on high; and thou now rejoicest with angelic joy, O 
holy hierarch Theophanes, our father.  
Theotokion: Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? Who doth not 
hymn thy most pure birthgiving? Entreat thy Son and God, O pure and most blessed 
one, that our souls may find mercy.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
O holy hierarch Theophanes, * namesake of the Theophany: * By thy teachings 
thou didst enlighten many of the people. * And standing now with the angels before 
the throne of the Holy Trinity, ** pray thou unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
Ikos: Thou hast truly been shown to be a revelation of divine gifts to the land of 
Russia, O holy hierarch Theophanes, good shepherd of the flock of Christ, teaching 
them by thy way of life and guiding them by thy discourse and writings. And now, 
standing before the throne of the most holy Trinity, and lifting up thy venerable 
hands with boldness, pray thou unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Canon I of the feast  
Irmos: The breath of the wind heavy with dew * and the descent of the angel 
of God * preserved the Holy Children from all harm, * as they walked in the 
fiery furnace. * Refreshed with dew in the flames, * they sang in thanksgiving: 
* ‘Blessed and supremely praised art Thou, * O Lord God of our fathers.’ 
As in heaven, with trembling and wonder the angelic hosts stood before Thee in 
the Jordan, witnessing the breadth of God’s condescension; for the God of our 
fathers, Who holdeth the firmament of the waters above, stood, incarnate as a man, 
in the waters.  
The cloud and the sea of old prefigured the wonder of divine baptism, for the 
ancient people of the law were baptized therein when they fled Egypt. The sea was an 
image of the water, and the cloud was an image of the Spirit, whereby we are made 
perfect. And we cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
O all ye faithful, in Him have we received perfection; and, theologizing continually 
with the angels we glorify the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. For, lo! the 
consubstantial Trinity of Hypostases is the One God. To Him do we chant: Blessed 
art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Having the way of the cross of Christ, the Judge of the contest, continually before 
thee, thou didst tread the narrow path that leadeth to life everlasting, O blessed one, 
crying out unceasingly: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
In zeal thou didst emulate Elijah the Tishbite, O holy hierarch Theophanes; and 
setting thy heart afire with divine love, in patience thou didst possess thy soul, crying 
aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou! 
O father Theophanes, zealous preacher of divine Truth, guided by the wisdom of 
thy words and teachings we now chant with thee: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Theotokion: Grant consolation to thy servants, O Mary, Birthgiver of God, that 
with thee we may cry aloud to thy Son and our God: O God of our fathers, Blessed 
art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Canon I of the feast  
Irmos: The Babylonian furnace, as it poured forth dew, * foreshadowed a 
marvelous mystery: * how the Jordan should receive in its streams the 
immaterial fire, * and should encompass the Creator, * when He was baptized 
in the flesh. * Him do ye peoples bless and supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
“Put aside all fear,” the Redeemer said to the Forerunner; “Obey Me, in that I am 
good, and touch Me, for tangible have I become by nature: Submit to My commands 
and baptize Me Who am come down.” Him do the people bless and supremely exalt 
throughout all ages.  
When the Baptist heard the words of the Master, he stretched forth his hand with 
trembling, and as he touched the head of his Creator he cried out to Him Who was 
being baptized: “Sanctify me, for Thou art my God, Whom the people bless and 
supremely exalt throughout all ages!”  
The Trinity was revealed in the Jordan, for the Father, the all-divine Essence 
Himself, announced: “This One Who is baptized is My beloved Son!” And the Spirit 
came upon Him Who was like unto Him, Whom the people bless and supremely exalt 
throughout all ages.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Ye children, bless! Ye priests, chant! Ye people, exalt Christ throughout all ages, 
celebrating the great solemnity of the glorification of the favored one of God, the 
holy hierarch Theophanes!  
As is meet, thou didst teach all to hymn the glory of God, O Theophanes, 
preacher of piety. Teach this also unto us who now approach thee with faith, that the 
name of God may be glorified throughout all ages.  
O Theophanes, steadfast champion of the Faith, wise preacher of piety, excellent 
theologian of Orthodoxy, recluse of Vyshensk: Vouchsafe that we, the unworthy, may 
in spiritual joy hymn the Lord, Who is supremely exalted throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: Thou ever givest streams of healings to the faithful, O Mother of 
God. Heal thou our souls through the supplications of Theophanes, the favorite of 
God, that we may glorify and supremely exalt thy birthgiving, O most pure one, 
throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Every tongue is at a loss to praise thee as is due: * even a spirit from 
the world above is filled with dizziness, * when it seeketh to sing thy praises, 
O Theotokos. * But since thou art good, accept our faith: * Thou knowest well 
our love inspired by God, * for thou art the Protector of Christians and we 
magnify thee. 
O David, come thou in spirit to the enlightened and chant, saying: “Approach 
God now with faith and be illumined! Lowly Adam cried out in his fall, and the Lord 
heard him, and, coming to the streams of the Jordan, He restored the corrupted one.”  
Isaiah saith: “Change your ways and cleanse yourselves; leave off your wickedness 
in the face of the Lord! Ye who thirst, go to the living Water; for Christ sprinkleth 
with water those who have recourse to Him with faith, renewing them, and He 
baptizeth with the Spirit unto life which ageth not.”  
By grace and the seal are we preserved, O ye faithful; for as of old the blood-
smeared lintels allowed the Hebrews to escape the destroyer, so shall the laver of 
regeneration be for us a divine exodus. And henceforth we shall see the never-waning 
light of the Trinity. 
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Thou hast been vouchsafed eternal life, O holy hierarch. Be thou a fervent 
mediator and advocate before God for us who celebrate thy sacred memorial with 
faith.  
Thou hast been shown to be a new wonderworker, O divinely wise Theophanes, a 
most merciful healer and an unmercenary physician of the souls and bodies of all who 
have recourse to thee with faith, having pity, consoling, and pouring forth thy 
compassions in abundance.  
Truly thou hast been shown to be a fervent advocate for us before God, O father. 
Beg thou the Creator of all things, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto all who 
magnify thee with faith and love.  
O man of God, faithful friend of Christ, mercifully accept our entreaties, and bear 
them to the throne of the glory of the Lord Who by His baptism sanctified the 
streams of the Jordan.  
Theotokion: Him Whom the armies of heaven glorify thou didst bear in thy 
womb, O most pure Mother of God. Entreat Him to have compassion and save our 
souls.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Rejoicing, with hymns let us honor the holy hierarch Theophanes, the luminary 
enlightened from on high, resplendent with light divine.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the feast:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us ...”: 
The Savior appeared, grace and truth, in the streams of the Jordan, and He 
illumined those sleeping in darkness and shadow, for He, the immutable Light, hath 
come and appeared.  
On the Praises, 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast, by Patriarch Germanus, in Tone I: 
Christ our Savior, the Light of Light, hath shone forth upon the world, 
manifesting Himself as God. Let us worship Him, O ye people!  
How can we who are servants honor the Master as is meet? For He hath restored 
us all in the waters.  
Baptized in the Jordan, touched by Thy servant’s hand, O our Savior, Thou didst 
sanctify the waters, healing the sufferings of the world. Great is the mystery of Thine 
epiphany! O Lord Thou Lover of mankind, glory be to Thee!  
And 3 of the holy hierarch, in Tone VII:  
Thy God-pleasing life hath now shone forth upon us, O holy hierarch Theophanes 
our father, recluse of Vyshensk, for thou didst make all carnal knowledge subject to 
thy spirit. Pray for us who celebrate thy sacred memorial, that the Lord may save our 
souls.  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Thou wast shown to be an image of monastic struggles and temperance, and an 
inexhaustible treasury of love and humility; wherefore, honoring thy holy memory, we 
glorify Christ Who hath crowned thee. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He save 
our souls.  
O Theophanes, thou man of God and faithful servant of Christ, lover of stillness, 
who didst converse alone with the one God: Be thou mindful of us who honor thy 
holy memory, and bear thy fervent supplications to the Lord, that He may save our 
souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VII: 
O wise preacher of piety, excellent theologian of Orthodoxy, thou didst explain to 
the people the mysteries of the spiritual life, and thus brought many to believe in the 
triune God. Wherefore, honoring thy holy memory, O God-bearing father 
Theophanes, we cry out with thee: O Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee!  
Both now ..., the composition of John the monk, in Tone VIII: 
Desiring to fulfill that which Thou hast established from before time, O Lord, 
Thou didst accept ministers of Thy mystery from among all creatures: Gabriel from 
among the angels, the Virgin from among men, the star from among the heavens, and 
the Jordan from among the waters, wherein Thou didst destroy the iniquity of the 
world. O our Savior, glory be to Thee!  
Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE V of Canon I of the feast; and 4 
from ODE VI of the canon of the holy hierarch.  
Jesus, the Prince of Life, hath come to set loose from condemnation Adam the 
first-formed man; and though as God He needeth no cleansing, yet for the sake of 
fallen man He is cleansed in the Jordan. In its streams He slew the enmity and 
bestoweth the peace that passeth all understanding. (Twice) 
When countless people went down to be baptized of John, Thou Thyself didst 
stand in their midst. And he announced to those present: “Who hath told you, O 
rebellious ones, to avoid the impending wrath? Bring forth fruits worthy of Christ; for 
He standeth before you, granting peace.”  
Standing in their midst, the Creator and Fashioner alone trieth the hearts of all; 
and taking his winnowing-fan in His hand, He all-wisely doth separate the harvest of 
the whole world, letting the chaff fall away; and He granteth eternal life to the fruitful.  
Thou didst tread the narrow path to salvation, and as one meek didst cry 
unceasingly to the Meek One: It is good for me to cleave unto God!  
Desiring the Truth of Christ, thou didst joyfully endure tribulations and afflictions, 
ever mindful that as there is no crown save there be a victory, so is there no victory 
except there be struggle.  
As thou abidest in the house of the heavenly Father, O father Theophanes, forget 
not us, thy children, but by thy supplications vouchsafe that we also may enter the 
wedding-chamber of the Lord of glory.  
Theotokion: Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? Who doth not 
hymn thy most pure birthgiving? Entreat thy Son and God, O pure and most blessed 
one, that our souls may find mercy.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee!  
Troparion of the Temple (Theotokos or saint) 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O guide of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, * ascetic of Vyshensk, divinely 
wise and holy hierarch Theophanes: * By thy writings thou didst explain the Word of 
God, * and hast shown the way to salvation unto all the faithful. ** Entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Kontakion of the Temple (Theotokos or saint) 
Glory ..., Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
O holy hierarch Theophanes, * namesake of the Theophany: * By thy teachings 
thou didst enlighten many of the people. * And standing now with the angels before 
the throne of the Holy Trinity, ** pray thou unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
 Both now ..., Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, * and Thy light, O Lord, hath been 
signed upon us * who with understanding hymn Thee. * Thou hast come, Thou hast 
appeared, ** the Light unapproachable.  
 
Prokeimenon of the feast, in Tone IV: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of 
the Lord. * God is the Lord and hath appeared unto us.  
And that of the saint, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the 
meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations, give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 335 (HEB. 13: 17-21)  
Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they 
watch for your souls, as ones who must give account, that they may do it with joy, 
and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work 
to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
Alleluia, of the feast, in Tone IV: Bring unto the Lord, ye sons of God, bring 
unto the Lord the sons of rams.  
And that of the saint, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate 
wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 36 (JN. 10: 9-16)  
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 

--- PAGE 19 ---
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he who is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and 
know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd.”  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Refrain and Irmos of ODE IX: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable than the armies on high.  
Irmos: Every tongue is at a loss to praise thee as is due: * even a spirit from 
the world above is filled with dizziness, * when it seeketh to sing thy praises, 
O Theotokos. * But since thou art good, accept our faith: * Thou knowest well 
our love inspired by God, * for thou art the Protector of Christians and we 
magnify thee. 
 
Communion Verse: The grace of God that bringeth all men to salvation hath 
appeared. 
Communion Verse of the Hierarch: In everlasting remembrance shall the 
righteous be, he shall not be afraid of evil tidings. 
