--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 17th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE & GOD-BEARING FATHER ANTHONY 
THE GREAT  
If the superior so desireth, we celebrate a vigil  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
When, rejoicing, * thou didst enclose thyself in a tomb O father, * for the love of 
Christ, thou didst mightily endure * the temptations of demons, * and by prayer and 
grace didst drive away * their webs of perverse vexation. * Then the ranks of the 
angels having assembled, * cried aloud saying: ** Glory to Him Who hath 
strengthened thee, O Anthony! (Twice)  
Thou didst manifest thyself as another Elijah, * having thy glorious disciples like 
Elisha, O wise one; * and to them thou didst leave * a twofold measure of grace, O 
father, * when thou wast caught up as on a chariot of the air. * Wherefore, living in 
the Spirit, * thou now rejoicest with them, O all-blessed one. * Be thou mindful of 
those who celebrate ** thine honored solemnity with love, O Anthony.  
Like Moses the God-seer * thou didst truly enter the noetic darkness of visions, * 
and didst straightway clearly behold Him * Whom thou didst desire. * And thy face 
was filled with glory by His radiance, O father, * that thou mightest guide men to the 
abodes of salvation. * Wherefore, having assembled, we cry aloud, rejoicing: * Glory 
be to Christ God ** Who hath strengthened thee!  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone III:  
O venerable Anthony, thou didst perfect a life of most constant suffering of 
burning heat and cold, finding thy rest as amid unwaning splendors; for having united 
thyself spiritually to those of the desert, thou didst trample down the fiery darts of the 
demons. And having transcended every virtue, thou hast made thine abode with the 
angels in the kingdom of heaven. With them beseech Christ God, that our souls be 
saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
From earliest infancy * thou wast shown to be * a consecrated vessel, * O God-
bearing Anthony, ** and a habitation of the all-holy Spirit.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Having put to shame * the deceits of the wicked demons * by the power of the 
Cross, * thou didst shine forth the glory of Christ, ** O father Anthony.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Like Elijah thou wast caught up * on a chariot of fire, * and didst pass directly to 
the Trinity, * O blessed Anthony, ** universal father.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II: 
The choirs on high * chant with those below, * O Virgin Theotokos, * unceasingly 
glorifying ** thy most pure birthgiving.  
Trisagion through Our Father ..., Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Emulating the manner of the zealous Elijah, * and following the Baptist with 
righteous steps, O father Anthony, * thou wast a dweller in the desert; * making the 
whole world steadfast by thy supplications. ** Wherefore, entreat Christ God, that 
our souls be saved.  
Glory..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”:  
O thou who wast illumined with the rays of the Spirit, * when divine desire set 
thee afire * and gave wings to thy soul, * that thou mightest truly desire * the summit 
of His love, * then didst thou overcome flesh and blood, * and didst transcend the 
world, * uniting thyself to Him * with great abstinence and solitude. * Wherefore, 
thou wast filled there, * for thou didst ask for the good things from thence, * and 
didst shine forth like a star, ** enlightening our souls, O Anthony. (Thrice)  
Having broken the bows and arrows, * the malice of the demons and their pursuit, 
* with the grace of the divine Spirit, * thou didst make them plain to all * with divine 
doctrines, * illumined with divine splendors. * And thou wast a lamp of divine 
radiance for monastics, * the first adorner of the desert, * a most skillful physician * 
of the infirm, * and the pristine image of a virtuous life, ** O father Anthony. 
(Thrice)  
Pure of soul and heart, * an earthly angel, * a heavenly man, * a teacher of 
virginity, * an excellent measure of abstinence, O Anthony, * who dwellest with thy 
Master, * offering Him continual glorification * with the angels and the venerable, * 
and with all the martyrs, O blessed one, * from cruel tribulations and transgressions 
free thou ** those who ever celebrate thy sacred memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Having preserved that which is in the image of God, and set thy mind as master 
over the pernicious passions through fasting, thou didst ascend to that which is in the 
likeness of God, as far as thou wast able; for manfully compelling thy nature, thou 
didst strive to subdue that which is lower to that which is better, and to enslave the 
flesh to the spirit. Wherefore, thou wast shown to be the summit of monastics, a 
citizen of the desert, a trainer of those who run the good race, a most excellent rule of 
virtue. And in purity thou now beholdest the Holy Trinity in the heavens, not by 
reflection as by a mirror, praying directly for those who honor thee with faith and 
love.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  

--- PAGE 4 ---
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill-dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of im-
mortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God 
proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He 
tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation 
they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge 
the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. 
They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in 
love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for 
His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 

--- PAGE 5 ---
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hastened He to take him away from among the 
wicked. This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their 
minds: that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His 
chosen.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera of the venerable one, the 
composition of the Studite, in Tone II:  
Having instituted the art of ascetic training on earth, O venerable Anthony, thou 
didst drown all the assaults of the passions in the flow of thy tears. Thy God-pleasing 
life hath been recognized by all as a divine and precious ladder rising up to the 
heavens. For, having shown forth the fruits of piety within thyself, thou hast thereby 
healed the weakness of the passions of those who cry out to thee with faith: Rejoice, 
O golden-rayed star of the East, luminary and shepherd of monastics! Rejoice, O 
ever-memorable one, most comely offspring of the desert and unshakable foundation 
of the Church! Rejoice, great guide of the lost! Rejoice, O our boast, thou radiant joy 
of the whole world!  
Let us honor Anthony, the angel on earth and a man of God in the heavens, the 
goodly adornment of the world, the enjoyment of good works and the virtues, the 
boast of fasters for planted in the house of God, he flourished in righteousness, and 
like a cedar in the wilderness, he hath increased the flock of Christ’s reason-endowed 
sheep in holiness and righteousness.  
O venerable father, having diligently exercised thyself in virtue from childhood 
thou didst become an instrument of the Holy Spirit; and, receiving from Him the 
ability to work miracles thou didst exhort mortals to spurn that which is sweet. And 
now, most purely illumined with divine light, enlighten also our thoughts O father 
Anthony. 
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
O venerable father, having listened to the words of the Gospel of the Lord, thou 
didst depart from the world, considering riches and glory to be as naught. Wherefore, 
thou didst cry aloud to all: Love God, and ye shall receive everlasting grace; prefer 
nothing to His love, that when He shall come in His glory, ye shall find rest with all 
the saints. By his supplications, O Christ, preserve and save our souls!  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ, * the 
Sun of righteousness, ** Who hath great mercy.  
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice, O boast of fasters ...”:  
Rejoice, O Anthony, joining the choirs in the highest; for, having truly trained 
thyself by virtue, O father, thou didst live their life on earth, showing thyself to be a 
most pure and unblemished mirror reflecting the radiant beams of the brilliance of 
the most holy Spirit, O all-blessed one. Wherefore, illumined, thou didst behold 
things that were to come, foretelling them all, taught by the manifestation of the 
divine light of Christ. Him do thou beseech that He grant great mercy to our souls.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Rejoice, thou who wast the first leader and invincible champion of ascetics! For 
cutting off the roots of the passions and the assaults of the demons, contending thou 
didst manfully denounce their weakness and soul-destroying deceit; and revealed the 
activity and invincible power of the Cross of the Savior and girding thyself therewith, 
thou didst vanquish all who rejected the divine manifestation of Christ in the flesh. 
Him do thou beseech, that He grant great mercy to our souls.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Established as a radiant pillar of virtue, thou wast shown to be a cloud 
overshadowing those in the desert, leading from earth to heaven those who behold 
God. And with the staff of the Cross thou didst part the sea of the passions, 
vanquishing the noetic Amalek and didst find a sure path to heaven and an incorrupt 
inheritance. O blessed of God, joyfully standing before the throne of Christ with the 
incorporeal ones. Him do thou beseech, that He grant great mercy to our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
We honor thee, O Anthony our father, as the instructor of a multitude of monks; 
for following thy steps we have truly learned how to walk aright. Blessed art thou 
who, having labored for Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O converser 
with the angels and companion of Paul of Thebes. With them pray thou to the Lord, 
that our souls find mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * Mother 
of God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, 
* granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting now our 
supplications, ** pray thou that we all be saved. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Emulating the manner of the zealous Elijah, * and following the Baptist with 
righteous steps, O father Anthony, * thou wast a dweller in the desert; * making the 
whole world steadfast by thy supplications. ** Wherefore, entreat Christ God, that 
our souls be saved.  
Glory..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Emulating the manner of the zealous Elijah, * and following the Baptist with 
righteous steps, O father Anthony, * thou wast a dweller in the desert; * making the 
whole world steadfast by thy supplications. ** Wherefore, entreat Christ God, that 
our souls be saved. (Twice) 
Glory..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before ...”: 
Thou didst follow the call of thy Lord, rejecting the world and all the beautiful 
things in the world, O all-blessed Anthony; and diligently bearing the discomfort of 
the desert, thou didst manfully rout the hordes of the demons. Wherefore, we ever 
faithfully praise thy memory with hymns. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
exceedingly glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:  
With hymns let us honor the faster of the Lord, as one who truly mortified all the 
assaults of the passions with abstinence and steadfast endurance, who utterly put to 
shame the adverse foe and all his pride, and now prayeth to the Lord, that our souls 
find mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V:  
An awesome miracle of conception * and an inexpressible birthgiving have been 
recognized in thee, O pure Ever-virgin, * by which my mind is filled with awe * and 
my thoughts amazed. * Thy glory, O Theotokos, hath reached into all things, ** unto 
the salvation of our souls.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We bless thee, O venerable father Anthony, 
and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monastics and converser with 
the angels.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Having received pastoral skill, O pillar and ground of monastics, with strength 
thou didst shepherd thy reason-endowed flock; for, desiring the divine teachings of 
Christ, thou didst sow the word therein, O venerable one. Wherefore, thou didst raise 
all up to the zeal of the angelic life, to glorify God with oneness of mind, O God-
bearing Anthony. Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of transgressions to 
those who honor thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Let us hymn the heavenly door and ark, * the all-holy mountain, * the radiant 
cloud, the unburnt bush, * the paradise of the Word, * the restoration of Eve, * the 
great treasure of the whole world, * for in her have been wrought on behalf of the 
world, * the salvation and the remission of the ancient transgressions. * Wherefore, 
we cry out to her: * Entreat thy Son, that He grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those 
who piously worship thy most holy Offspring.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §43 (MT. 11: 27-30)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: 
and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, 
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and 
learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 
For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; 
wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed 
the hordes of the demons, and hast attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life 
thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask thou 
peace for our souls.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Canon of the Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the 
saint, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is: “I chant praise unto the Life-
bearing Maiden”, the composition of John of Damascus, in Tone II:  
Irmos: Traversing dryshod the impassible, peculiar path in the sea, * Israel the 
chosen cried aloud: * Let us chant unto the Lord, * for He hath been glorified!  
The immaterial ladder of old and the path of the sea made strangely firm revealed 
thy birthgiving, O pure one. Her do we all hymn, for she hath been glorified!  
The power of the Most High, the perfect Hypostasis, the Wisdom of God 
incarnate of thee, O most pure one, hath conversed with mankind, for He hath been 
glorified!  
The Sun of thy righteousness hath passed through the impassible door of thy 
locked womb, O pure one, and hath shone forth upon the world, for He hath been 
glorified!  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “It is good to praise the godly 
Anthony”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Manifestly embracing immortality and life everlasting, and delighting in the 
threefold radiance, O father, pray thou that my darkened soul be illumined with grace, 
that I may hymn thee as is meet.  
Though thou wast small of bodily stature, choosing the new path of virtue thou 
didst tread it safely, obedient to the new law of the Savior and following the life-
bearing precepts of the Gospel, O thrice blessed one.  
Illumined with the effulgence of the threefold Sun, O all-wise and blessed one, 
aflame with divine desire thou didst break the savagery of the demons, the mouths of 
the wild beasts and the pain of sores as though they were a spider’s web.  
Theotokion: Possessing boldness, as the Mother of God, before the only-begotten 
Son Who hath been born of thee, and the co-beginningless Father, and the co-
essential Spirit, cease thou never to pray, that they save from tribulations those who 
glorify thee as the Theotokos, O all-immaculate one.  
Katavasia: The Sun once passed over dry land * in the midst of the deep. * For 
the water on both sides became firm as a wall * while the people traversed the 
sea on foot, * chanting in a manner pleasing to God: * Let us sing unto the 
Lord; * for gloriously hath he been glorified. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath been broken * by Thy might, O Christ, * 
and the enfeebled * have girded themselves with power.  
He that, as the Creator of time, is outside all time, O Virgin, willingly made 
Himself a Child through thee.  
Let us hymn the womb which is far more spacious than the heavens, through 
which Adam hath made his abode in the heavens, rejoicing.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
With steadfast mind and mighty endurance thou didst cause the flame of the 
passions to die out O father Anthony, and thou didst array thyself in the splendid 
vesture of dispassion and the robe of salvation.  
Thou didst disdain the feeble power of the demons who dared mighty assaults and 
assumed the guise of wild beasts; for thou didst have a mighty ally in battle.  
Denouncing the princes and powers of darkness O Anthony, through mighty 
asceticism thou didst become a God-bearer, a mighty victor, the glory of fasters and 
boast of monastics.  
Theotokion: By the activity of the Life Who manifested Himself to the world 
through thee, O pure one, raise up my mind which hath been slain and guide it to 
Life, O thou who alone hast destroyed the gates of death by thy birthgiving.  
Katavasia: O Lord, the firm foundation of those who put their trust in Thee, * 
do Thou establish the Church, * which Thou hast purchased * with thy 
precious blood. 
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having bound thy wounds with the love of Christ and wisely hated all the things 
of the earth O venerable father, thou didst make thine abode in the deserts and 
mountains; for, having tasted of the noetic tree, O glorious initiate of the mysteries, 
thou didst shine forth like an angel with never-waning rays. Wherefore, having passed 
through the darkness of thy flesh, thou didst dispel the gloom of the demons, O 
Anthony, first-chosen among monastics. Entreat Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of transgressions unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. 
(Twice)  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
As the all-immaculate Bride of the Creator, * Mother of the Redeemer, who 
knewest not a man, * and as the receptacle of the Comforter O all-hymned one, * 
hasten thou to deliver me, * the vile abode of iniquity and noetic plaything of the 
demons, * from their evil machinations; * and make me the bright dwelling-place of 
the virtues, * O thou incorrupt light-bearing one. * Drive away the clouds of the pas-
sions and grant that, * by thy supplications, * I may receive a portion on high ** and 
share in the never-waning light.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: I have heard, O Lord, * of Thy glorious dispensation, * and I have 
glorified, O Lover of mankind, * Thine unapproachable power.  
Behold! the most manifest Mother of God, the divine mountain of the house of 
the Lord, is exalted far above the heavenly powers.  
O Virgin, who, alone outside the laws of nature, hast given birth unto the Ruler of 
creation: thou hast been vouchsafed a divine calling.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Using the divine ladder of the virtues, O father, thou didst ascend to the summit, 
and didst behold God standing thereon, distributing gifts with His generous hand 
unto those who chant with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Thou alone didst dedicate thyself wholly to God alone, O all-wise Anthony, 
uniting thyself to Him with virtue and spiritual discourses, and as thou art pure, thou 
wast vouchsafed divine revelation; for, having abandoned the earth and the things of 
the earth, thou didst receive the delights of heaven, as is meet.  
Having purified mind and soul, O father Anthony, thou didst denounce the soul-
destroying deceit, the wiles, bitter deceptions and phantasms of the enemy; for, 
having trained, thou didst achieve mastery, and having achieved mastery, thou didst 
teach the multitudes of monastics, O all-blessed one.  
Theotokion: Beseech the God Who was incarnate of thee, who immutably 
remained what He was, Who is equal to the Father in essence and didst become 
consubstantial with thee who gave Him birth, that He grant forgiveness of 
transgressions and salvation of soul to those who hymn thee with faith. 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Katavasia: Thy virtue, hath covered the heavens, O Christ, * for having come 
forth from the Ark of Thy sanctification, * from Thine undefiled Mother, * 
Thou hast appeared in the temple of Thy glory * as an infant borne in arms, * 
filling all with Thy praise. 
ODE V  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: The burning Ember was revealed to Isaiah, * and the Sun hath shone 
forth from the Virgin’s womb, * granting the enlightenment of the knowledge 
of God * to those who in darkness have gone astray.  
Clouds of darkness rain down delight upon those who are on earth, for unto us 
hath a Child been given, Who hath existed from before the ages: our God, incarnate 
of the Virgin.  
Light hath shone forth upon my life and my flesh, and hath destroyed the gloom 
of sin: the most Exalted One, Who in the latter days was incarnate without seed of 
the Virgin.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why has the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Having God Who seeth all things living within thee, O blessed one, teaching, 
enlightening and making thee wise, thou wast vouchsafed to behold the ascents of 
pure and blessed souls, O thrice-blessed one.  
O wise one, Christ hath given thee the grace to heal divers ailments and power 
against unclean spirits; for, having vanquished nature supernaturally, O father, thou 
didst receive a share of the gifts of the Spirit.  
Theotokion: Having thee as a rampart, and preserved by thine intercession, we 
bless thee, boasting in thy divine glory; for thou, O most pure one, pourest forth 
gladness and joy upon our souls.  
Katavasia: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * 
borne aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have foreseen 
God made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the King of peace.’ 
ODE VI  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: O Master, hearkening unto the sound of entreaties * from a soul in 
pain, * do Thou deliver me from my grievous sins, * for Thou alone art the 
Cause of our salvation.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Human nature, enslaved to sin, hath obtained freedom through thee, O pure 
Sovereign Lady; for thy Son hath been sacrificed like a lamb.  
We all cry out to thee, the true Mother of God: Save thou thy wrathful servants, 
for thou alone hast boldness before thy Son.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The abyss of my sins and the storm of my transgressions * disquieten 
me and thrust me down * into the depths of despondency; * but do Thou 
stretch forth Thy mighty arm, * unto me as Thou didst to Peter, * and save 
me, O my Guide.  
Accepting the life of God’s law as an athlete from thine earliest childhood, O 
divinely wise one, thou didst preserve it even unto the end; and as a godly warrior 
thou hast received the crown of victory from the King of all.  
Having thee as a mighty advocate before God, an intercessor, a champion and 
pious mediator, who sharest in our cares, we are saved from all manner of 
tribulations, perils and evil circumstances.  
Theotokion: Thou hast truly raised up fallen human nature, O Mother of God, 
having borne in thy womb, without seed, the immutable Son, Who is visible in divine 
appearance and in His equality with the Father.  
Katavasia: The Elder, having seen with his eyes the salvation * that was to 
come unto the peoples from God, * cried aloud unto Thee: * ‘O Christ, Thou 
art my God.’ 
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Having cast aside the tumults of life, * thou didst live a life of stillness unto the 
end, * in every way emulating the Baptist, O all-venerable one. * Wherefore, with him 
we honor thee, ** O Anthony, first among the fathers.  
Ikos: Hearkening to the voice of Christ, thou didst follow His commandments, 
and, stripping off thy former life, thou didst cast away all the cares of possessions, 
property and thy slaves, as well as the love of thy sister, O God-bearing Anthony; and 
most purely conversing alone with God in the deserts, thou didst receive the grace of 
understanding, which do thou send upon me who praise thee in hymns, O Anthony, 
first among the fathers.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Of old the youths revealed themselves to be rhetors * with a love for 
supreme wisdom, * for from the depths of their God-pleasing souls, * they 
theologized with their lips as they sang: * O supremely divine God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
At night Jacob beheld God as in a dream, and He that was incarnate of thee hath 
manifested Himself in splendor unto those who chant: Most divine and supremely 
glorified is the God of our fathers!  
He that wrestled with Jacob, prefiguring the ineffable union in thee, O pure one, 
whereby He willingly united Himself to mankind: He is the most divine and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers!  
The vile one who did not proclaim Thee, the Son of the Virgin, to be One of the 
all-hymned Trinity, cried out with steadfast thought and with his tongue: Most divine 
and supremely glorified is the God of our fathers!  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thy cheeks were as phials of perfume, emitting the sweet fragrance of the virtues 
and salvation, as from a garden, for those who cry with faith: Blessed is the God of 
our fathers!  
The grace of the all-holy Spirit, dwelling within thee, O father, made thee a 
dispeller of the wickedness of evil spirits and an instructor of monks, crying out: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Let us praise the most pure and all-holy Mary; for through her the 
grace of spiritual gifts is poured forth upon us in a manner past understanding, as 
from a torrent of divine goodness. Let us bless her now with pious intent.  
Katavasia: O Thou who in the midst of the fire * bedewed the children as they 
discoursed on things divine, * and Who didst take up Thy dwelling in the pure 
Virgin: * O Word of God Thee do we reverently praise chanting: * O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Disdaining the golden image, the thrice-blessed children, * beholding 
the immutable and living image of God, * chanted in the midst of the flame: * 
Let all existing creation hymn the Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
He that is incomparable in grace and might through thee became visible on earth 
and dwelt amongst mankind. Chanting unto Him, O all ye faithful, let us cry out: Let 
all existing creation hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Truly proclaiming thee the pure one, we glorify thee, O Theotokos, for thou didst 
give birth to the One of the Trinity Who became incarnate. And to Him, with the 
Father and the Spirit, do we sing: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Like an angel on earth showing, by purity of mind, vigilance in prayer, might in 
ascetic endeavors and endurance amid tribulations, O Anthony, thou didst cry out to 
God: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
Continually drawing nigh unto God through supplications and entreaties, O ven-
erable one, thou didst ascend to the highest summit, escaping the snares of the 
demons; and, freed from their tyranny, O divinely wise one, thou dost chant: Ye 
priests, hymn; ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Like a new Moses, thou didst win a victory over the foes and adversaries in the 
desert, guiding thy people, the assembly of ascetics, in gladness and a new way of life; 
and they cry out to the Master: Ye priests, bless; ye people, supremely exalt God 
throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O all-pure Birthgiver of God, cleanse the wounds of my soul and the 
stripes of my sins, washing them with the springs which issue forth from the side of 
thine Offspring, and purifying them with the streams which flow therefrom; for to 
thee do I cry, to thee do I flee and on thee do I call, who art full of the grace of God.  
Katavasia: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the 
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all ye 
works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages. 
ODE IX  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Thou art all desire, Thou art all sweetness, * O Word of God, Son of the 
Virgin, * God of gods, most holy Lord of the saints. * Wherefore, we magnify 
Thee * and her who hath borne Thee.  
In thy womb, O pure one, the Word of God was given over to corruptible nature 
as a staff of strength, and restored what had been dragged down to Hades. 
Wherefore, we magnify thee, O all-pure one, as the Theotokos.  
O Master, mercifully accept Thy mother as an intercessor on our behalf, as Thou 
hast willed, and all things shall be filled with Thy goodness, that we all may magnify 
Thee as our Benefactor.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
O all-blessed father Anthony, thy splendid feast hath dawned, full of joy, full of 
spiritual gladness, full of the Holy Spirit, full of sweet fragrance and enlightenment; 
and having thee now as a rule and giver of the laws of asceticism, we rejoice.  
Cease thou never to pray to the Redeemer, O most honored father, that He grant 
to those who reverently celebrate thy sacred memorial forgiveness of transgressions, 
the reception of spiritual gifts, divine intercession, salvation of soul and everlasting 
joy.  
Having lived angelically upon the earth, thou hast found the splendor of the 
angels; for thou hast obtained a share of their God-seeing effulgence. And with them 
thou dost ever rejoice, as a prophet of God, a crowned martyr, preeminent among 
monastics.  
Theotokion: Without seed, without carnal desire, O Virgin, thou didst conceive the 
Word of God Who created all things, and thou hast given birth to Him without 
corruption, without experiencing the pangs of motherhood. Wherefore, confessing 
thee with tongue and heart, we magnify thee, the Theotokos.  
Katavasia: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, 
discern a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be 
sanctified to God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the 
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not known a 
man. 
Exapostilarion of the venerable one, in Tone III,  
Spec. Mel.: “O Light immutable ...”:  
O Anthony, father of fathers, thou hast been revealed to be a light for those who 
share thy way of life, having taught the pious to tread the paths of light; and thou 
emittest the flame and fire of lightning, consuming hordes of the demons.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III: 
With unceasing hymns we bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, in that thou hast given 
birth to One of the Trinity, and didst bear in thy divine embrace the Word Who is 
immutably and unchangeably transcendent.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O venerable father Anthony, * taking the yoke of Christ upon your shoulders, * 
thou didst valiantly trample the visitation of the enemy underfoot, * and didst show 
forth cities in the desert; * wherefore, we all honor thee with faith, * O all-blessed 
one, * thou boast of monastics. * Therefore, unceasingly beseech Christ, ** that we 
be saved. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Assembling with faith, * we all honor thee, O Anthony, * as an ascetic of Christ; * 
for, rejoicing, thou didst tread the trackless wilderness, O wise one, * and didst 
become an honored instructor. * Wherefore, we cry out to thee with faith: * O all-
blessed boast of monastics, * pray thou for us to the Lord, ** that we be saved!  
O venerable father Anthony, * thou didst enclose thyself in a tomb * for the sake 
of true life, * and wast in nowise affrightened by the invisible foe; * for though they 
came upon thee to smite thee, * by thy prayers thou didst render them insensible, * O 
thou of forthright soul, * first leader of the desert. ** Wherefore, we all honor and 
bless thee with faith.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Ascending from the desert to heaven on the ladder of the virtues, O wondrous 
one, thou didst attain its bastions through ascetic endeavor, encircling the beauties of 
the celestial Jerusalem; and, receiving honors through thy painful struggles as is meet, 
thou rejoicest with the ranks of heaven, O all-blessed one, becoming an heir to 
everlasting good things and an inhabitant of the kingdom. O God-bearing Anthony, 
entreat the Savior of all, that He grant peace to the world and save our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O Sovereign lady, * accept the supplications of thy servants, ** and deliver us from 
all want and grief. 
Great Doxology. Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Emulating the manner of the zealous Elijah, * and following the Baptist with 
righteous steps, O father Anthony, * thou wast a dweller in the desert; * and making 
the whole world steadfast by thy supplications. ** Wherefore, entreat Christ God, 
that our souls be saved.  
Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the venerable one.  
With steadfast mind and mighty endurance thou didst cause the flame of the 
passions to die out O father Anthony, and thou didst array thyself in the splendid 
vesture of dispassion and the robe of salvation. (Twice) 
Thou didst disdain the feeble power of the demons who dared mighty assaults and 
assumed the guise of wild beasts; for thou didst have a mighty ally in battle.  
Denouncing the princes and powers of darkness O Anthony, through mighty 
asceticism thou didst become a God-bearer, a mighty victor, the glory of fasters and 
boast of monastics.  
Accepting the life of God’s law as an athlete from thine earliest childhood, O 
divinely wise one, thou didst preserve it even unto the end; and as a godly warrior 
thou hast received the crown of victory from the King of all. (Twice) 
Having thee as a mighty advocate before God, an intercessor, a champion and 
pious mediator, who sharest in our cares, we are saved from all manner of 
tribulations, perils and evil circumstances.  
Theotokion: Thou hast truly raised up fallen human nature, O Mother of God, 
having borne in thy womb, without seed, the immutable Son, Who is visible in divine 
appearance and in His equality with the Father.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Emulating the manner of the zealous Elijah, * and following the Baptist with 
righteous steps, O father Anthony, * thou wast a dweller in the desert; * making the 
whole world steadfast by thy supplications. ** Wherefore, entreat Christ God, that 
our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Having cast aside the tumults of life, * thou didst live a life of stillness unto the 
end, * in every way emulating the Baptist, O all-venerable one. * Wherefore, with him 
we honor thee, ** O Anthony, first among the fathers.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS (5:22-6:2) 
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (6: 17-23).  
At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of his ,disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and 
Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that were 
vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to 
touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his 
eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. 
Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: 
for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall 
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as 
evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, 
your reward is great in heaven.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
