--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 11th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
AFTERFEAST OF THEOPHANY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER THEODOSIUS THE 
CENOBIARCH 
AT GREAT VESPERS  
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” we chant 6 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “O venerable father ...”:  
O venerable father, God-bearing Theodosius, thou didst struggle mightily in this 
transitory life, and wast a model for thy disciples in hymnody, fasting and the keeping 
of vigil. And now thou joinest chorus with the incorporeal ones, unceasingly 
glorifying Christ: God the Word and Redeemer, Who is from God, Who bowed His 
head before the Forerunner, and hath sanctified the nature of water. Him do thou 
entreat, to Him do thou pray, O venerable one, that He grant unto the Church 
oneness of mind, peace and great mercy. (Twice)  
O venerable father, God-bearing Theodosius, having found thy soul pure, as it 
desired, the grace of the all-holy Spirit dwelt within thee as a most holy light, and with 
its activity thou wast splendidly adorned. Thou didst unceasingly glorify Christ, the 
one Son in two natures, Who is baptized at the hand of the Forerunner, and borne 
witness to by the Father’s voice. Him do thou beseech, to Him do thou pray, O 
venerable one, that He grant to the whole world oneness of mind, peace and great 
mercy. (Twice)  
O venerable father, God-bearing Theodosius, abundantly hast thou been 
vouchsafed the blessed life, having acquired it through purity and fasting; for, having 
lived, thou wast translated to the life on high, telling all to rejoice. With the 
incorporeal ones thou dost unceasingly glorify Christ, Who ineffably took flesh of the 
Virgin, and hath drowned our sins by His baptism in the Jordan’s streams. Him do 
thou entreat, to Him do thou pray, O holy one, that He grant to the whole world 
oneness of mind, peace and great mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
O venerable father, the river’s streams, the waters of forgiveness, made glad thy 
sacred soul like a city of the living God, Christ our God Who crossed the Jordan and 
hath poured forth the word of piety upon all the ends of the earth. Him do thou 
entreat, O all-blessed Theodosius, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Thou didst bow Thy head before the Forerunner, and didst crush the heads of the 
serpents. Having come to the streams, thou didst illumine all things, that they may 
glorify Thee, O Savior, the Enlightener of our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (5:15-3:3)  
But the righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the 
care of them is with the most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, 
and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall he cover 
them, and with his arm shall he protect them. He shall take to him his jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature his weapon for the revenge of his enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of an 
helmet. He shall take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall he 
sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with him against the unwise. Then shall 
the right aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn 
bow, shall they fly to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a 
stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall 
cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm 
shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill-dealing 
shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear therefore, O ye kings, and 
understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the 
people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord, and 
sovereignty from the Highest, who shall try your works, and search out your counsels.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (3:1-9)  
But the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
he tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with him: for grace and mercy is to his saints, and he hath 
care for his elect.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (4:7-15)  
But though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was loved of him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 

--- PAGE 3 ---
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted he to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in their minds, 
That his grace and mercy is with his saints, and that he hath respect unto his chosen.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
Having humbled Himself in a manner past understanding, the Lord said: * “Thou 
hast seen how I have clad Myself in thine image, * which I Myself have created. * 
What, then, is so strange, My friend, * if I also bow beneath the hand of thee * who 
art one of my minions; * and if, naked, I clothe Myself in the waters? * For, in that I 
am compassionate, ** I wish to clothe the naked in everlasting incorruption.”  
Verse: The sea beheld and fled, * Jordan turned back.  
“Thou hast shown Thyself incarnate, * yet the womb which received Thee 
remaineth unconsumed; * for the furnace which did not consume the youths long ago 
* serveth as an image thereof. * But how can I, who am grass, * touch Fire with my 
hand, * O Jesus Almighty, * Thou Savior of our souls, ** before Whom all in heaven 
and on earth do tremble?”  
Verse: What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? * And thou, O Jordan, that 
thou didst turn back?  
“In the waters of the Jordan do thou wash Me, * Who in nowise am defiled,” * the 
Lord said; * “and human nature * which hath been defiled by the transgression of 
Adam, * will be washed clean as new. * For when I am baptized * all mankind will be 
renewed ** by water and the Spirit.”  
Glory ..., the composition of the Studite, in Tone VIII: 
Multitudes of monks honor thee as their instructor, O Theodosius our father. For, 
following thy steps, we have truly learned to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, having 
labored for Christ, didst denounce all the power of the enemy, O converser with the 
angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them entreat the Lord, 
that our souls find mercy.  
Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
The angelic armies were struck with awe at what they beheld, when Thou, O 
Savior, didst stand naked in the waters, and bowed Thy most pure head to be 
baptized by John. For when, of Thine own will, Thou didst impoverish Thyself, the 
world was made rich. Glory be to Thee, O Lord!  
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
With the streams of thy tears thou didst cultivate the barren desert; * and with 
sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst bring forth fruit an hundredfold; * and 
thou wast a beacon for all the world, shining forth miracles, ** O Theodosius our 
father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee! (Twice)  
Glory ..., that of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
With the streams of thy tears thou didst cultivate the barren desert; * and with 
sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst bring forth fruit an hundredfold; * and 
thou wast a beacon for all the world, shining forth miracles, ** O Theodosius our 
father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., that of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Joshua son of Nun, leading the people and the ark of God across the Jordan River, 
was a shadowy image of the benefaction which was to come: for, in the Spirit, the 
mystic crossing doth represent both an image of our restoration and a true picture of 
our regeneration. Christ hath appeared in the Jordan to sanctify the waters.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
 Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:  
Beholding the Word, Who is equal in honor to the Father and the Spirit, incarnate 
and baptized in His tender compassion, the choirs of the angels trembled. And the 
River Jordan, stricken with awe and fear, turned back, bearing up to the summit of 
salvation us who have become corrupt through the passions.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Polyeleos, and this Magnification: We bless thee, O venerable father 
Theodosius, and we honor thy holy memory, thou instructor of monastics and 
converser with the angels.  
Selected Psalm Verses: 
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine faith ...”: 
Lifting up thy hands to the divine summit, thou wast shown to be a radiant pillar, 
shining with beams of prayer, O venerable one. For, furnishing thy mind with wings 
to fly to the heavens, thou hast illumined all, as a partaker of ineffable things, praying 
to Christ God, that He grant us great mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Today the Master hath come to the Jordan, to be baptized in its waters by the 
divine Forerunner. And the Father hath borne witness from on high, saying: “This is 
My Son, in Whom I am well pleased!” And the Spirit hath appeared over Him in the 
strange guise of a dove.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: What shall I render unto God for all that He hath rendered unto me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (LK. 6: 17-23)  
At that time, Jesus came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the company 
of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and 
from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of 
their diseases; and they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. 
And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out of him , and 
healed them all. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye 
poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall 
be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men 
shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall 
reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in 
that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven:  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
O venerable father, report of thy corrections hath gone throughout all the earth. 
Wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed 
legions of the demons, and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou 
didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask peace for 
our souls.  
ODE I  
Canon of Theophany, with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos, in Tone II:  
Irmos: Israel traversed the stormy depths of the sea, * which had straightway 
become as dry land; * but the dark waters engulfed the chief captains of Egypt 
* in a watery grave, * by the mighty power of the right hand of the Master. 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
When Thou, the radiant Sun, didst dawn for men, shining forth from the desert to 
the waters of the Jordan, Thou didst bend Thy neck, O King, to take away the 
gloomy countenance of the father of our race, and to cleanse creation of all 
defilement.  
O Beginningless Word, that which hath become corrupt through deception Thou 
dost make new, burying it with Thee in the streams. And Thou ineffably receivest the 
mighty voice of the Father: “This is My beloved Son, Who is equal to Me in essence!”  
Canon of the venerable one, with 6 Troparia, the composition of Theophanes, in 
Tone II: 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
As our wise general, O father Theodosius, do thou in godly manner lead the hymn 
to Christ God, Who cameth to save the whole world and with Himself hath glorified 
thine all-holy memory.  
The Forerunner of Christ, who sprung forth from Elizabeth of the lineage of 
Aaron, came from the desert; and Theodosius, reborn through the Spirit in the font 
of baptism, becameth a citizen of the desert, following after Jesus.  
When Christ was baptized in the streams, the arrogance of the Israelite synagogue 
was set at naught, and the angelic way of life was implanted in the Church, which 
thou didst steadfastly lead, O all-blessed Theodosius.  
Sharing, through fasting, in the suffering of Him Who, for our sake, was nailed to 
the Cross, O father Theodosius, thou didst also worthily emulate His resurrection, 
and became an heir to glory.  
Theotokion: The divine choir of maidens doth in a most divine manner call thee 
comely among women and adorned with the beauties of godliness, O Lady 
Theotokos; for in a manner past all telling thou hast given birth to the beneficent 
Word.  
Katavasia Tone II: The Lord mighty in battle * uncovered the foundation of 
the deep * and led His servants on dry ground; * but He covered their 
adversaries with the waters, * for He hath been glorified. 
ODE III 
Canon of Theophany  
Irmos: From the ancient snares have we all been set loose, * and the teeth of 
the lions have been smashed asunder. * Let us then rejoice with great joy * 
and open wide our mouths, * weaving with words a sweet hymn to the Word, * 
Who delighteth in bestowing gifts upon us. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
He Who of old planted death in creation, having clothed himself in the guise of a 
malignant serpent, was dismayed at the Master’s coming in the flesh, and, having 
assailed the Master, the Dawn which hath broken, he hath broken his own evil head.  
The Master draweth to Himself the divinely wrought nature of mankind, which 
had become buried within the tyrant’s belly; and the restoration of mortal men is 
born anew, for He accomplisheth a mighty deed, in that He hath come to bring 
cleansing.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a lily * 
at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established 
The Lord Who covered the chambers with the waters hath clad His body in the 
streams of the Jordan; and therein hath my heart been established.  
The divine light which shone forth in the Jordan hath shown thee to those on 
earth as a divinely bestowed offshoot of blessing and goodwill, O Theodosius.  
Thou didst forsake the world and the things of the world, O venerable 
Theodosius, emulating the Master’s nakedness in the Jordan.  
Taking the Cross of the Savior upon thy shoulder, thou didst hasten to His tomb, 
like a deer to springs of saving water, O all-blessed Theodosius.  
Theotokion: The ranks of the angels were stricken with awe, and the hearts of men 
were filled with fear at Thy birthgiving; wherefore, we honor thee with faith, O 
Theotokos.  
Katavasia: The Lord who granteth strength unto our kings, * and exalteth the 
horn of His anointed, * is born of a Virgin and cometh unto baptism. * 
Therefore let us, the faithful, cry aloud: * None is as holy as our God. 
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, * and Thy light, O Lord, hath been 
signed upon us * who with understanding hymn Thee. * Thou hast come, Thou hast 
appeared, ** the Light unapproachable.  
Ikos: As the prophet hath said, Christ, the great Light, hath shone forth upon 
Galilee of the nations, the country of Zebulon and the land of Naphthali. The Lord 
hath manifested Himself as a radiant beam, shining forth from Bethlehem, yet more 
from Mary, upon the darkened; and He, the Sun of righteousness, doth illumine the 
whole universe with His rays. Wherefore, come, all ye naked children of Adam, let us 
clothe ourselves in Him, that we may be warm; for He covereth the naked and 
enlighteneth the darkened. Thou hast come, Thou hast revealed Thyself, O Light 
unapproachable!  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Having adorned thy soul in a godly manner with abstinence, pangs and prayer, 

--- PAGE 9 ---
thou didst become a companion of the martyrs, O blessed one, and didst truly receive 
gifts of miracles, to heal the afflictions of those who honor thee with faith. 
Wherefore, driving out multitudes of the demons, thou bestowest healings upon all 
through grace, O God-bearer Theodosius. Entreat Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of sins unto those who with faith celebrate thy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
Jordan ministereth to Thee with its streams, and John stretcheth out his corrupt-
ible hand unto Thee Who hast appeared in the flesh for baptism, O Invisible One; 
but the former turned back in fright, while the latter with trembling straightway 
touched Thee, the Incorruptible One. Verily, Thou art the Lamb of God, the ever-
living Wellspring Who hath sanctified the streams, the sea and men. For the Trinity 
hath shone forth: from on high the Father calleth Thee His Son, and the Holy Spirit 
descendeth.  
ODE IV  
Canon of Theophany  
Irmos: Purified by the fire of a mystical vision, * the prophet praiseth the 
restoration of mankind; * and, filled with the inspiration of the Spirit, * he 
lifteth up his voice to reveal the incarnation of the ineffable Word, * by Whom 
the dominion of the mighty hath been abolished. 
O most radiant Word, Who hast been sent by the Father to dispel the evil assault 
of night’s darkness, Thou comest also to uproot men’s sins and, by Thy baptism, to 
bring them forth from the streams of Jordan as children of the light, O Blessed One.  
Foreseeing the ineffable Word Himself, the herald crieth out clearly to creation: 
“This is He Who was before Me, yet cameth after me in the flesh, sharing our form! 
He hath shone forth with divine power, to take away our loathly sin!”  
Bearing us with Himself to the life-creating pasture, God the Word searcheth for 
the serpents’ nests, treading upon their manifold snares and laying them low; and he 
seizeth the one who hath wounded the whole race of mankind, and, having destroyed 
him, delivereth creation.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Thou didst crush the heads of the dragons in the waters, and by the Spirit hast 
made me a wholly new man, O Word of God. Wherefore, I cry out to Thee: Glory to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Emulating Christ, Who bowed His head before the Forerunner, in thy submission 
and excellent humility, O father Theodosius, thou didst ascend the unshakable tower 
of virtue.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Serving the Virgin Mother of Christ God, thou didst receive the invincible grace of 
the Spirit, O father Theodosius, casting down the invisible foe.  
The glorious cave of the magi, which received thee, O Theodosius, showed thee to 
be a bearer of gifts unto Christ Who was baptized for our sake, offering Him faith, 
hope and love.  
Strengthened by the sufferings of Christ the Master, O father Theodosius, thou 
didst endure torment with a loving conscience, struggling against the dark prince of 
this world.  
Theotokion: In thy womb thou didst seedlessly conceive the Lord, and thou hast 
given birth unto Him who, incarnate, saveth the world by thine intercessions. 
Wherefore we cry unto thee: Rejoice, O Ever-virgin Lady!  
Katavasia: I heard, O Lord, Thy voice, * which Thou didst call the voice of one 
crying in the wilderness, * for Thou didst thunder over the multitude of waters, 
* bearing witness to Thy Son. * And, wholly filled with the Spirit which had 
descended, * He cried aloud: * Thou art Christ, the Wisdom and Power of 
God! 
ODE V  
Canon of Theophany  
Irmos: Washed clean of the poison of the dark and defiled enemy * by the 
cleansing of the Spirit, * we have set out upon a new path * which leadeth to 
unapproachable joy, * to which only they whom God hath reconciled with 
himself * can draw near. 
The Creator, seeing that which He had fashioned with His own fingers held fast in 
the darkness of transgressions by inescapable bonds, hath lifted it on high and set it 
upon His shoulders. And now He washeth away, in abundantly flowing waters, the 
ancient shame of Adam’s evil inclination.  
With piety let us earnestly make haste to the most pure springs of the torrent of 
salvation, gazing upon the Word Who came forth from the incorrupt Virgin, and 
accepting the drink which quencheth our godly thirst, sweetly healing the addiction of 
the world.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Christ God Thou art a mediator between God and man; * for by 
Thee, O Master, * we have been led from the night of ignorance, * to Thy 
Father, the Source of light.  
Setting thy mind afire in the waters of Him Who hath renewed us, O all-blessed 
Theodosius, thou didst wisely make it steadfast, brought low by fasting and by 
suspending thy body aloft.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Ever setting the teaching of death as a rule of thy life, and yearning to depart to 
Him Who hath manifest Himself in the flesh for our sake, thou didst fashion a coffin 
for thyself, O Theodosius.  
Thy glorious disciple Basil, O Theodosius, emulating the voluntary suffering of 
Christ, restored a new grave, rejoicing.  
Theotokion: Behold, O all-pure Theotokos, thou didst have Christ God in thy 
womb, in a manner past all telling, as Isaiah foretold; and thou hast given birth unto 
Him supra-naturally, O Birthgiver of God.  
Katavasia: Jesus, the Prince of Life, * hath come to set loose from 
condemnation * Adam the first-formed man; * and though as God He needeth 
no cleansing, * yet for the sake of fallen man He is cleansed in the Jordan. * In 
its streams He slew the enmity * and bestoweth the peace that passeth all 
understanding. 
ODE VI  
Canon of Theophany  
Irmos: With a supremely blessed voice * the Father revealed His Beloved One, 
* Whom He had begotten from the womb. * Verily, saith He, this is the 
splendid Son, * of the same nature as Myself, * and He hath come forth from 
the human race. * He is My living Word, * Who by My providence hath 
become a man. 
Strangely whirled about in the uttermost depths of the abyss for three days, the 
prophet straightway issued forth from the lion of the deep, showing forth unto all in 
latter ages a prefiguration of regeneration, salvation from the serpent who slayeth 
mankind.  
When the heaven of most splendid scriptures was opened, the disciple beheld the 
Spirit, Who was sent by the Father and resteth upon the most pure Word, 
descending, in a manner ineffable, like a dove; and He revealeth Himself to those 
who come to the Master.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
In Thy resurrection Thou hast given us incorruption, O Christ; wherefore, the 
glorious Basil, Thy favored one, is shown in death to be like a living person.  
God, Who cleanseth the world and becameth a man like me for my sake, is 
baptized. Him didst thou proclaim to be twofold in nature, O blessed Theodosius.  
The torrents of thy tears poured forth the sweetness of gladness for Christ God, 
Who transformed the tears of the myrrh-bearing women into joy, O Theodosius.  
Theotokion: Grant unto me thy tender compassion, O thou who hast given birth 
unto the exceedingly merciful Word, Who hath delivered mankind from corruption 
by His own blood.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Katavasia: The Voice of the Word, the Candlestick of the Light, * the Morning 
Star and Forerunner of the Sun, * cried in the wilderness to all the peoples: * 
‘Repent and be cleansed beforehand. * For lo, Christ is at hand, * Who 
delivereth the world from corruption. 
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”:  
Planted in the courts of thy Lord, thou didst flourish most beauteously in thy 
venerable virtues, * and didst increase in number thy children in the desert, * watering 
them with the torrents of thy tears, * O godly chief shepherd of the divine flocks. ** 
Wherefore, we cry out: Rejoice, O father Theodosius!  
Ikos: Thou wast a man by nature, O father, yet wast shown to be a fellow citizen 
with the angels; for, having lived on earth like one of the incorporeal ones, O wise 
one, thou didst put aside every carnal thought. Wherefore, thou hearest from us: 
Rejoice, scion of a pious father; Rejoice, offshoot of a devout mother! Rejoice, most 
comely citizen of the desert; Rejoice, most radiant beacon for all the world! Rejoice, 
for from thy youth thou didst follow after Christ; Rejoice; for thou didst cause the 
pleasures of the flesh to wither away! Rejoice, mediator for the salvation of monastics; 
Rejoice, model of consolation for the despondent! Rejoice, thou who didst deliver 
many from deception; Rejoice, thou who bestowest torrents of miracles! Rejoice, 
thou who showed care for the poor; Rejoice, our intercessor and Redeemer! Rejoice, 
O father Theodosius!  
ODE VII 
Canon of Theophany  
Irmos: He Who burnt the heads of the dragons in the waters, * cooled the lofty 
flame * that encircled the pious youths in the furnace; * He it is that doth wash 
away all the unbearable gloom of sin * by the dew of the Spirit.  
The Assyrian flame, which prefigured Thee, didst Thou put in awe, transforming it 
into dew. Wherefore, water now, as though clothed with fire, consumeth the malice 
of the enemy concealed in its depths, O Christ, summoning all away from the path of 
stumbling.  
When the Jordan was parted of old, the people of Israel traversed it over dry land; 
and they prefigured Thee, the Almighty Who sustainest creation without touching it, 
Who now in the waters dost indicate the goodly way to incorruption.  
We know of the all-destroying deluge of old, which in Thy mercy Thou didst loose 
to bring destruction upon all. But now, O Christ Who doest thrice-great and strange 
deeds, Thou hast drowned sin, in Thy tender compassion and for the salvation of 
mankind.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
Blessed and most glorious art Thou, O Lord, divine Word, supremely exalted 
God, Who in Thy baptism united the stream which burneth up sin and the flame 
which bedeweth the human race.  
Thou didst burn thyself as incense before Him Who made the Jordan a furnace, O 
venerable one; and accepting a heavenly flame as a true indication of God’s consent, 
thou didst erect a temple for the salvation of men’s souls.  
By thy tactics the children of Moses came to submission when grace manifested 
itself, O venerable one; for, having humbled the invisible foe; thy people have 
inherited the city of heaven, O all-praised one.  
Thou didst make of thyself a habitation for Him Who hath buried sin in the 
streams of the Jordan, O God-pleasing Theodosius, while also erecting a temple 
wherein to offer up unceasing hymnody; and thou didst make it a rule that praises be 
chanted in many languages.  
Emulating the boldness of the youths, thou didst quench the fiery threat of the 
tyrant, wisely interceding for the Church of Christ, O father Theodosius, for whose 
sake the Crucified willingly manifested Himself in the flesh.  
Theotokion: Thou alone hast manifested a most pure conception and an incorrupt 
birthgiving, while remaining a Virgin, O pure one; for thou didst conceive the God 
Who is above all things, yet became a man for the salvation and deliverance of the 
faithful.  
Katavasia: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * 
Thy three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst 
of the flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed 
art Thou! 
ODE VIII  
Canon of Theophany  
Irmos: Creation hath found itself set free, * and those who previously sat in 
darkness are now sons of light; * alone the prince of darkness moaneth, * 
wherefore let His inheritance * which was formerly in misery * now bless Him 
Who hath accomplished this. 
The three youths of godly visage who were bedewed in the furnace, shining most 
splendidly with threefold sanctity, plainly prefigured the Being Who transcendeth the 
composition of man, and Who with dew doth mercifully consume all pernicious sin.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Let all earthly nature be made white as snow, now raised from the fall even up to 
heaven; for thereby are all preserved by the Word, cleansed by the flowing streams. 
Washed most splendidly, it hath escaped its former offenses.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Once, in Babylon, the furnace prefigured the streams of the Jordan, which 
consumeth the adversary by divine baptism, yet bedeweth the faithful who chant: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Having eluded the carnal passions before thy departure, O Theodosius, drawing 
forth water from the bosom of the earth thou appearest to the youth who crieth: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
It was the most divine command of Christ Who was baptized in the streams of the 
Jordan that the blessing of thy hands bring forth deep-lying water for a land parched 
by the burning sun; for a kernel of wheat was seedlessly nurtured to become an 
abundant crop.  
Having entered the noetic darkness of the Light most divine, O Theodosius, and 
had thy heart inscribed by the finger of God like the tablets of the law, thou didst 
transmit the book of life, the teachings of piety, to thy disciples, O all-blessed one.  
When the woman who emulated the steadfast faith of the woman with an issue of 
blood touched thy hairshirt, O father, her affliction fled like darkness before the light 
which was in thee; for thou wast a chosen vessel of Christ Who hath manifested 
Himself.  
Triadicon: Beholding Thee, God begotten of God, Christ Who hast ineffably 
appeared in the body, we have also come to know Thy Father and Thy Holy Spirit, 
crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Without seed thou didst conceive Him Who is not separated from the 
Father, and Who as man and God made His abode within thy womb; and thou didst 
give birth to Him. Wherefore, we know thee to be the salvation of us all.  
Katavasia: The Babylonian furnace, as it poured forth dew, * foreshadowed a 
marvelous mystery: * how the Jordan should receive in its streams the 
immaterial fire, * and should encompass the Creator, * when He was baptized 
in the flesh. * Him do ye peoples bless and supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
ODE IX 
 Canon of Theophany  
Irmos: The wonders of thy birthgiving pass all understanding, * O all-pure 
Bride, blessed Mother! * Through thee we have received the most perfect 
salvation, * wherefore we praise our Benefactor as is meet and right, * bearing 
a hymn of thanksgiving unto Him as a gift. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Those things revealed to Moses in the bush have we come to know; that which 
hath been accomplished through strange laws hath arrived. For the Virgin, bearing 
Fire, hath been saved, and hath given birth unto the luminous Benefactor Who hath 
appeared in the streams of the Jordan.  
O beginningless King, by the operation of the Spirit Thou dost anoint and perfect 
human nature, washing it in streams of purity; and having put to shame the vaunted 
might of darkness, thou now dost exalt it in never-ending life.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Thou didst preach the four Councils, equal in number to the Gospels of Christ, O 
divinely wise Theodosius, willingly accepting the blood of martyrdom in thy zeal; and 
thou wast shown to be a martyr for piety though thou shed not thy blood.  
The judgment of the unjust ruler didst thou justly condemn; and he was deposed 
for banishing thee, deprived of his iniquitous soul for his blasphemous words, and 
given over to death, as an enemy of life, O venerable one.  
Mindful of thy teachings, O Theodosius, we proclaim Christ to be twofold in 
essence, knowing there to be two wills, natural, active and autonomous, in God Who 
was baptized in the flesh.  
O namesake of the good gift which cometh from the Father of lights, thou wast a 
physician of souls and bodies, abundant food and drink for those languishing in 
starvation and thirst, vesture for the naked and correction for the fallen.  
Cease thou never to watch over thy flock, O venerable father, mindful of thy 
promise that, having thee as a mediator before Christ, we have been bound firmly to 
an immovable anchor of hope.  
Triadicon: O ye faithful, with hymns let us in an Orthodox manner glorify the 
Threefold Unity, the Trinity One in essence, the indivisible, supremely divine nature 
of thrice-radiant Light, the One incorrupt and never-waning Radiance which hath 
shone Its light upon us.  
Theotokion: O most pure Mother of God, thou art seen to be like an early dawn 
amid the night of life, resplendent with beams of virginity, revealing unto us the 
orient of the noetic Sun of righteousness.  
Katavasia: Every tongue is at a loss to praise thee as is due: * even a spirit from 
the world above is filled with dizziness, * when it seeketh to sing thy praises, 
O Theotokos. * But since thou art good, accept our faith: * Thou knowest well 
our love inspired by God, * for thou art the Protector of Christians and we 
magnify thee. 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Exapostilarion of the venerable one: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us ...”:  
We have been purified splendidly by Thy cleansing, O Christ, and now, with 
festive joy, we have been enriched by the commemoration of the honored 
Theodosius. Wherefore, the ranks of monastics are made glad. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of Theophany:  
The Savior, Who is grace and truth, hath revealed Himself in the streams of the 
Jordan, and hath enlightened those who sleep in darkness and shadow; for He is 
come and hath appeared, the Light unapproachable.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone V: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Having made of thyself a house of lofty virtues, O Theodosius, thou wast 
vouchsafed to dwell in the divine house of the Theotokos, and to visit it; for thou 
didst love to gaze upon its godly splendor. And now thou beholdest the magnificence 
of the true tabernacle and the ineffable beauty which the Most High hath wrought, O 
venerable one, wherein He causeth those to dwell who most earnestly cry out to Him. 
Him do thou entreat, that He send down great mercy upon our souls.  
Cleansing thyself with the pangs of fasting, thou wast an emulator of thy Master, 
O all-blessed one; for thou didst heal the affliction of her who touched the hem of 
thy garment, and didst nourish those who suffered starvation in the wilderness, 
pouring forth gifts from thine inexhaustible treasury, as the namesake of the gifts of 
God. And thou didst preach the Orthodox Faith, O venerable one, setting at naught 
the savagery of the tyrant, and praying to Christ Who bestoweth great mercy upon the 
world.  
Having kindled the flame of unwavering, burning and ardent love for God, from 
heaven thou didst receive effulgence, the divine will commanding thee to erect a most 
holy temple of virtue, where thy much-suffering body doth lie, most excellently 
honored by thy pure regulations, O all-blessed one. Entreat Christ, that He send 
down great mercy upon our souls.  
O father Theodosius, thou didst truly pass with rejoicing and gladness of soul to 
the wondrous tabernacle, even unto the house of God, and desiring to hear the voice 
of those who keep festival, and their beautiful and sweet hymnody, and to share in 
their ineffable sweetness of soul and consolation therein, O blessed one, thou didst 
mortify thy flesh. This thou didst receive, adorned with divine righteousness, and 
thou entreatest Christ, that He grant our souls great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
The ladder of the virtues hath been mystically shown forth in an image on earth. 
Him let us praise as the adornment of fasters; for, having truly fasted like the great 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Anthony and shown infinite humility, He tended his people piously and caused them 
to dwell in the holy fold, where the choir of angels abideth. And we cry out to him: 
Forget not even now thy flock, O all-blessed Theodosius, but save us by thy 
supplications to the Lord, we pray!  
Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Today Christ hath come to the Jordan to be baptized; today John toucheth the 
head of the Master. The hosts of heaven are stricken with awe, beholding this most 
glorious mystery. The sea saw and fled; Jordan, seeing it, turned back. And we who 
have been illumined cry aloud: Glory to God Who hath manifested Himself, Who is 
seen on earth and hath enlightened the world!  
Great Doxology. After the Trisagion and the usual prayers, the Troparion of the 
venerable one; Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion of Theophany. Litanies, and 
Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE 6 of the canon of Theophany, and 
4 from ODE 6 of the canon of the venerable one.  
With His most blessed voice the Father showed forth His beloved Son, Whom He 
had begotten from the womb: “Yea,” said He, “this My Son, My living Word, Who is 
equal in essence and splendor to Me, hath come forth from the human race in His 
care for mankind.” (Twice)  
Strangely whirled about in the uttermost depths of the abyss for three days, the 
prophet straightway issued forth from the lion of the deep, showing forth unto all in 
latter ages a prefiguration of regeneration, salvation from the serpent who slayeth 
mankind.  
When the heaven of most splendid scriptures was opened, the disciple beheld the 
Spirit, Who was sent by the Father and resteth upon the most pure Word, 
descending, in a manner ineffable, like a dove; and He revealeth Himself to those 
who come to the Master.  
In Thy resurrection Thou hast given us incorruption, O Christ; wherefore, the 
glorious Basil, Thy favored one, is shown in death to be like a living person.  
God, Who cleanseth the world and becameth a man like me for my sake, is 
baptized. Him didst thou proclaim to be twofold in nature, O blessed Theodosius.  
The torrents of thy tears poured forth the sweetness of gladness for Christ God, 
Who transformed the tears of the myrrh-bearing women into joy, O Theodosius.  
Theotokion: Grant unto me thy tender compassion, O thou who hast given birth 
unto the exceedingly merciful Word, Who hath delivered mankind from corruption 
by His own blood.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
When Thou wast baptized in the Jordan, O Lord, * the worship of the Trinity was 
made manifest: * for the voice of the Father bare witness unto Thee * calling Thee 
His beloved Son; * and the Spirit in the guise of a dove * confirmed the certainty of 
His words. * O Christ God, Who hast appeared ** and enlightened the world, glory 
be to Thee!  
Troparion of the temple (Theotokos or saint) 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
With the streams of thy tears thou didst cultivate the barren desert; * and with 
sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst bring forth fruit an hundredfold; * and 
thou wast a beacon for all the world, shining forth miracles, ** O Theodosius our 
father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the temple (Theotokos or saint) 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Glory ..., Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Planted in the courts of thy Lord, thou didst flourish most beauteously in thy 
venerable virtues, * and didst increase in number thy children in the desert, * watering 
them with the torrents of thy tears, * O godly chief shepherd of the divine flocks. ** 
Wherefore, we cry out: Rejoice, O father Theodosius!  
 Both now ..., Kontakion of Theophany, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast appeared today to the whole world, * and Thy light, O Lord, hath been 
signed upon us * who with understanding hymn Thee. * Thou hast come, Thou hast 
appeared, ** the Light unapproachable.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. * 
God is the Lord and hath appeared unto us.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
 
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §176 (II COR. 4: 6-15)  
Brethren: God, Who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in 
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus 
Christ. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power 
may be of God, and not of us. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we 
are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not 
destroyed; always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life 
also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. For we which live are always 
delivered unto death for Jesus’ sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest 
in our mortal flesh. So then death worketh in us, but life in you. We, having the same 
spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we 
also believe, and therefore speak; knowing that He which raised up the Lord Jesus 
shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us with you. For all things are for 
your sakes, that the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound 
to the glory of God.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Bring unto the Lord, ye sons of God, bring unto the Lord 
the sons of rams.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, §43 (MT. 11: 27-30)  
All things are delivered unto Me of my Father; and no man knoweth the Son, but 
the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever 
the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I 
will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly 
in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is 
light.  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Refrain and Irmos of ODE IX: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable than the armies on high.  
Irmos: Every tongue is at a loss to praise thee as is due: * even a spirit from 
the world above is filled with dizziness, * when it seeketh to sing thy praises, 
O Theotokos. * But since thou art good, accept our faith: * Thou knowest well 
our love inspired by God, * for thou art the Protector of Christians and we 
magnify thee. 
 
Communion Verse: The grace of God that bringeth all men to salvation hath 
appeared. 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
