--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 19th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER MACARIUS THE EGYPTIAN  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
Desiring blessedness which passeth understanding, * O wondrous one, * thou 
didst consider abstinence to be food, * poverty to be riches, * non-acquisition to be 
true prosperity, * and humility to be glory; * wherefore, thou hast received thy desires 
* according to thine understanding, ** dwelling in the habitations of the saints, O 
Macarius. (Twice)  
Steadfastly thou didst finish * the course of asceticism, * and didst keep the Faith; 
* hence thou hast also received * the crown of righteousness, O father, * which 
Christ prepared for thee, * granting rewards and bestowing honors * and rewards for 
pangs, as is meet. ** Pray thou, O glorious one, that He grant them to us as well. 
(Twice)  
Subduing thy body, * thou didst reject every passionate attachment, * O divinely 
wise one, * embittering thy senses * with mighty feats of abstinence and a hard life, * 
with the endurance of perils * and the bearing of evil circumstances, * for which thou 
hast received never-ending delight, ** eternal nourishment and ineffable joy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII:  
Be glad, O Egypt, who hast budded forth such a citizen as Macarius amongst thy 
saints! For, lo! adorned with the wisdom of the Holy Spirit, he prefigured every aspect 
of ascetic endeavor in his virtuous life. And we, setting him before us as mediator, ask 
that he beseech Christ, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs, O Lord ...”:  
The unblemished heifer, beholding her Bullock * willingly nailed to the Tree, * 
cried out aloud, lamenting piteously: * “Woe is me, O my most beloved Child! * How 
hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, * desiring to leave me 
childless and bereft of Thee, ** my most beloved Child?”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, and Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; 
wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed 
hordes of demons and attained the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst 
faultlessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask peace for our souls.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
 Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Upon beholding our Life suspended upon the Tree, * O all-immaculate 
Theotokos, * thou didst cry out, lamenting maternally: * “O my Son and my God, ** 
save those who hymn Thee with love!”  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Thou wast revealed to be a desert-dweller, an angel in the body and a wonder-
worker, * O our God-bearing father Macarius. * Having received heavenly gifts 
through fasting, vigil and prayer, * thou dost heal the infirm and the souls of those 
who have recourse unto thee in faith. * Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! 
* Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him Who worketh healings for 
all through thee!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without the martyria, with 8 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and that of the venerable one, with 6 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is “I glorify Macarius who is most 
excellent among ascetics”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: The choirs of Israel passed dry-shod across the watery deep of the Red 
Sea * and beholding the riders and captains of the enemy * swallowed by the 
waters, they cried out for joy: * ‘Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been 
glorified.’ 
Shining with divine light, and dwelling now with the angels, O father, by thy 
supplications save those who celebrate thy most sacred memory and cry out in joy: 
Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!  
Treading without wavering, O most blessed one, thou didst reach the end of the 
path which leadeth to life, fleeing the tumults, and thou didst put down the uprisings 
of the demons, crying out with joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been 
glorified.  
Having mortified carnal mindedness with ascetic struggles, O father, thou didst 
make thyself obedient to the divine Spirit; and, guided by His divine power, didst cry 
out in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!  
Thou didst forsake all beautiful things, loving the eternal beauty in the house of 
the Lord, O father, wherein is the sound of those who keep pure festival, crying out 
in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!  
Theotokion: Having conceived in thy womb the timeless Son of the beginningless 
Father, Who became flesh for the sake of mankind, thou didst ineffably give birth to 
Him in time; and, rejoicing, we cry out to Him: Let us sing unto our God, for He 
hath been glorified!  
ODE III  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath been rendered impotent * and the infirm 
are now girded with strength; * wherefore my heart is established in the Lord. 
Thou didst submit to the law of the Spirit, girding thyself about with His armor, O 
venerable one, and didst not subject thy will to the law of sin.  
Having thine understanding directed to God on high, O God-bearer, thou didst 
forsake all things on earth, being unceasingly made light by the pangs of abstinence.  
Having burst asunder the bonds of nature by thy supra-natural and pure life, O 
God-bearer, thou didst receive the ability to work things which transcend nature. 
  

--- PAGE 4 ---
That thou mightest converse with God in stillness, O blessed father, thou didst 
resolve to dwell in the desert, withdrawing from tumult.  
Theotokion: Desiring to save mankind for his benefit, He Who is the Lover of 
mankind made His abode within thy womb without being circumscribed, O Mother 
of God, in that He is our Benefactor.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
The Lord hath truly set thee in the house of abstinence * like a star which 
wandereth not, * guiding the ends of the earth with light, * O venerable Macarius, ** 
father of fathers.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Tried by the fire of abstinence like gold in the crucible, O wise one, thou wast 
shown to shine with great luster; for which cause thou hast passed over to the 
kingdom of heaven. Wherefore, praising thee with faith, we cry aloud: Ask thou for 
grace, mercy and the cleansing away of our transgressions, O father! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
Do thou guide to the path of repentance, * we who have ever wandered away into 
the trackless wastes of evil * and have angered the supremely good Lord, * O blessed 
Mary who knewest not wedlock, ** thou refuge of despairing men and dwelling-place 
of God.  
 Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
By true abstinence thou didst straightway put off the corrupt old man and sinful 
passions, O father; and didst put on Christ, the new Man, O most honored one.  
Thy life was shown to be most radiant, as a most excellent standard of every divine 
virtue, O father, in prayers and fasting, vigils and supplications to Christ, Who is the 
Lover of mankind.  
Thou gavest no slumber to thine eyelids, O divinely wise father, until thou didst 
make thyself a most beautiful abode for the Master Who seeth all things; and to Him 
thou didst cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
In thy youth thou didst show forth chastity, in old age, understanding, and 
throughout thy life, endurance and long-suffering, and love for all who cry: Glory to 
Thy power, O Christ!  
Theotokion: O all-pure one, thou hast brought life to all the noetically dead and 
hast raised up those who have fallen into corruption, having given birth to the 
Bestower of life, Who delivereth those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!  
ODE V  
Irmos: Do Thou O Lord send down upon us * Thine enlightenment, and free 
us * from the gloom of transgression, O Good One, * granting us Thy peace. 
Extending the intelligence of thy soul, and directing thy senses, O wise and 
glorious one, thou didst become a most honored temple dedicated to God.  
Ruining the machinations of the most perverse serpent, thou didst blunt his bitter 
wiles, ever setting thy soul firmly in divine law.  
Thou didst adorn the three parts of thy soul, O venerable one, and, having made 
thy mind master, didst have Christ guiding thee to the path of heaven.  
Theotokion: The Virgin gave birth to our most pure God, Who hath appointed 
purity as the law for all, and declareth the holiness of piety unto all on earth.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
Thou didst ardently love to dwell in the desert, O God-bearer, therein receiving 
God Who delivered thee and guarded thy steps.  
Thou didst remain unshaken in asceticism, O divinely wise one, maintaining such 
strictness even to the end, and thereby thou hast manifestly been vouchsafed 
incorrupt delight.  
Thou didst live an angelic life on earth, and hast received angelic honor as is meet, 
standing before the God of all with the angels.  
Theotokion: In thy womb, O Mother of God, thou didst conceive the Word of 
the beginningless Father, Who for our sake immutably became a man like us, and is 
known in two natures.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of the angels ...”:  
Having in life reached the end of a blessed life * thou dwellest in the land of the 
meek with the choirs of the martyrs, as is meet; * O God-bearing Macarius, * having 
populated the desert as though a city, * thou hast received from God the grace of 
miracles. ** Wherefore, we honor thee.  
Ikos: As a zealous disciple of the God-bearing Anthony, O father, pliable as wax, 
thou didst truly take the form of his every virtue and struggle. Wherefore, like Elijah 

--- PAGE 6 ---
to another Elisha, he gave the grace of miracles in twofold measure to thee, who hast 
also received the effulgence of the foreknowledge of the truth. The great activity of 
thy life hath been established throughout the world, awakening those who sleep in the 
abyss of perdition. Wherefore, we honor thee.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O God of our 
fathers, * supremely praised above all, and blessed art Thou O Lord.  
Casting down the enemy with the help of God and assistance from on high, thou 
didst become a victor, crying aloud: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Having purged away the gloom which cometh from the passions, thou wast 
illumined with the enlightenment of dispassion, a blessed one, crying: O all-hymned 
Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having adorned thy soul with magnificent virtues and become beautiful for God 
with comeliness, thou didst chant, rejoicing: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Making His abode within thy womb, O Virgin, the Lord Who is the 
Lover of mankind, the blessed God of our fathers, became incarnate, calling us who 
had fallen into captivity, that we might become what we were in the beginning.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Receiving the words of eternal life in thy heart, O all-blessed one, thou didst cause 
thy body to wither; and thou didst die to the world, clothing thyself in life-bearing 
immortality, crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  
O God-bearer, entreat our only Benefactor, that He be merciful unto those who 
celebrate thy most sacred memory, asking forgiveness of sins for them. Hymn the 
Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Heeding God with constant inclination, and thus receiving the radiance of 
effulgence, like a mirror thou didst send forth luminous reflected light upon those 
who chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Ever advancing with divine ascents, thou didst mount the ladder which stretcheth 
up to the heavens, whereon the Lord had appeared, O father, until thou didst reach 
those who chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: We hymn thee, O divinely joyous one, for thou hast given birth for us 
to God incarnate. Wherefore, we all call thee the Theotokos, the God-receiving table, 
the beauty of Jacob, crying: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
 
ODE IX  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Thou didst water the field of thy heart with tears of fasting; and, rejoicing, O God-
bearing father, and like sheaves, thou dost now joyously gather up the honors of thy 
struggles. Wherefore, we all bless thee.  
The never-waning light shone upon thee, and thou hast received everlasting 
gladness; and, joining chorus with the angels around the King and Lord, be thou 
mindful of those who celebrate thy memory with faith, O all-blessed father.  
Thou didst succeed in eluding the arrows of the demons and their wicked 
machinations; thy soul was saved, O blessed one, and stood forth, pure and undefiled, 
and thou hast been vouchsafed the inheritance of heaven. Wherefore, be thou 
mindful of those who hymn thee.  
Thou didst contend according to the law of asceticism, as is meet, O father, and 
didst triumph. Wherefore, the only Benefactor hath honored thee with a crown of 
glory and hath granted thee divine effulgence and blessed delights.  
Theotokion: As thou hast given birth to the Creator of all creatures, O Mother of 
God, thou hast surpassed every creature in divine glory, holiness and grace, and in the 
perfection of every virtue. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars ...”: 
Desiring the life of the angels, thou didst withdraw into the deserts; and having 
subdued the passions of the flesh, thou wast shown to be angelic, O our God-bearing 
father.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III: 
By thy mighty protection, O pure one, * preserve all of us, thy servants unharmed, 
* by the attacks of enemies; ** for thee alone do we have as our refuge in need.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Oktoechos, and Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
Thy good works have shone forth like the sun on earth and in heaven, O 
Macarius, thou favorite of Christ; for thou hast proclaimed to us the true and 
unadulterated Faith of Christ in Orthodox manner. Wherefore, pray thou, O 
venerable and God-bearing father, that He grant us great mercy on the day of thy 
commemoration.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, * the ewe-lamb 
who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * “O most desired 
Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? * How is it that 
Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-suffering Word, ** 
and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE VI of 
the canon of the venerable one.  
Thou didst ardently love to dwell in the desert, O God-bearer, therein receiving 
God Who delivered thee and guarded thy steps.  
Thou didst remain unshaken in asceticism, O divinely wise one, maintaining such 
strictness even to the end, and thereby thou hast manifestly been vouchsafed 
incorrupt delight.  
Thou didst live an angelic life on earth, and hast received angelic honor as is meet, 
standing before the God of all with the angels.  
Theotokion: In thy womb, O Mother of God, thou didst conceive the Word of 
the beginningless Father, Who for our sake immutably became a man like us, and is 
known in two natures.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Thou wast revealed to be a desert-dweller, an angel in the body and a wonder-
worker, * O our God-bearing father Macarius. * Having received heavenly gifts 
through fasting, vigil and prayer, * thou dost heal the infirm and the souls of those 
who have recourse unto thee in faith. * Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! 
* Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him Who worketh healings for 
all through thee!  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Having in life reached the end of a blessed life * thou dwellest in the land of the 
meek with the choirs of the martyrs, as is meet; * O God-bearing Macarius, * having 
populated the desert as though a city, * thou hast received from God the grace of 
miracles. ** Wherefore, we honor thee.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: The saints shall boast in glory, * and they shall 
rejoice upon their beds.  
Verse: O sing unto the Lord a new song, for the Lord hath wrought wondrous 
things.  
THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS §213 (5:22-6:2)  
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §43 (MT. 11: 27-30)  
The Lord said to His disciples: all things are delivered unto Me of my Father; and 
no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save 
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that 
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn 
of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For 
my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.  
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
