--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE TIMOTHY  
& OF THE VENERABLE MARTYR ANASTASIUS THE PERSIAN  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the apostle, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Manifestly illumined * by the rays of the Spirit, * O divinely revealed Timothy, * 
thou wast shown to be a most radiant beacon, * passing over all the earth * and 
enlightening it with grace. * Pray thou now, that our souls be granted ** peace and 
great mercy.  
O divinely wise Timothy, * thou didst drink of the torrent of sweetness * and, 
emulating Christ, * with godly wisdom hast given drink * to those who fervently 
desire the understanding of God. * To Him hast thou now joyously departed, * 
contemplating the supremely radiant glory of the Trinity ** and immeasurably 
powerful peace.  
Placing thyself in submission to Paul, * conversing with the Spirit through writing, 
* thou didst become wholly radiant with light, * a generous husbandman, and an 
earnest favorite of the Lord, * living in chastity and piety, * O divinely wise Timothy; 
* wherefore thou hast been deemed worthy of crowns of victory ** as a lawful 
spiritual athlete.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable martyr, in the same tone & melody:  
O all-blessed Anastasius, * thou boast of the martyrs, * who achieved splendid 
victories over falsehood, * thou bearest in thy name a standard of fame, * being borne 
aloft everywhere * as a steadfast victor. * And now do thou raise up from sinful falls 
** those who honor thy memory with faith.  
O martyr Anastasius, * achieving a splendid victory over falsehood, * thou didst 
receive a twofold crown * for thine ascetic struggle * and thy steadfast contest, * and 
thine opposition, even unto death. * And Christ the Master hath given thee ** the 
ability to work miracles, as is meet.  
The ends of the world * now hymn thy miracles, * O wonder-worker Anastasius; * 
for Christ hath adorned thee, * rewarding with miracles thee who endured tortures 
for His sake; * and after thy death * thou wast deemed worthy ** of immortal glory 
and blessedness.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Chosen by God before to be the disciple of the wise Paul, thou didst learn divine 
things; and having lived in goodness and preserved the Faith unadulterated even unto 
the shedding of thy blood, thou wast shown to be a faithful hierarch, O Apostle 
Timothy. Therefore, thou didst denounce the idolaters and, wounded by staves and 
stones, hast received the crown of martyrdom. Wherefore, O all-blessed one, pray on 
behalf of us who celebrate thine honored memory with faith.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O martyrs of the Lord ...”:  
The unblemished heifer, beholding her Bullock * willingly nailed to the Tree, * 
cried out aloud, lamenting piteously: * “Woe is me, O my most beloved Child! * How 
hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, * desiring to leave me 
childless and bereft of Thee, ** my most beloved Child?”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Octoechos, and this Sticheron, in Tone I:  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  
Come, ye people, let us hymn the Apostle Timothy, the lamp of the faith, who 
shone forth in the spreading of the Gospel; and let us say: Rejoice, O comely scion of 
faith, adopted son of the divine Paul! Rejoice, honored master of the virtues, greatly 
wise mouth of the Word! Rejoice, harp sounding forth the music of God unto the 
ends of the earth! Rejoice, pillar of faith and ground of the Church!  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
O Christ, Thou didst magnify the power of the precious Cross in Judea and in 
Babylon, for because of it they came to know the feast of Thy life-creating 
resurrection: And now the right laudable and glorious athlete Anastasius, a martyr of 
countless miracles, hath become for them a liberator from the captivity and the 
madness of idolatry, joining chorus with the angels and praying on behalf of our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Having endured many pangs during the crucifixion of thy Son and God, O most 
pure one, thou didst groan, weeping and crying aloud: “Woe is me, O my sweet Child! 
How is it that thou sufferest unjustly, desiring to deliver the mortal descendents of 
Adam?” Wherefore, O most pure Virgin, we entreat thee with faith: Render Him 
merciful unto us!  
Troparion of the apostle, in Tone IV: 
Learning goodness and being sober in all things * with a good conscience, arrayed 
as a priest * thou didst draw forth things ineffable from the chosen vessel; * and 
having kept the faith, thou didst finish the even course. ** O Apostle Timothy, 
entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Anastasius * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tormenters 
and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and one 
combined canon of the saints, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the saints, the acrostic whereof is: “With hymns I honor the Apostle 
Timothy”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it shattered 
the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the deep. 
Troparia of the apostle: By thy supplications and with the radiant grace of 
dispassion, O blessed one, dispel the uprisings of the passions and the gloom of 
ignorance, that I may now worthily hymn thee, who art revealed by God.  
God, Who knoweth all things beforehand, seeing the beauty of thy mind, O 
Timothy, showed thee forth as worthy of being a fellow minister with the divine 
apostles, taking thought concerning thee with His wise providence.  
We know the one transcendent Source Who knoweth all things beforehand; for 
the Apostle Timothy, enlightened by the grace of Christ from among the Greeks, is 
now counted with the divine Paul.  
Troparia of the martyr: Illumined by the most radiant dawning of Thy 
resurrection, O Christ, the namesake thereof, having hastened from the East like the 
sun, doth now illumine the Church with miracles.  
Full of divine love, thou didst patiently endure tortures, O martyr Anastasius; and, 
adorned with the beauties of asceticism, thou wast brought to Christ, rejoicing, as a 
sacrifice of sweet savor, O blessed one.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O well-spring of grace! Rejoice, O ladder and portal of 
heaven! Rejoice, O golden lampstand and jar, O unquarried mountain, who for the 
world hast given birth unto Christ, the Bestower of life!  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
Troparia of the apostle: Grace was poured forth abundantly in thy lips, O all-
blessed one, giving rise to rivers of dogmas, which water the Church of Christ and 
bring forth much fertile fruit, O divinely wise Apostle Timothy, thou preacher of 
Christ.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
In accordance with the prophecy, O all-blessed one, thy feet were made beautiful; 
for thou didst proclaim the peace, which passeth all understanding, of the Savior and 
Lord of all, Who hath destroyed the ancient enmity of mankind, O all-wise one.  
Having mortified thy fleshly members, O blessed Timothy, thou didst make that 
which is worse subject to thy discourse, giving dominion to that which is higher; and, 
restraining thy passions, thou didst illumine thy soul, instructed by the teachings of 
Paul.  
Troparia of the martyr: Having first trodden the narrow path by asceticism, thou 
didst attain unto the glory of martyrdom, finding delight through thy pangs because 
of thy torments, O glorious martyr Anastasius, receiving heavenly beauty.  
The pain of thy suffering hath gone forth into all the world, O invincible martyr; 
for, contending against sin even to the shedding of thy blood, thou wast victorious, 
and hast been adorned with a crown of victory.  
Theotokion: From thee, O pure one, the never-fading Bloom hath sprung forth, 
Who doth perfume all humanity with the divine myrrh of His nature, and Who is co-
beginningless with the Father, yet came under time through thee, O all-immaculate 
Virgin.  
Sessional Hymn of the apostle, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before ...”: 
Adorned with divine gifts, O glorious apostle, thou didst adorn the radiant me-
tropolis of Ephesus; for thou wast shown to be a preacher, and with the divine Paul 
didst proclaim unto all the word of salvation. Wherefore, we celebrate thy memory 
with faith.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the martyr, in the same tone & melody:  
Thou wast shown to be honorable in the glory of perfection, having enlightened 
thy mind as with a divine effulgence and acknowledging the power of the Cross, thou 
didst become venerable in a godly manner, through fasting and a martyr, by the 
shedding of thy blood, O blessed Anastasius. Wherefore, Christ poureth forth the gift 
of miracles through thee.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV:  
O all-immaculate Virgin who hast given birth to the transcendent God: do thou 
unceasingly entreat Him with the incorporeal ones, that He grant forgiveness of trans-
gressions and correction of life before the end, to us who, as is meet, hymn thee with 
faith and love, O thou who alone art all-hymned.  
 Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee suspended upon the Cross, O Word of 
God, Thy most pure Mother exclaimed, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and 
strange wonder, O my Son? How is it that Thou, the Life of all, hast tasted death, 
desiring to bring life to mortals, in so far as Thou art compassionate?”  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV  
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain overshadowed 
by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy One of Israel * 
would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and restoration. 
Troparia of the apostle: Willingly suffering lawfully, O all-blessed one, with 
extreme abstinence thou didst make the threefold billows of the passions subject to 
thy mind, receiving the perfection of virtue, O divinely wise Timothy, thou great 
preacher.  
Shining like the sun, Paul emitted thee like a radiant beam, illumining the whole 
world with rich light, O divinely revealed Timothy, unto our edification and 
confirmation.  
Ardently desiring the uttermost of desires, and infusing thyself with love, with zeal 
thou didst pass over to another life, O God-pleaser, ever contemplating thy Creator 
and delighting in the vision of Him.  
Troparia of the martyr: Naught could separate thee from thy love for Christ: 
neither dismemberment, nor the threat of wounds, nor the sword, nor death, nor fire, 
nor yet starvation, O Anastasius, who hast made thine abode with the choirs of 
heaven.  
Taking thy cross upon thy shoulder with zeal, thou didst follow the saving 
commandments of Christ; and as thou didst emulate Him even unto death, O most 
excellent one, thou dost now delight in His radiance.  
Theotokion: Manifestly arriving from heaven, O pure one, the angelic commander 
announced joy to thee, saying: “God shall issue forth from thee in the flesh, O most 
pure virgin, unto the salvation of those who hymn thee with love!”  
ODE V  
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
Troparia of the apostle: Illumined with the immaterial effulgence of the primal 
light of the Cause of all, thou hast illumined the world with honorable preaching; and 
been manifestly revealed to be a beacon of piety emitting the discourse of the highest 
life, O all-blessed initiate of the sacred mysteries.  
The true disciple of the divine Paul followed in the footsteps of his teacher, 
sowing his teachings among the faithful; and thereby guided to the light of piety, 
rising early out of the night, we glorify Thee, the Lover of mankind.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Through enlightenment thou hast been shown to be a second Paul, ministering to 
the primal Radiance, with Whose understanding thou hast illumined us. Victoriously 
protected by his armor, Timothy hath been revealed to be his ally in battle.  
Troparia of the martyr: The adversary of God, who of old boasted unrestrainedly, 
threatening to seize the earth and vainly claiming that he would destroy the whole of 
the sea, hath been trampled underfoot by thy goodly courage, O martyr Anastasius.  
Having suffered lawfully and emerged victorious, the martyr of Christ hath 
manifestly received the ability to work miracles in reward for his sufferings; for 
Anastasius doth heal infirmities and expel demons, working wonders by the power of 
Christ.  
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving, O Virgin, thou hast annulled the curse of Eve, the 
mother of all, having given rise to Christ, the blessing of the world. Wherefore, 
rejoicing, with mouth and tongue we magnify thee, confessing thee to be the true 
Theotokos.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin * and taken 
flesh, came forth from her * yet kept her uncorrupt. * For being Himself not 
subject to decay, * He preserved His Mother free from harm. 
Troparia of the apostle: Troparia of the apostle: Thou wast shown to be a chariot 
of God, O God-pleasing Timothy, bearing His divine name before the face of the 
godless tyrants, undaunted by their savagery; for thou didst array thyself in the 
invincible might of the Savior.  
Thou didst receive a magnificent crown, O divinely wise Apostle Timothy, who art 
most noetically rich; for crowned with the diadem of the kingdom as is meet, thou 
dost stand before the throne of thy Master, rejoicing with Paul in the mansions of 
heaven, O blessed one.  
Perfumed with the noetic myrrh of Christ Who for our sake abased Himself by 
assuming flesh, O most honored Timothy, thou hast received His sweet fragrance; 
and granted it to those who have recourse to thee with faith, O holy initiate of the 
ineffable mysteries of His noetic love. 
 Troparion of the martyr: Manifestly illumined by the radiance of the Cross, thou 
didst dispel the gloom of delusion and didst triumph, contending against the tyrant, O 
most glorious one; and, rejoicing, thou didst receive thy trophies of victory, O 
Anastasius, martyr of Christ, joining chorus with the armies of the martyrs.  
Theotokion: The whole choir of the prophets, taught by God, foretold the mystery 
of the ineffable and divine conception of the divine Word through thee, O Virgin 
Mother; for thou hast truly revealed the most true and ancient counsel.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Kontakion of the saints, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The angelic choir ...”:  
O ye faithful, let us all hymn Timothy, * the divine disciple and companion of 
Paul, * honoring with him the wise Anastasius, * who shone forth from Persia like a 
star * and dispelleth the passions of our souls ** and our bodily infirmities.  
Ikos: The annual festival of the saints hath shone forth more brightly than the sun, 
illumining the faithful, and dispelling the manifold power of the demons, washing 
away infirmities and fulfilling the petitions of those who entreat them. Wherefore, 
wretch though I am, I make haste and offer ye a supplication from my pained and 
passion-plagued heart, that I may receive that which I desire and need: freedom from 
grief, a life free from sorrow, forgiveness of transgressions, and divine healing of soul 
and body.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; * 
for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so hath He 
wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou praised and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Troparia of the apostle: Becoming a member of the chorus of the ranks of heaven 
as is meet, thou dost now rejoice in gladness, O blessed Timothy, initiate of sacred 
mysteries, delighting in light-bestowing radiance and proclaiming our supremely 
praised and glorious God.  
Performing the sacred propagation of the Gospel of Christ from the heights of 
virtue, rejoicing, the most godly Paul sent divinely written epistles to thee, his disciple, 
O Timothy, proclaiming our praised and supremely glorious God.  
The weakness of the flesh thou didst strengthen with might of soul, O blessed of 
God; for, having lived on earth like one of the incorporeal hosts, thou didst become a 
martyr when thy head was crushed, O sacred minister of the mysteries of God.  
Troparia of the martyr: The spiritual athlete exhorteth the faithful, manifestly 
showing them his courage as an example, that they might now emulate the voluntary 
suffering which the praised and supremely glorious God of our fathers endured for 
us.  
The lovers of piety believe in the Trinity Whose Hypostases are equal in might; for 
the valiant athletes suffered therefore, shedding their blood, contending as martyrs, 
and manifestly rendering up their souls as they are slain.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O pure one, from whom the Shepherd in His compassion 
issued forth, Who, clothing Himself wholly in me, in the skin of Adam, is truly 
supremely glorified, the praised and supremely glorious God of our fathers.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so the 
fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin’s womb * into which it had 
descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation bless the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Troparia of the apostle: Thou wast shown to be worthy to stand with the angels of 
the heavenly ranks, O blessed Timothy; for, having been taught supra-naturally, thou 
didst emulate their radiance, O wise one, and with them dost chant in gladness: Let all 
creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Invested with power from heaven which descended in a strange manner upon the 
disciples and eye-witnesses of the Word, thou wast shown to be an apostle, O 
divinely wise Timothy. And with them thou dost chant rejoicing: Let all creation bless 
the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou didst stand forth, O all-blessed Timothy, preacher of God, manifestly 
attaining the good things of uttermost desire, ever illumined brilliantly by the light of 
the Trinity; wherefore thou dost now chant in gladness: Let all creation bless the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Troparia of the martyr: Crowned, thou didst soar aloft from earth to the heavens, 
O martyr Anastasius, escaping all the deception of the demons, and trampling 
underfoot the temples of the idols. Wherefore, thou dost now cry aloud, rejoicing: 
Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou didst empurple thy vesture with the blood of thy martyrdom, O martyr who 
art most noetically rich; and, bearing the Cross as a scepter, thou reignest with Christ 
forever, O Anastasius, to Whom thou dost now chant, rejoicing: Let all creation bless 
the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: The rich Word Who is glorified with angelic hymnody hath beggared 
Himself for our sake, choosing thee, the beauty of Jacob, O blessed one, to be His 
Mother. Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured Thy 
pure birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * quench 
the raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may unceasingly 
magnify Thee. 
Troparia of the apostle: The saying of David hath been fulfilled, for thou hast 
appeared to the world like lightning, illumining the ends of the earth with thy 
preaching, O ever memorable and blessed Timothy. Wherefore, we unceasingly 
magnify thee, O thou who wast revealed by God.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Partaking of the light-bearing radiance and divine effulgence of the three-Sunned 
Godhead, and delighting therein in purity, O blessed and most honored initiate of the 
sacred mysteries, from the darkness of transgressions save those who hymn thee.  
Made steadfast by the teachings of Thine apostles; Paul, the preacher of Thy 
dispensation, and the divinely wise Timothy, O only-begotten Master, reasoning 
aright we glorify Thee as equal to the Father and the Spirit.  
Troparia of the martyr: With the streams of thy blood thou didst quench all the 
delusion of idolatry, O glorious one, and didst adorn the fullness of the Church, for 
which do thou never cease to pray to the Master, O most excellent one, that we all 
may bless thee.  
O thy glory and thy truly ineffable and divine radiance, which pass understanding, 
whereof thou hast partaken, O Anastasius, as a victor, standing before Christ the 
Master. Him do thou now entreat on behalf of us who hymn thee.  
Theotokion: O thine awesome wonder! For, having given birth ineffably to God 
the Word, O Virgin Theotokos, thou hast revealed the mystery hidden in God, Who 
hath created all things, before time and before all generations.  
Exapostilarion in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “O Light immutable ...”: 
Two beacons shine forth radiantly in the world - Timothy, great among the 
apostles of Christ, and the martyr Anastasius, among his fellows, whom we praise 
together.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III: 
All of us, the faithful, have appointed thee as a mediator before Him Who hath 
now been born of thee, O most holy one; and we are crucified with Him for the sake 
of that which is better. Wherefore, cease thou never to pray on our behalf.  
On the Aposticha, Stichera from the Octoechos; and, Glory ..., in Tone V: 
O venerable father, as vanquisher of the noetic Medes and Chaldeans, and in 
casting down all the falsehood of Babylon by the power of the Cross, thou wast not 
lulled by the smoothness of pleasures, nor wast thou affrighted by the fire of thy 
trials; wherefore, Christ our God hath crowned thee with the honors of victory. 
Standing with the angels before the Lord, pray thou, asking peace and great mercy for 
our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
When thou didst behold hanging upon the Tree, the planted Cluster of grapes 
Whom, like a vine, thou didst bring forth, with His divine side pierced by a spear, 
thou didst exclaim crying aloud O most pure one: “What is this, O my Son and God? 
How is it that Thou Who dost heal all infirmities and sufferings, hath undergone 

--- PAGE 10 ---
suffering, though Thou art dispassionate according to Thy divine nature? How have 
the thankless people thus rewarded Thee for Thy benefactions, O Benefactor?.” By 
His sufferings pray thou that I may ever be free from sufferings, that I may glorify 
thee.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Octoechos; and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the apostle.  
Grace was poured forth abundantly in thy lips, O all-blessed one, giving rise to 
rivers of dogmas, which water the Church of Christ and bring forth much fertile fruit, 
O divinely wise Apostle Timothy, thou preacher of Christ.  
In accordance with the prophecy, O all-blessed one, thy feet were made beautiful; 
for thou didst proclaim the peace, which passeth all understanding, of the Savior and 
Lord of all, Who hath destroyed the ancient enmity of mankind, O all-wise one.  
Having mortified thy fleshly members, O blessed Timothy, thou didst make that 
which is worse subject to thy discourse, giving dominion to that which is higher; and, 
restraining thy passions, thou didst illumine thy soul, instructed by the teachings of 
Paul.  
Theotokion: From thee, O pure one, the never-fading Bloom hath sprung forth, 
Who doth perfume all humanity with the divine myrrh of His nature, and Who is co-
beginningless with the Father, yet came under time through thee, O all-immaculate 
Virgin.  
Troparion of the apostle, in Tone IV: 
Learning goodness and being sober in all things * with a good conscience, arrayed 
as a priest * thou didst draw forth things ineffable from the chosen vessel; * and 
having kept the faith, thou didst finish the even course. ** O Apostle Timothy, 
entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his suffering, O Lord, Thy martyr Anastasius * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tormenters 
and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the saints, in Tone I: 
O ye faithful, let us all hymn Timothy, * the divine disciple and companion of 
Paul, * honoring with him the wise Anastasius, * who shone forth from Persia like a 
star * and dispelleth the passions of our souls ** and our bodily infirmities.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY, §290 (II TIM. 1 :3-9)  
Timothy my child: I thank God, Whom I serve from my forefathers with pure 
conscience, that without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and 
day; Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may be filled with 
joy; When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first 
in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee 
also. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is 
in thee by the putting on of my hands. For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; 
but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind. Be not thou therefore ashamed of 
the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner: but be thou partaker of the af-
flictions of the gospel according to the power of God; Who hath saved us, and called 
us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose 
and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §50 (LK. 10: 1-15)  
At that time, the Lord also appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and 
two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come. 
Therefore said he unto them, The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few: pray 
ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his 
harvest. Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Carry 
neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by the way. And into 
whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the son of peace 
be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again. And in the 
same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give: for the laborer is 
worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. And into whatsoever city ye enter, 
and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you: and heal the sick that are 
therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But into 
whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your way out into the streets of 
the same, and say, Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe 
of against you: notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come 
nigh unto you. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for 
Sodom, than for that city. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if 
the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, 
they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it shall be 
more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment, than for you. And thou, 
Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
 
 
