--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 24th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE MOTHER XENIA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Having first transformed thy love * and made thyself steadfast by the higher 
activity of the mind, * thou didst depart from the wickedness * of the vanity of 
pleasures, O blessed one, * and, becoming a stranger, ** didst walk aright by the 
difficult ascent of the virtues.  
Hastening to the divine haven, * thou didst calmly pass through the tumult of the 
waves of life, * and didst steer the ship of thy soul * through the bitterness of 
pleasures * without foundering, O most honored one, ** laden with mystic freight.  
Becoming a stranger * in godly emulation * of Him Who for our sake came down 
from on high to raise up the fallen, * thou didst abide, O wise one, unknown among 
thy kin; * and thou ever prayest to God, O Xenia, ** on behalf of the pious.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone I:  
Most glorious art thou among generations of generations, * O Virgin Mother and 
Maiden, Mary, * the Theotokos who hath given birth in the flesh * to the Son of the 
beginningless Father, * Who is truly equally everlasting with the Spirit. ** Him do 
thou beseech, that we be saved.  
 Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb * lifted up upon the Cross, * the 
immaculate Virgin cried aloud, weeping: * “O my Child most sweet, what is this new 
and most glorious sight? * How is it that Thou Who holdest all things in Thy hand ** 
hast been nailed to the Tree in the flesh?”  
Troparion, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O mother, was the image of God preserved, * for taking up thy cross, 
thou didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Xenia.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, with 8 Troparia, including the irmos of the first; 
and that of the venerable one, with 4 Troparia.  
Canon of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
By thy right pleasing supplications unite me to God, for I have become a stranger 
to every virtue and have estranged myself from Him through mine unseemly deeds, O 
honored and venerable Xenia, for I praise thy strange life.  
Noetic fire set thee alight like right flammable tinder, and prevailed upon thee to 
renounced the deception of the world and a fleshly bridegroom with most manly 
understanding, and to wed thyself to the Lord in purity.  
Comprehending a strange life which abideth in the heavens and passeth not away, 
thou didst adopt a name in accordance with thine activity, and didst hasten after thine 
immortal Bridegroom like a thirsting deer.  
Theotokion: With hymns let us praise the most pure Mary, the joyous Mother of 
God, the divine shelter, the right calm haven, the salvation of all the faithful.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Thou Who established the heavens by Thy word * and founded the 
earth upon the multitude of waters, * establish me unto the hymning of * Thy 
glorification O Lord.  
Thou didst cling to divine love, O honored one, prevailing upon thy pure soul to 
accept the oblivion of the pangs of asceticism and nature.  
Having acquired the golden wings of the virtues, thou didst soar aloft to the 
heights of heaven, O blessed one, like an incorrupt dove.  
Theotokion: O radiant cloud of the noetic and supremely radiant Sun Who shone 
forth from thy womb, O Virgin, illumine the souls of those who hymn thee.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Loving the Word of God the Father, Who had appeared on earth in His tender 
compassion, O blessed one, thou didst follow Him as if He were thy Bridegroom, 
and didst straightway abandon thy corruptible bridegroom, leaving behind corruptible 
wealth; wherefore, living as a stranger, in accordance with thy name, thou didst 
mortify the passions and received the inheritance of the living, O divinely inspired 
one. Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who celebrate 
thy holy memory with love.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, we have been overcome by the 
storms of our uncountable sins, and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O all-pure one, unto 
Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, that those who worthily hymn thee 
may be granted the remission of their sins. 
 Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer upon the 
Cross, the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: “The 
world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, 
beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful loving-kindness. 
O long-suffering Lord, Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring of mercy, take pity, 
and grant forgiveness of sins unto those who hymn Thy divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Thou didst bring to Christ as a dowry thy purity, the mortification of thy members 
and the pangs of abstinence; and thereby received the kingdom of heaven and 
everlasting delight.  
Providing in thyself a model for the good, thou didst draw many souls to salvation, 
removing them from passionate attachment to the world, O divinely wise and right 
wondrous Xenia  
Bedewing thy couch with tears, O venerable one, and eating thy bread with ashes, 
thou hast received the consolation which waxeth not old, and the delight of paradise.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O holy Theotokos, who hast come from among us! Rejoice, 
thou who hast given birth to Joy for the world! Rejoice, thou who alone art the help 
of mankind, O blessed and holy Theotokos!  
ODE V  
Irmos: Disperse, O Word, the darkness from my soul, * O Christ God, the 
Light-Giver, * Having driven out the primordial darkness of the abyss, * grant 
unto me the light of Thy commandments, * that early in the morning I may 
glorify Thee. 
Like a heifer desiring the divine beauty of the Herdsman, thou didst cry aloud: 
“Where now dost Thou tend Thy flock? Tell me: at what place hast thou come to 
rest? I desire to behold the transcendent vision of Thee, and am wholly consumed!”  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
“Seeking the beauty of My love, and having shone forth with the virtues” the 
Bridegroom cried, “look for Me in the heavens! There do I tend My flock, and thither 
do I ever call My sheep!”  
O honored Xenia, thou wast shown to be a most comely turtle-dove, a most 
radiant swallow and a noetic nightingale, who eluded the entrapment of spiritual 
snares and hast flown to the beauty of Christ, which thou didst desire, O right 
wondrous one.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, in latter days for those on earth thou hast given birth 
without father to Him Who on high was without mother, but Who assumed our 
whole nature in His surpassing compassion. Him do thou beseech, that He save from 
corruption those who hymn thee.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Glorifying thy strange life and thy superhuman asceticism, O glorious one, He 
Who had become a stranger for thy sake truly adorned thee with most glorious signs 
and wonders, O venerable one.  
Crowned with a wreath of the virtues, thou didst hasten to Christ, Whom thou 
didst desire, and Who, in a manner strange and beyond understanding, proclaimed 
thee with a circlet of stars to those near and those afar, O glorious Xenia.  
By thine entreaties, O venerable one, make me thine, for I have wandered far away 
from the commandments of our God; and make me a stranger to cruel Gehenna and 
the passions which beset me.  
Theotokion: He Who sitteth upon the shoulders of the cherubim without being 
circumscribed, made His abode, circumscribed within thy womb, though not in His 
divinity; and He issued forth from thee, saving mankind.  
Kontakion of the saint, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Thy blood ...”: 
Celebrating thy strange memorial, O Xenia, * we who honor thee with love hymn 
Christ, * Who giveth thee the power * of healing in all things. ** To Him do thou 
ever pray on our behalf.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst bedew the Children in the furnace, * and Thou didst 
preserve Thy Mother as a Virgin after childbirth: * Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
God of our fathers. 
Rome boasteth of thy birth, and Mylassa boasteth yet more greatly, having 
acquired thy relics, from whence miracles flow forth upon the faithful, O bride of 
God.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thou hast been shown to be a river of healings, engulfing the sea of the passions 
of those who chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Thou didst lull to sleep the soul-destroying passions during thy many vigils, O 
blessed one, and didst fall into the sleep which becometh the righteous, praying for 
the world.  
Theotokion: Cease thou never to entreat Him Who was incarnate of thee in a 
manner past all telling, O all-hymned Theotokos, that our souls be delivered from the 
snares of the enemy.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: O Thou who dost cover Thy chambers on high with the waters, * Thou 
Who hast set the sands to bound the sea * and Who upholdest all things: * the 
sun doth sing Thy praises, * the moon giveth Thee glory, * every creature 
offereth a hymn unto Thee, * as their Creator, unto the ages. 
Betrothing thyself to Christ, the only Man comely in beauty, as is written, thou 
didst piously acquire all manner of the virtues, O glorious one; and thou hast made 
thine abode in the divine bridal-chamber, receiving the grace of healings as thy 
marriage portion, throughout all ages.  
“My soul hath cleaved unto Thee, O Christ!” didst thou cry out with love; “Like a 
thirsting land I seek thee, the living Water, O Lord, and offer Thee showers of tears! 
With the stream of Thy love do Thou water me, O Savior, throughout all ages!”  
Truly loving Him Who is desire, O maiden, thou didst adorn thyself and wast 
glorified, cleaving unto the supremely glorious God, thou didst lead to the Savior the 
holy choir of virgins who emulated thee, and with them dost dance in the mansions 
on high.  
Theotokion: The Word of the Father chose thee alone, O all-pure one, the beauty 
of Jacob, and made His abode within thee; and as was His good pleasure, He Who 
surpasseth all mankind in comeliness issued forth from thee, cleansing our darkened 
nature.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, * Who hath exalted the horn of 
salvation on our behalf * in the house of His child David, * wherein the 
Dayspring from on high hath visited us, * and guided us on the path of peace.  
By thy weakness thou didst vanquish the impotent foe, O glorious one, leading a 
strange life and mortifying the carnal passions; and thou now dwellest in the heavens, 
where thou hast thy true place of abode, as a pure virgin.  
Blessed be the Lord Who hath shown thine honored shrine to be a calm haven of 
healings, unto us who are ever beset by the abyss and tempest of the passions, O 
God-bearing Xenia, thou glory of monastics and boast of virgins.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
O God-bearing Xenia, we, the faithful, honor thee as the temple of virginity, the 
pure turtle-dove, the immaculate dove, the bride of Christ comely in beauty and 
unblemished, a model of the divine virtues and an enclosed garden.  
Theotokion: Following thy words, O blessed one, all of us, the generations of 
generations, ever call thee blessed; for thou, O pure Virgin, didst truly give birth to 
the blessed God Who truly maketh blessed all who serve Him.  
 
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the saint, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O mother, was the image of God preserved, * for taking up thy cross, 
thou didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Xenia.  
Kontakion of the saint, in Tone II:  
Celebrating thy strange memorial, O Xenia, * we who honor thee with love hymn 
Christ, * Who giveth thee the power * of healing in all things. ** To Him do thou 
ever pray on our behalf.  
 
