--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 20th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE & GOD-BEARING FATHER EUTHYMIUS 
THE GREAT  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Soaring far above the circles of heaven * in divine virtue, O most blessed father, * 
thou didst descend into the divine darkness; * and thereby thou wast truly shown * to 
receive effulgence, O venerable one, ** not in indistinct images, but in the grace of 
God. (Twice)  
Having enlightened soul and mind with the virtues, * thou didst pass over to the 
heavens, to the kingdom of Christ, * O thrice blessed Euthymius, * offering Him the 
hardest of thy pangs; * and shining forth in ascetic endeavors like a lamp, ** thou 
didst find delight in the sustenance which groweth not old.  
The truly consubstantial and beginningless Trinity, * having established the abode 
of the Spirit within thee, * showed thee to be a most radiant beacon, * O God-
bearing Euthymius; * and having passed above all things which would drag thee 
down, ** thou hast found a dwelling-place in the heavens.  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
O venerable father, having diligently learned the virtues from childhood, thou 
didst become an instrument of the Holy Spirit; and receiving from Him the ability to 
work miracles, thou didst exhort all to spurn pleasures. And having been illumined 
now most purely with divine light, illumine thou our thoughts, O father Euthymius.  
Both now ..., Theotokion  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Denouncing the deceptions * of the evil demons * by the power of the Cross, * O 
father Euthymius, ** thou didst shine forth the glory of Christ.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Like Elijah thou wast taken up * in a fiery chariot, * O blessed one, * and thou 
standest directly before the Trinity, ** O most comely Euthymius.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Bearing in thy hands * the Cross of the Lord, * O father Euthymius, * thou didst 
utterly destroy ** demonic illusions.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Rejoice, thou who hast received * the Joy of the world, * Christ, the Bestower of 
life, * and brought an end to the grief ** of our first mother, O Virgin.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 4 in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
O father Euthymius, * an angel of heaven was sent to announce beforehand the 
birth of thee * who like John sprang forth from the womb of a barren woman; * for 
thou didst show thyself, to be an emulator of him * and a homeless one who spurned 
possessions, sharing his way of life, * and, like the Baptist, * sustaining thyself in the 
mountains, ** thou didst shine forth with boundless miracles.  
O father Euthymius, * thou didst produce the fruit of barrenness, * yet wast truly 
shown to have many children; * for the desert, which before was trackless, * became 
filled with monastics, thy spiritual seed. * And now, make thou supplication, * that 
our souls be granted ** peace and great mercy.  
O father Euthymius, * thy life was excellent * and thy Faith truly Orthodox; * for 
through activity thou didst attain unto the most exalted vision, * becoming an abode 
of wisdom, * worshiping Christ in two natures as One of the Trinity. * Him do thou 
beseech ** on behalf of our souls.  
O father Euthymius, sharing in the sufferings * of Him Who was stretched out 
upon the Cross, * through activity * thou didst truly make thyself conformable * to 
His resurrection and glory. * Him do thou now entreat, * that He grant to our souls 
** peace and great mercy.  
And 4 Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”:  
O thou who wast sanctified from thy mother’s womb, * when the eye of Him 
Who seeth all things * perceived thy purpose and inclination * leading constantly * 
toward those things which are higher, * then, O most blessed one, * declaring thee to 
be a God-given gift, * the namesake of good courage, * He loosed the sorrow of thy 
parents. * Wherefore, advancing from infancy, * thou didst please God, our 
Benefactor. * Him do thou beseech, ** that He save and enlighten our souls. (Twice)  
Finding thee to be like a clear mirror * of divine revelations, * Christ illumined 
thee * with the radiant splendor of His light, * O father who art full * of divine gifts. * 
Wherefore, thou hast been shown to be a well-spring overflowing with healings * and 
a feeder of the hungry, * watering with rains the desire of those who thirst; * and, 
looking upon souls as pledges, O wise one, * by thy discourse thou didst make them 
better for God. * Him do thou entreat ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Shining forth with vision and activity, * thy life was angelic, * a standard and most 
excellent model of virtue, * for those who desire to worship God, O summit of 
perfection. * And thy divinely wise discourse, O Euthymius, * hath taught all to 
worship the Trinity, * that Christ is known to be One in two natures, * and that the 
councils were equal in number * to the four Gospels of Christ. * Him do thou 
beseech, ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone III:  
Dedicated to God, like another Samuel from thy mother’s womb, O father 
Euthymius, thou wast the namesake of the good courage for the faithful, the staff and 
confirmation of monastics, and the pure habitation of the Holy Spirit. Ask thou great 
mercy for us who honor thee.  
Both now ..., the dogmatic Theotokion, in the same tone:  
How can we, O all-honored one, * not marvel at thine Offspring? * who is both 
God and man. * For without knowing a man, O all-immaculate One, * without a 
father thou hast given birth to a Son in the flesh, * who without a mother was 
begotten from the Father before all ages, * yet in no way undergoing change, fusion 
or separation, * but preserving fully the characteristics of both natures. * Wherefore, 
O Sovereign Lady, and Virgin Mother, * beseech Him to save the souls of those ** 
who with Orthodox faith confess thee to be the true Theotokos.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true Judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction; but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple; and these Stichera, in Tone II: 
The composition of Germanus: “Be ye of good courage!” the angel of the Lord 
said to thy parents, “For a child of the womb shall be born to you, the namesake of 
good courage!” And thou wast conceived in the womb, fulfilling the promise to them, 
and wast nourished with prayer from earliest infancy, O father Euthymius.  
The composition of the Studite: Having strengthened thy mind with divine under-
standing, O father Euthymius, thou didst traverse impassable wastes, in nowise 
amazed by the things of this earth. In tribulations thou didst show thyself to be most 
valiant and great in wisdom, and humble and meek in thine ascetic struggle and 
goodly courage. And thou didst manifestly sail across the raging sea of this present 
life, attaining unto the right tranquil haven. Entreat Christ, that He have mercy on our 
souls.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou didst spurn the things of this life, O father Euthymius, as one who desired 
the life on high; and disdaining riches, thou didst clothe thyself in humility. Thou 
didst hate food and didst embrace abstinence; thou didst reject unrighteousness and 
didst pursue righteousness. Wherefore, O venerable father, in thy holy prayers to the 
Lord be thou mindful of us.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Thy good works shone forth like the sun on earth and in heaven, O Euthymius, 
favorite of Christ; for in an Orthodox manner thou hast preached to us the true and 
unadulterated Faith of Christ. Wherefore, pray thou, O venerable and God-bearing 
father, that He grant us great mercy on the day of thy commemoration.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to 
thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of 
our souls! 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Rejoice, O venerable father, in that thou art the cause of good cheer for the 
Church; for by thy nativity all the assaults of the heretics were repulsed by the 
providence of God. Wherefore, He called thee Euthymius, namesake of good 
courage. Thou didst fill the ranks of celestial beings with joy by the radiance of thy 
life, and now, making thine abode with them, filled with light and enjoying most 
blessed and divine effulgence, entreat Christ, that He grant great mercy to our souls.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Made steadfast by the staff of the Cross, thou didst dry up torrents of iniquity, 
and, noetically watered by the torrent of divine sweetness and the well-spring of 
paradise, thou didst show forth springs of salvation in the desert. And irrigated with 
streams of the divine Spirit like a palm-tree, O venerable one, thou didst hasten to the 
heights of heaven, showing thyself to be a fiery pillar full of luminous effulgence, O 
divinely wise one. Wherefore, entreat Christ, that He grant great mercy to our souls.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Truly thou hast passed over with joy and gladness of soul to the wondrous 
tabernacles, even unto the house of God, O most blessed father, where thou dost 
listen to the beautiful voices, the sweet hymnody and the ineffable delight of those 
who keep festival, sharing in their beauty, O Euthymius. And desiring this alone, thou 
didst mortify thy flesh, which thou didst attain, adorned with divine righteousness. 
Entreat Christ, Who granteth the world great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
O venerable father, thou gavest no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine 
eyelids, until thou didst free soul and body from the passions and didst prepare 
thyself to be a dwelling-place for the Spirit; for Christ, coming with the Father, made 
His abode within thee: In that thou art a favorite of the consubstantial Trinity, O 
Euthymius our father, thou great preacher, pray on behalf of our souls. 
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone V:  
We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, * and we, the faithful, glorify thee as is meet, * 
thou unassailable city, * impregnable rampart, ** and steadfast intercession and refuge 
of our souls.  
After the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the saint, in Tone IV: 
Rejoice, O desert who hast not given birth! * Be of good cheer, thou who hast not 
felt the pangs of travail! * For the man of spiritual desires hath multiplied children for 
thee, * planting them with piety and nurturing them with abstinence * unto the 
perfection of the virtues. * By his prayers, O Christ God, ** bring peace to our life. 
(Twice)  
And “Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos ...,” (Once).  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the saint, in Tone IV:  
Rejoice, O desert who hast not given birth! * Be of good cheer, thou who hast not 
felt the pangs of travail! * For the man of spiritual desires hath multiplied children for 
thee, * planting them with piety and nurturing them with abstinence * unto the 
perfection of the virtues. * By his prayers, O Christ God, ** bring peace to our life. 
(Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Resurrectional Theotokion in the same tone:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
Shining with unapproachable light, thou didst shine forth like a star in the deserts, 
illumining with thy teachings those who approach thee with steadfast soul, O 
Euthymius. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Accepting the entreaty of us * who have recourse to thy protection, O Virgin, * 
cease thou never to make supplication to Him * Who is the Lover of mankind, ** 
that He save thy servants.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:  
Rejecting the cares of life and embracing the angelic life, thou didst adorn thy soul 
with abstinence, and richly received grace from God, O God-bearing Euthymius. 
Pray thou on behalf of us who piously praise thee. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O all-holy Virgin, * have mercy on us who with faith have recourse to thee, * the 
mercifully compassionate one, * and who ask thy fervent aid; * for, since thou art the 
good Mother of God Most High, * O thou who art full of the grace of God, * thou 
dost ever make entreaty with thy maternal supplications, ** that He save us all.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We bless thee, O venerable father Euthymius, 
and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the 
angels.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Truly embracing the poverty of Him Who was born of the Virgin for our sake, 
thou didst reckon transitory things to be as grass, O blessed one; for, having tasted of 
the tree of knowledge, O venerable one, thou didst show thyself to be a godly 
instructor of monastics. Wherefore, thou didst raise up in them all, zeal for the 
angelic life and a proper understanding of the Faith, O sign-bearing Euthymius our 
father. Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of transgressions unto those 
who celebrate thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thine all-holy 
Offspring.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 43 (MT. 11: 27-30)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of my Father; 
and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, 
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and 
learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 
For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; 
wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed 
legions of the demons and hast attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou 
didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask thou peace 
for our souls.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, including the 
Irmos; and two canons of the venerable one, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon I of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is (including the Irmoi): “Thou 
hast been shown to be the wealth of mortals, O Euthymius”, the composition of 
John of Damascus, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: There is none like unto Thee, * O exceedingly glorious Lord; * for by 
Thy mighty arm * Thou didst deliver the people * whom Thou hast acquired, 
* O Lover of mankind.  
Most gloriously thou didst loose the grief of thy parents, O namesake of good 
courage, having been promised to them by God as a gift before birth.  
The Church giveth utterance to a hymn of thanksgiving, O venerable one, having 
received thee from God as an offspring of peaceful and goodly courage who wast 
foretold.  
Canon II of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “By thy supplications, O most 
blessed one, grant me light”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
With thy supplications and entreaties beseech God; dispel the gloomy cloud of my 
despondency, O most blessed one, who, standing before the King of all, art full of 
good cheer and consolation.  
Having been promised and given by God like a new Samuel, even before thou 
wast conceived, O venerable father, thou hast been revealed to all the Churches by 
the splendor of thy good courage, in accordance with thy name.  
Having made supplication and entreaty to God, thy parents received thee as a 
divine gift and a radiant offspring, who by thy nativity hast declared the splendor of 
piety and the denunciation of heresy.  
From childhood thou wast dedicated to God Who had given thee life, O venerable 
one; and, looking to Him and guided by His life-creating precepts, O God-bearer, 
thou didst ascend to the uttermost summit of the virtues by faith.  
Theotokion: Having thee as our intercession, O Mother of God, we fear not the 
hordes of the enemy which assail those who glorify the God and Lord of all Who was 
born of thee. Him do thou entreat on our behalf.  
Katavasia: The Sun once passed over dry land * in the midst of the deep. * For 
the water on both sides became firm as a wall * while the people traversed the 
sea on foot, * chanting in a manner pleasing to God: * Let us sing unto the 
Lord; * for gloriously hath he been glorified. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE III  
Canon I  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Emulating Hannah, she who gave thee birth brought thee, like the venerable 
Samuel of old, as a living sacrifice to God, Who had glorified thee even before thou 
wast conceived.  
Aflame with rich love for God, O venerable one, with most pious resolve thou 
didst master the passions; wherefore, the grace of God rested upon thee.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Born of a barren woman, thou wast shown to be a most skillful husbandman of 
spiritual fertility, cutting down the weeds of impiety and scattering the divine seed of 
piety, O venerable one.  
As a sacred minister of supra-natural and mystic visions, O God-bearing father, by 
thy doctrines thou didst divinely lead unbelievers to Christ as believers instructed in 
higher things.  
Having mortified the flesh with extreme abstinence, O Euthymius, holding fast to 
the most chaste and pious thought, thou didst straightway prefer everlasting life and 
sweetness to things which are transitory and corrupt.  
Eluding the fiery pursuit of the demons by a soul aflame and wounded with the 
love of Christ, O father, thou wast illumined with dew-bearing grace, becoming a 
bearer of the sign of the Cross.  
Theotokion: Thou didst seal the sayings of the prophets of God and their 
prophecies. Yea, thou didst fulfill all their divine utterances, O blessed and all-
immaculate one.  
Katavasia: O Lord, the firm foundation of those who put their trust in Thee, * 
do Thou establish the Church, * which Thou hast purchased * with thy 
precious blood. 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Thou didst spiritually fill the lamp of thy soul with the oil of abstinence, desiring 
the ever-radiant coming of thy Bridegroom, O venerable one. Thou didst keep watch 
with vigilant prayers and didst make thine abode in His bridal chamber, O blessed 
one. Wherefore, as is meet, thou hast truly received sweetness and the ever-vital 

--- PAGE 12 ---
ability to perform miracles, O God-bearing Euthymius. Entreat Christ God, that He 
grant forgiveness of transgressions unto those who celebrate thy holy memory with 
love. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, as is meet I offer thee thankful praise, like the widow’s two 
mites, for all thy gifts; for thou hast been shown to be my protection and help, ever 
rescuing me from perils and tribulations. Wherefore, delivered from those who 
oppress me as from the midst of a burning furnace, I cry out to thee from the depths 
of my heart: O Theotokos, help me, entreating Christ God, that He grant forgiveness 
of sins unto me, for I, thy servant, have thee as my hope.  
ODE IV 
 Canon I  
Irmos: By thy descent, O Christ, * Thou didst bow down the heavens in 
wisdom, * revealing Thyself incarnate on earth. * Wherefore, we all cry aloud: 
* Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind.  
Having preserved thine intelligence immutable, from earliest infancy thou didst 
show forth ascent unto God by thy way of life. And drawing nigh unto Him, thou 
didst ascend from power to higher power.  
As a traveler from hence to the city which received God, thou didst desire the 
humility of Christ, and wast crucified in spirit with Him Who suffered on the Cross 
for thy sake.  
It being thy will to contend lawfully, thou didst strip off thy life; and naked, 
wrestling like Christ against the enemy, thou didst raise high the trophy of victory in 
the desert.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Desiring undying glory, O father, thou didst consecrate thyself wholly unto God, 
and by thy blameless life, abstinence and the splendor of thy life, didst zealously 
hasten to Him, crying out unceasingly: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Loving the Well-spring of goodness with all thy strength, O venerable one, thou 
didst become a well-spring of divine gifts for ascetics, healing those who thirst; for 
thou didst most gloriously cause springs to issue forth in the desert, like Moses of old.  
Emerging from the hidden recesses of the Spirit, thou didst set free the children of 
the bondwoman Hagar, regenerating them as worthy children of God by the baptism 
of adoption; for, having emulated the life of the divine forerunner, thou wast shown 
to be a baptizer, O Euthymius.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Illumined by God with grace, O Euthymius, thou wast acknowledged by the 
ignorant; for truly it did not befit thy virtue to hide and conceal thyself in the deserts. 
Wherefore, the Master of all hath shown thee to all as a radiant lamp.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O honored one! Rejoice, O all-pure Virgin! Rejoice, 
mountain overshadowed with grace! Rejoice, tabernacle! Rejoice, O ark! Rejoice, 
candle stand who bore the divine Light! for thou hast been for the faithful the 
mediatress of ineffable joy and gladness of soul.  
Katavasia: Thy virtue, hath covered the heavens, O Christ, * for having come 
forth from the Ark of Thy sanctification, * from Thine undefiled Mother, * 
Thou hast appeared in the temple of Thy glory * as an infant borne in arms, * 
filling all with Thy praise. 
ODE V  
Canon I  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
Thou didst submit to the law of God, for thou didst wield thy body like a spiritual 
weapon, O God-bearer, making the wisdom of thy flesh subject to thy spirit.  
In gladness thou didst complete the course of this life, and, conceiving the fear of 
God within thyself, thou didst give birth unto salvation for the lost, shining like the 
sun though hidden by the desert.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why has the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Revealed as a pillar of fire and cloud by the radiance of the Spirit, O Euthymius, 
thou didst go in advance of the pious ascetics, leading them towards the heavenly 
path and to non-perishing delight, guiding them to the heights of heaven, O father.  
Christ hath given thee to the world, O father, as an exceeding merciful physician 
of the sick, a most glorious feeder of the hungry, an instructor of the ignorant, a 
chastiser of the mindless, and a helper of orphans and the poor.  
Thou wast compassionate and merciful, possessing a humble-minded character, O 
father, cutting off the roots of the passions with divine teachings, enlightening and 
instructing thy disciples, and healing the afflictions of men’s souls.  
Emitting everywhere the rays of thy miracles, thou hast illumined all; like a magnet 
thou hast drawn all to thy teachings, edifying the traits and gifts of their souls, 
surpassing all in purity of soul.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Theotokion: We all proclaim thee to be the true Theotokos, O thou who art 
blessed of God, having been delivered from corrupt birth by thy birthgiving and 
recalled to a better life, through the loving-kindness of the mercy of our God.  
Katavasia: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * 
borne aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have foreseen 
God made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the King of peace.’ 
ODE VI  
Canon I  
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 
By thy supplications, O God-bearer, break thou the yoke of our bondage, having 
now through the laver of regeneration adopted the offspring of the bondwoman of 
old.  
The grace of God, O God-bearer, which dwelt actively within thee, appointed thee 
as a most wise founder, a chastiser of the mindless and an expeller of evil spirits.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Receiving from God great authority, thou didst drive away multitudes of adverse 
demons, healing the noetic deformity of all who with faith had recourse to thee.  
Truly blessed wast thou, O venerable father Euthymius, having acquired enriching 
poverty and tears of joy; for thereby thou didst inherit the kingdom of heaven.  
Thou didst spurn quickly fading honor and glory on earth, O most blessed one, 
and received everlasting life and incorrupt delight, having made thine abode most 
excellently in the mansions of heaven.  
Theotokion: We call thee the Queen and Sovereign Lady of all; for truly thou didst 
ineffably give birth unto God Who created, sustaineth, and embraceth all, O all-
immaculate one.  
Katavasia: The Elder, having seen with his eyes the salvation * that was to 
come unto the peoples from God, * cried aloud unto Thee: * ‘O Christ, Thou 
art my God.’ 
Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “As first-fruits ...”: 
Creation found joy in thine honored nativity * and in thy divine memory, O 
venerable one, * receiving the good cheer of thy many miracles. * Give richly of them 
to our souls, and wash away the defilement of our sins, ** that we may chant: Alleluia!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Ikos: How can I, wretch that I am, offer praise from my slothful heart? I am filled 
with fear when I hymn the great Euthymius. Yet, trusting in his entreaties, I begin a 
hymn with good courage and great diligence, and recount to all his life and birth, and 
how his parents chanted unto God: Alleluia!  
ODE VII  
Canon I  
Irmos: The three youths in Babylon, * regarded the tyrant’s command as 
foolishness, * and cried aloud in the midst of the flame: * Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God of our fathers!  
Thou wast seen within a cloud, O father, enveloped by a supra-natural fire, crying 
out, as a heavenly initiate of the mysteries of God: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of 
our fathers!  
The Creator of nature hath freely given thee supra-natural powers, O father, for as 
a divine initiate of the mysteries of heaven, thou didst cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God of our fathers!  
Worshipping the one Only-begotten, one in two natures according to His divine 
incarnation, O Euthymius, thou didst cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of 
our fathers!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Uniting thyself with the incorporeal ones through extreme abstinence, O father 
Euthymius, thou didst show thy life to be a contest of asceticism and an exercise in 
holiness, crying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Christ showed thee to be a two-edged sword cutting down hordes of the demons 
and piercing the hearts of the enemy, but making glad the souls of those who chant: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Filled with the light of the threefold Sun, O father Euthymius, through 
communion thou wast shown to be a secondary luminary reflecting the primal Light, 
emitting rays upon those who chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Thou didst shine like the dawn, having within thee the Sun of 
righteousness, Who cleanseth the world of the darkness of ignorance with the 
radiance of divine knowledge. To Him do we chant: Blessed is the God of our 
fathers!  
Katavasia: O Thou who in the midst of the fire * bedewed the children as they 
discoursed on things divine, * and Who didst take up Thy dwelling in the pure 
Virgin: * O Word of God Thee do we reverently praise chanting: * O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
ODE VIII  
Canon I  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath since been born on earth, * and 
He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Having dedicated thyself to God and kindled the furnace of the conscience, O 
Euthymius, rejoicing thou didst set fire to thy whole self, thy life, as an unblemished 
sacrifice, chanting unto Christ: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Having become a son by adoption through the grace of God, as an inheritance 
thou didst receive knowledge of things to come; for, mastering thy nature, thou didst 
transcend nature in thy foreknowledge, hastening to fulfillment, O Euthymius. Hymn 
the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon II  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Having acquired a mighty way of life, O most blessed one, thou didst attain unto 
the most exalted vision, becoming the receptacle containing the life-creating Spirit 
and the gifts which richly flow from Him; and thou chantest unceasingly: Ye people, 
supremely exalt Him forever!  
Moving thy residence, thou didst reach the outer limits of Sion; and thou didst 
attain unto the everlasting mansions, obtaining a heavenly inheritance by thy pangs. 
And thou chantest with the angelic choirs: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye 
people, supremely exalt God throughout all ages!  
As radiant as the sun, thou didst illumine the desert places, didst expel the dark-
visaged demons and didst become a most brilliant pillar which reached up to the 
heights of heaven, shining with the effulgence of miracles, and unceasingly crying out 
to the Master: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, supremely exalt God throughout all ages!  
Adorned with the most sacred activities of thy life, thou didst set aright the most 
basic virtue, becoming radiant through the correctness of thy doctrines and an 
expounder of excellent theology, crying out unceasingly: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, 
supremely exalt God throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Bride of God, from captivity by the passions do 
thou rescue those who have recourse unto thee; and grant full freedom, O Lady, to 
the churches of the Orthodox, who chant with faith: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, 
supremely exalt God throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Katavasia: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the 
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all ye 
works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages. 
ODE IX 
 Canon I  
Irmos: Thou who during birth O most pure one * and after giving birth * was 
as pure as thou wast before birthgiving, * doth all creation proclaim out load, * 
and as the true Theotokos we magnify thee. 
Finding thee reposing whole in thy shrine, O venerable one, we bless thee as a 
victorious spiritual athlete, who wast a well-spring of healings even before thy death.  
He Who dwelleth in the highest hath made thee an ally for our earthly rulers 
against the barbarians, and for thy flock against divers temptations, O venerable 
father.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Christ told thee of thy much-loved departure unto Him, O father, as He did of old 
to Moses the God-seer, whose emulator thou hadst become through virtue; and thou 
didst part the sea of the passions and didst pass over unhindered to the promised 
land, vanquishing the adversary.  
Thou didst repose like Elijah the zealot, ascending to the heavens on a chariot of 
the virtues, O venerable one, where thy manner of life was manifestly recorded; and, 
standing now before the Master, be thou mindful of those who with faith celebrate 
thy luminous and most sacred memory.  
Thy manner of life was angelic and thy life was most luminous, O most blessed 
and divinely wise one; thy soul was radiantly godlike, and thy faith pious; for thou 
wast an extoller of divine dogmas, O God-bearer, and revealed to be a true preacher 
of Orthodox doctrine.  
Made steadfast by thy supplication, O divinely wise father, I earnestly set my hope 
on thee, as my advocate and intercessor, ever praying to God, and beseeching for the 
forgiveness of my sins and the termination of my debts, for thou hast been granted 
divine compassion.  
Theotokion: Be thou a tower of salvation for me, O pure one, repelling the hordes 
of the demons and driving away the tumult of temptations and tribulations, repulsing 
the assault of the passions, bestowing pure freedom, and granting an abundance of 
the gifts of God.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Katavasia: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, 
discern a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be 
sanctified to God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the 
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not known a 
man. 
Exapostilarion in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
God sanctified thee from thy mother’s womb, O venerable father, showing thee to 
be a divine prophet, like unto Jeremiah and Samuel of old. With them, O wonder-
working and God-bearing Euthymius, co-dweller with the angels, be thou mindful of 
those who hymn thee with faith. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II:  
Saved because of thee, O Sovereign Lady, we regally confess thee to be the 
Theotokos; for thou didst ineffably give birth to God, Who destroyed death by the 
Cross and hath drawn to Himself the assemblies of the venerable. With them we 
praise thee, O Virgin.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O venerable father Euthymius, * having forsaken that which is earthly, * thou didst 
follow after Christ; * and thou didst not prefer corruptible things * to things which 
are to come, O glorious one. * Dwelling in the desert as in a city, * thou didst destroy 
hordes of the demons. * O ever-glorious one, who can help but recount ** thy soul’s 
true zeal for the Lord? (Twice) 
O venerable father Euthymius, * thou wast shown to be a rule for monastics and 
their boast, * the delight of the Orthodox, * and a radiant beacon for the whole 
world; * for thou wast not afraid of the terrors of the deceitful enemy * when thou 
didst dwell in the cave. * O the gifts replete in thee, O blessed one, * whereby thou 
didst manifestly trample underfoot ** all the arrogance of the demons!  
O venerable father Euthymius, * thou didst, truly take wing, * soaring aloft unto 
God, O holy one; * and, having purified thy senses * by fasting and unceasing 
supplications, O most blessed one, * thou wast deemed worthy of immortal life. * O 
most glorious adornment of ascetics, * Christ hath received thee, rejoicing, ** into the 
immaterial mansions.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
We honor thee, O Euthymius our father, as the instructor of a multitude of 
monks; for by thy path have we truly come to learn how to walk aright. Blessed art 
thou, for, having labored for Christ, thou didst put down the power of the enemy, O 
converser with the angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them 
do thou entreat the Lord, that He have mercy upon our souls.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, * and deliver us ** 
from all want and grief.  
Great Doxology. Dismissal. First Hour. Final Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I of the saint, and 4 
from ODE VI of Canon II.  
Emulating Hannah, she who gave thee birth brought thee, like the venerable 
Samuel of old, as a living sacrifice to God, Who had glorified thee even before thou 
wast conceived. (Twice) 
Aflame with rich love for God, O venerable one, with most pious resolve thou 
didst master the passions; wherefore, the grace of God rested upon thee. (Twice) 
Receiving from God a most great authority, thou didst drive away multitudes of 
adverse demons, healing of deformity all who with faith had recourse to thee.  
Truly blessed wast thou, O venerable father Euthymius, having acquired enriching 
poverty and tears of joy; for thereby thou didst inherit the kingdom of heaven.  
Thou didst spurn quickly fading honor and glory on earth, O most blessed one, 
and hast received everlasting life and incorrupt delight, having made thine abode most 
excellently in the mansions of heaven.  
Theotokion: We call thee the Queen and Sovereign Lady of all; for truly thou didst 
ineffably give birth unto God Who created, sustaineth and embraceth all, O all-
immaculate one.  
Troparion of the saint, in Tone IV:  
Rejoice, O desert who hast not given birth! * Be of good cheer, thou who hast not 
felt the pangs of travail! * For the man of spiritual desires hath multiplied children for 
thee, * planting them with piety and nurturing them with abstinence * unto the 
perfection of the virtues. * By his prayers, O Christ God, ** bring peace to our life.  
Kontakion of the saint, in Tone VIII: 
Creation found joy in thine honored nativity * and in thy divine memory, O 
venerable one, * receiving the good cheer of thy many miracles. * Give richly of them 
to our souls, and wash away the defilement of our sins, ** that we may chant: Alleluia!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 335 (13: 17-21) 
Brethren: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they 
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it With joy, and 
not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 

--- PAGE 21 ---
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, that 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work 
to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (6: 17-23).  
At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and 
Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that were 
vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to 
touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his 
eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. 
Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: 
for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall 
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as 
evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, 
your reward is great in heaven.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
