--- PAGE 1 ---
 THE SUNDAY ON OR AFTER THE 22nd DAY OF JANUARY  
THE SERVICE TO THE HOLY NEW MARTYRS AND CONFESSORS OF THE RUSSIAN 
LAND  
Their commemoration is made on the Sunday nearest to the 25th of January. If the 25th of 
January fall on Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday, we chant the service to the New Martyrs on the 
Sunday before; but if it fall on Thursday, Friday or Saturday, we chant the service on the following 
Sunday. If the 25th of January fall on Sunday itself we chant the service to the New Martyrs on 
that very day, and the service to St. Gregory the Theologian on January 27th in conjunction with 
that to St. John Chrysostom. When such be the case, the hymnody of St. Gregory precedes that of 
St. John. Be it known that this service can fall between January 22nd and January 28th. If it 
coincide with the Sunday of the Publican and Pharisee, or with the Sunday of the Prodigal, or 
With Meat-fare Sunday, the service to the New Martyrs is chanted in conjunction with the 
Triodion, following the pattern set for the service to the Three Hierarchs in the Chapters of 
Mark. If a service to a major saint fall on the same day, we chant the service to the major saint on 
the closest Saturday, or on some other day. If a church’s patron feast fall on such a Sunday, we 
chant the service of the patron feast in conjunction with the Triodion, without further alteration; 
and the service to the New Martyrs is then transferred to the subsequent Sunday.  
AT LITTLE VESPERS:  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the Resurrection, and Glory ..., for the New 
Martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
The land of Russia hath become an earthly heaven, hiding the bodies of the new--
martyrs and confessors in its clefts and shining forth with the heavenly glory of those 
who bedewed it with their own blood having suffered at the hands of the minions of 
Satan for the Faith of Christ, to redeem them from the sin of apostasy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion of Little Vespers, in the Resurrectional tone.  
On the Aposticha, one Sticheron of the Resurrection, and these Stichera of the new 
martyrs, in Tone I:  
O great passion-bearers, new martyrs of Russia, with love we fall down before you 
and, glorifying your struggles, we reverently kiss your wounds. Pray ye, we beseech 
you, on behalf of our souls.  
Verse: By fire hast Thou tried us, * even as silver is tried by fire.  
O glorious new martyrs of Russia, when faith failed, ye strengthened it with your 
confession; when loved waxed cold, ye gave yourselves over to torment and death for 
the sake of your love for Christ; and when hope was shaken, ye made it steadfast by 
faith in Christ, Whom do ye entreat, that within us He strengthen faith, hope and 
love.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them 
out of all their tribulations.  
It is not men that save the Church; and accord with her enemies profiteth naught. 
Rather, the Church saveth men by the power of Christ, as your struggle hath shown. 
O invincible new martyrs of Russia, truly ye are the glory of the Church, for which do 
ye earnestly pray, that Christ make it steadfast and unshakable.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
O wondrous army of new spiritual athletes of Russia! Who is able to worthily 
glorify you? Truly blessed is the land which hath been watered by your blood; and its 
cities and villages are mystically hallowed, having received your precious remains, oft-
times without hymnody of the Church, and likewise, without honorable burial. Yet 
pray, O ye saints, for your country and for all who honor you.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same tone: 
Who can worthily praise thee, and call thee blessed as is meet, * O Maiden Bride of 
God, * for through thee redemption hath come into the world? * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto thee and say, * ‘Rejoice, thou who hast made Adam divine 
and brought together that which was separated. * Rejoice!, thou who hast enlightened 
mankind * by the radiant Resurrection of thy Son and our God; ** Wherefore we, the 
race of Christians, unceasingly magnify thee. 
After “Our Father ...,” the Troparion of the Resurrection;  
Glory..., the Troparion of the new martyrs, in Tone IV: 
O ye holy hierarchs, royal passion-bearers and pastors, * monks and laymen, * ye 
countless new martyrs and confessors, * men, women and children, * flowers of the 
spiritual meadow of Russia, * who blossomed forth wondrously in time of grievous 
persecutions, * bearing good fruit for Christ in your endurance: * entreat Him as the 
One Who hath planted you, * that He deliver His people from godless and evil men, 
* and that the Church of Russia be made steadfast through your blood and suffering, 
** unto the salvation of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS:  
“Blessed is the man ...,” the full Kathisma.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the Resurrection, and 6 for the New 
Martyrs, in Tone I:  
With fervent supplication, O brethren, let us now begin to chant hymns to the new 
favorites of God; for, cleansed through fearsome torments, they have been shown to 
be branches of the true vine of Christ, abundantly watered with the sweetness of 
grace, set forth before us in the fragrance of their holiness. And edified by their 
struggle, with compunction let us also offer unto-God the fruit of repentance.  
O ye mountains of Kiev which were blessed by the cross of the Apostle Andrew, 
praise ye the beginning of the dread baptism wherewith the land of Russia hath been 
baptized anew. For where grace shone forth upon the Russian people through water 
and the Spirit, unto the opening of the kingdom of God, there was it fitting for this 
renewal to begin, through the blood of the first slain among the Russian hierarchs, 
the namesake of the enlightener of the Russian land. For this new Vladimir, led forth 
from his vineyard through the gates of the sacred Lavra of the Caves, was vouchsafed 
the crown of Stephen, forgiving and blessing those who slew him, as a meek 
intercessor for our souls.  
Lamentation, and mournful song, and woe: lo! the scroll of Ezekiel which filled thy 
soul to satiety, O holy Tikhon our Patriarch! May thy voice be heard even now, 
saying: “O brethren, archpastors and pastors, summon thy children to the defense of 
the Orthodox Church!” And may they that destroy the churches of God hearken to 
thy fiery discourse: “If ye but call yourselves Christians, we anathematize you by the 
authority given us by God!” O dread and everlasting excommunication! Behold an 
anathema lifted by no one! Behold the boldness of the Patriarch!  
O our holy Tsar and passion-bearer Nicholas, O new and saintly Tsaritsa 
Alexandra, O child Alexis, heir to heavenly things, and royal maidens Olga, Tatiana, 
Maria and Anastasia: ye who were abandoned by the ungrateful, O holy band of 
seven, who through many humiliations found ascent to heaven, leading with you four 
fellow sufferers: pray with them to our supremely good God, that He vouchsafe the 
exceeding sinful people of Russia forgiveness, bring peace to the world, and save our 
souls.  
And these other Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Meek, yet steadfast, wast thou, O elect of the city of Peter, hieromartyr Benjamin, 
who wast condemned by new Copronymuses and betrayed by false pastors to an 
authority opposed to God. For then God revealed thee a fearless teacher. Behold, 
here is thy testament proclaimed from imprisonment:  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
“For the sake of the Church, let us not spare ourselves, and let us not betray the 
holy Church for our own sake!” And at the lawless tribunal thy discourse was 
amazing to all: ‘‘Ye offer me now death or life; but signing myself with the sign of the 
holy Cross, I say: Glory to Thee for all things, O Lord God!”  
O victims for God who were buried live, cast down into a well-like pit! First of all 
the passion-bearer Elizabeth, the merciful princess who strove for the things of 
heaven, finding the pearl of Orthodoxy in her new homeland, who in accordance 
with the Gospel forgave the slayer of her husband, and who pleased God with prayer 
and benevolence, yet was not spared by the godless! Pray also for us, ye holy princes! 
Pray for all, ye venerable passion-bearers Elizabeth and faithful Barbara! Hearken 
unto us, ye who were buried in the Garden of Gethsemane. Give ear to us, ye whose 
place of burial is unknown! Hear us, ye holy seven, received together into the 
mansions of heaven, and pray to God on our behalf!  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Your steadfast courage is the glory of the Church of Russia, O new passion-bearers 
and confessors, for ye are the disciples of Philip and Hermogenes, and the servants of 
the much-suffering Patriarch Tikhon, who gave you your name. Persecuted and slain, 
ye remained in tribulations with patience. And who can reckon the number of your 
torments and bitter deaths? Yet ye showed yourselves to be preachers to those with 
you in bondage, enlighteners of those who before were unbelievers, performers of the 
holy Mysteries. Great is your love for Christ, great is your faith! In all things ye have 
shown yourselves to be servants of God!  
Both now ..., the Dogmaticon of the tone.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (43:9-13)  
Thus saith the Lord: All the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be 
gathered out of them: who will declare these things? or who will declare to you things 
from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let 
them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith 
the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, 
and understand that I am He; before Me there was no other God, and after Me there 
shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have 
saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you: ye are my 
witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that 
can deliver out of My hands: I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the 
Lord God that redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.  
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (3:1-9)  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastened, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (4:7-15) 
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the grey hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood naught, neither laid they up this in their minds, 
that His grace and mercy is with His servants, and that He hath respect unto His 
chosen. 
 At the Litiya, this Sticheron, in Tone VIII: 
May the joyous angels of God summon us all, and may we rejoice; for, rejoicing 
over a single sinner who repenteth, they dance for joy over the multitude of new 
saints, the martyrs and confessors of the Church of Russia, who shone forth in their 
sufferings. Behold, the Tsar and those of his household, the Patriarch, holy hierarchs, 
priests and monks, and a multitude of people of every calling, tried by bondage and 
privations, by cruel and multifarious torments, and by death, which brought them to 
everlasting life. And for the sake of this their struggle, grace hath been given them to 
pray for us, for they are a royal priesthood, the hope of the renewal of our generation, 
the proclaimers of the mercy of Christ our Savior, Who hath called them to His own 
wondrous light.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same tone:  
O fervent helper, joy of the sorrowful, * thou who art the comforter of those * 
who in their hour of tribulation call upon thee, * O most holy Sovereign Lady 
Theotokos. * Look upon the destroyed temples of thy Son, * look upon the mockery 
* to which His humble servants have been subjected by the godless ones. * Hearken 
to the groans of thy servants, * and do thou thyself, with the holy passion-bearers, ** 
help and have mercy upon us.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection, and Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O holy and most humble priests and confessors, we see how during the dreadful 
time of persecutions ye were banished far from your homes. We see you starving, 
afflicted with scurvy, bereft of your comeliness, covered with bleeding sores, beaten 
and deprived of sleep by guardsmen, weeping over abandoned children and their 
defenseless mothers. And who can record all your names? Who can relate to the 
world all that ye have suffered? Yet God knoweth His elect who have preserved the 
pledge they had given, even unto death, therefore possessing the boldness to pray for 
us.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Theotokos, thou help of the helpless! Help even now the suffering people of the 
Russian land, who are in prison, torment or grievous circumstances: We beseech thee, 
O Sovereign Lady, with all the holy new martyrs and confessors of our generation: 
pray that thy servants be delivered from many tribulations.  
Troparion of the new martyrs, in Tone IV: 
O ye holy hierarchs, royal passion-bearers and pastors, * monks and laymen, * ye 
countless new martyrs and confessors, * men, women and children, * flowers of the 
spiritual meadow of Russia, * who blossomed forth wondrously in time of grievous 
persecutions, * bearing good fruit for Christ in your endurance: * entreat Him as the 
One Who hath planted you, * that He deliver His people from godless and evil men, 
* and that the Church of Russia be made steadfast through your blood and suffering, 
** unto the salvation of our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same tone:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS:  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Resurrection (Twice);  
Glory ..., Troparion of the new martyrs, in Tone IV: 
O ye holy hierarchs, royal passion-bearers and pastors, * monks and laymen, * ye 
countless new martyrs and confessors, * men, women and children, * flowers of the 
spiritual meadow of Russia, * who blossomed forth wondrously in time of grievous 
persecutions, * bearing good fruit for Christ in your endurance: * entreat Him as the 
One Who hath planted you, * that He deliver His people from godless and evil men, 
* and that the Church of Russia be made steadfast through your blood and suffering, 
** unto the salvation of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
Polyeleos, and this Magnification: We magnify you, O holy new martyrs and 
confessors of Russia, and we honor your honored sufferings which ye have 
endured for Christ.  
Selected Psalm Verse:  
A: Our God is refuge and strength. A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice) 
The assembly of the angels ...Then the little litany and its exclamation: “For blessed is 
Thy name ...”  
After the Polyeleos, the Hypacoi of the tone; 
 And the Sessional Hymn of the saints, in Tone I: 
Ye passed through the fire of torment and the water of tears, and the Lord hath led 
you forth into the rest of the saints, O new martyrs and confessors of Russia, 
intercessors who call upon God on behalf of those who understand and venerate 
your struggle. Glory to Him Who kneweth your volition beforehand! Glory to Him 
Who predestined you for the glory of heaven! Glory to Him Who through you 
granteth us great mercy!  
Another Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
In that ye loved God, O passion-bearers, all things whatsoever ye endured on earth 
were for your good, and as ones elect, ye passed on to the promised inheritance of 
everlasting blessings. Glory to Him Who hath given you strength amid grievous 
torments! Glory to Him Who hath crowned you! Glory to Him Who through you 
worketh salvation!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., in Tone III:  
Ye shone forth brightly in the firmament of the Church, O holy hierarchs of the 
foremost sees of Russia: most holy Patriarch Tikhon, who with fire pronounced the 
anathema against the enemies of the Cross; Vladimir, holy hierarch of Kiev, first fruit 
most ripe of the new harvest of the garden of Russia; and Benjamin, beacon of 
Petrograd, who from childhood desired to suffer for Christ, which he did. And with 
you all the passion-bearers are also glorified. And with compunction we say to you 
thus: Rejoice, mighty and steadfast council! Be ye bold intercessors for all that pray to 
you!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Awed by the beauty of thy virginity * and the exceeding radiance of thy purity, * 
Gabriel called out unto thee, O Theotokos: * What worthy hymn of praise can I offer 
unto thee? * And what shall I name thee? * I am in doubt and stand in awe. * 
Wherefore as commanded, I cry to thee: ** Rejoice, O Full of Grace. 
Then the hymns of ascent, Prokeimenon, and Gospel of the Resurrection.  
N.B. If the temple be dedicated to the holy new martyrs:  
Prokeimenon, Tone IV: For Thy sake, O Lord, * are we slain all the day long.  
Verse: We are counted as sheep for the slaughter.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §36 (10:16-22)  
The Lord spake unto His disciples saying: Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the 
midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware 
of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues; And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a 
testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end 
shall be saved. 
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
The new passion-bearers and confessors have been shown to be true witnesses to 
the Resurrection of Christ, and for them have we established this feast. How could 
they have borne their cross to the glory which was to be revealed to them, had they 
not known that they were undeserving of the suffering of this present age?  
Canon to the Resurrection, with 4 Troparia, and to the Theotokos, from the 
Oktoechos, with 2 Troparia. (If it be the Sunday of the Publican, or of the 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Prodigal, or Meat-fare, see the Chapter of Mark for January 30th.) Then the 
canon of the new martyrs, with 8 Troparia, in Tone VI: 
ODE I  
Irmos: He Who in ancient times * hid the pursuing tyrant beneath the waves 
of the sea, * is hidden beneath the earth by the children of those * whom once 
He saved. * But let us, like the children, sing unto the Lord, * for gloriously 
hath He been glorified. 
O Lord my God, help me humbly to hymn the glory of the new martyrs and 
confessors of Russia, to whom Thou hast lovingly thrown open the portals of heaven 
for their grievous suffering.  
O Lord our God, Who from of old hast given this glory to the martyrs, that their 
relics be scattered throughout the churches for our renewal: grant this glory also to 
the new passion-bearers, even if the places of their burial are unknown.  
O holy martyred Tsar Nicholas, thou who, though deprived of thine earthly 
kingdom, remained utterly faithful to the King of heaven amid thy tribulations: 
entreat Him that we also not be deprived of the comfort of His grace amid our 
misfortunes.  
O holy Patriarch Tikhon our father, rebuker of the children of disobedience, who 
from the hands of the hieromartyr Vladimir didst receive the wooden staff of the holy 
hierarch Peter the primate: seek out me who am a sheep lost in the mountains.  
Theotokion: In thy dormition thou didst not forsake the world, O Sovereign Lady, 
nor hast thou abandoned the Russian land, but hast been well-pleased to accept the 
praise rendered thee by the holy new passion-bearers.  
ODE III  
Irmos: When creation beheld Thee, * Who founded the whole earth upon the 
waters, * hanging on Golgotha, * it was seized with awe and cried aloud: * 
None is holy save Thee, O Lord! 
What manner of gift of discourse shall we offer unto you, O faithful witnesses of 
the Word, valiant passion-bearers and pastors, who were reckoned like lambs for the 
slaughter?  
It was fitting for thee, O Vladimir, first hierarch of the Church of Russia, namesake 
of the holy enlightener of Rus’, to initiate the glorious contest of struggle and 
sufferings. As thou dost precede the host of passion-bearers crowned by God, may 
the first crown of praise be bestowed upon thee.  
Amid the valorous array we behold thee, O sacred one, first hierarch of the city of 
St. Peter, holy hierarch Benjamin, beloved of thy flock as thy namesake, the patriarch 
of old, was beloved of Jacob.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Thou art shown to be first in the rank of the new martyred priests, O presbyter 
John, who first stood before the throne of God in America. For the Lord crowned 
thee with a martyr’s crown as the denouncer of the cruel godless ones in Tsarskoe 
Selo, as He did another John, the namesake of rapture, who was wondrous in 
manliness and word before the tormentors. With them, O all ye new martyred priests, 
grant us aid.  
Theotokion: O most merciful Mother, most pure Virgin, who suffered with thy 
Son and Savior: we know thee to be a solicitous comforter both of those of thy 
servants who have remained in the Russian land and those who are in the dispersion.  
Kontakion of the new martyrs, in Tone II:  
O ye new passion-bearers of Russia, * who by your confession finished the course 
of this earth, * receiving boldness through your sufferings: * beseech Christ Who 
strengthened you, that we also, * whenever the hour of trial find us, * may receive the 
gift of courage from God. * For ye are a model for us that venerate your struggle, * 
for neither tribulation, prison, nor death could separate you ** from the love of God.  
Ikos: When the days of the trial by fire of the Church of Russia began, and the 
Lord was not pleased to accept wholeburnt offerings and oblations from us, many 
hierarchs and priests did not confer with flesh and blood, but, understanding the will 
of the Lord, offered themselves up as an unblemished sacrifice. And following the 
eternal High Priest and Mediator of the new covenant, they entered into the holy of 
holies with their own blood, that the sins of the people might be washed clean. 
Glorious are your names, O valiant passion-bearers, for ye are a model for us that 
venerate your struggle, for neither tribulation, prison, nor death could separate you 
from the love of God.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Subject to the weaknesses of the flesh like us, in spirit ye attained the measure of 
the ancient fathers, O undaunted sacred confessors of Russia, who were banished to 
the ruined Monastery of Solovki and to other places of imprisonment. And while 
your sufferings abounded, consolation from the Lord mystically abounded likewise; 
and ye are now comforted by Him more clearly, having attained unto the unwaning 
day of the kingdom of Christ, wherein, we beseech you, cease. not to pray for the 
salvation of our souls.  
Glory ..., another Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
The priest Alexis, of peasant stock, like unto the elderly prophetess Anna, accepted 
death of his own will in the stead of a young pastor who was his fellow prisoner. And 
the priest Peter, whose name signifieth scepter, was shot in the mouth by one whom 
he exhorted. Glory to Him Who hath given many priests strength against the godless! 
Glory to Him Who hath also led deacons to be martyrs. Glory to Him Who giveth to 
such a twofold grace to pray for us!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Both now ..., of the coming forefeast, in the same tone:  
The new martyrs and confessors of our generation rejoice, meeting their Lord and 
Master, Whom once the holy elder Symeon met, saying to Him: “Now lettest Thou 
Thy servant depart, O Master!” Vouchsafe unto us also, O Lord, that at the hour of 
our passing from this transient life, we may be forgiven and may depart in peace, 
through the supplications of our most holy Sovereign Lady the Theotokos, and Thy 
favored ones who are now being hymned, and of all Thy saints.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Foreseeing Thy divine self-emptying upon the Cross, * Habakkuk, in 
amazement, cried out: * “Thou hast cut asunder the strength of the mighty, * 
O Good One, * and preached to those in Hades, * as the Almighty One.” 
The land defiled by the deeds of the godless is made blessed again by the 
sprinkling of your blood. And the waters of the seas and rivers have received the 
bodies of the drowned as a sacred treasure cast therein.  
O new hieromartyr, lamp of Tobolsk, namesake of Hermogenes of Moscow, thy 
whole life was like a flame which the river Tura could in no wise extinguish. For, 
drowned, thou didst ascend to thy Lord, and beaten on the mouth, thou didst pray 
silently until the end. And now thou dost also pray for us.  
Dreadful is the report concerning the torments of Andronicus, the holy archpastor 
of Perm, who, fearing not tortures, commanded his flock to take an oath against the 
godless authorities. And Basil, holy hierarch of Chernigov, with others sent by the 
Council of All Russia to investigate the slaying of Andronicus, then suffered with 
him; and they all stand together before the Lord.  
The archpastor Metrophanes, who glorified the holy hierarch Joseph who of old 
had been slain by the minions of Razin, was cruelly slain at night; and his fellow 
bishop Leontius also suffered at that time. Thus, these three hieromartyrs of 
Astrakhan are illumined by the one light of the kingdom of heaven.  
Theotokion: O, how many of the holy icons are now taken from the faithful by the 
hands of the godless; but the image of the good comfortress is not uprooted from the 
hearts of those who pray, the confessors of the holy Faith who had been bereft of 
freedom.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thy Theophany, O Christ, the Unwaning Light, * that mercifully came 
to pass for us, * Isaiah, keeping watch, beheld out of the night, * and he cried 
aloud: * “The dead shall arise, and those in the tombs * shall be raised up, * 
and all that are born of earth shall rejoice.” 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
O Peter and Cyril, great and steadfast confessors, different of character, yet one in 
faith and firmness of spirit: though ye were exiled, yet ye retained the full right of the 
Church; and now, as heirs to the kingdom of heaven, entreat God that we also be 
maintained in this right.  
O Agathangelus, angel of the Church of Yaroslavl, rejoice with your friends; for 
your withdrawal from your brethren, who did not stand for the rights of the Church, 
was a joy to the angels. Ye did not wish to subject yourselves to impiety. Wherefore, 
ye went forth to tribulations and privations, bearing your cross.  
O Arsenius, glory of Novgorod the Great, thou wast one of the pillars of the 
Council of All Russia: thy soul was exceeding sorrowful when thou wast in prison; 
but soon thy faith shone forth in triumph, vanquishing all temptations, and thou wast 
shown to be steadfast to the end.  
The life of Damascene moveth all that read it to compunction: how he was on the 
islands of Solovki, in Kazakhstan and the parts of Siberia, ascending his own 
Golgotha; how on the bank of a river, tormented by the cold of Siberia, he gave his 
own outer riassa to a priest who had none. And he himself surrendered his spirit to 
God on a raft in the cold of winter, one of those of whom the whole world is not 
worthy.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, guide of steadfast and holy hierarchs: instruct us 
to think, to say and to do only that which is right, emulating the confessors who took 
no pity on themselves.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Jonah was caught but not held * in the belly of the whale; * for, bearing 
the image of Thee, * Who hast suffered and wast given to burial, * he came 
forth from the sea-monster as from a bridal chamber, * and he called out to the 
watch: * “O ye who keep guard falsely and in vain, * ye have forsaken your 
own mercy.” 
Ye have been shown to be heirs of Eden most sweet, O new martyrs of the land of 
Russia. Blessed are ye, for your weeping hath found solace in heaven. Ye thirsted after 
righteousness, wherewith ye are now abundantly satisfied in the kingdom of heaven.  
In cruel imprisonment, the daughters of the Tsar and their holy mother drew forth 
consolation for themselves from the writings of the holy Fathers, and thus betrothed 
themselves unto Christ. And Alexis their brother was borne in the arms of the 
martyred Tsar to the place where those royal persons and their four fellow sufferers 
were slain. And they intercede before God for our race as animate sacrifices.  
The mine-shaft became a tomb wherein the venerable martyr Elizabeth ended her 
royal path with Barbara, her sister in the Lord, and six others. There the Princes 
bound the wounds of the passion-bearer Prince John. O ye holy martyrs of 
Alapaevsk, tend now the wounds of our souls!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
O favored ones of God who have suffered in these dreadful days in the Russian 
land, ye renowned and unknown alike, monks, nuns, men, women and children: 
strengthen us by your prayers, that the way may be made straight before the Lord for 
us who commemorate your struggle.  
Theotokion: Many times hath our race been delivered from misfortunes and evils 
by people praying before thy holy icons, O Mother of God. O Sovereign Lady, in 
thine intercession unite all of our supplications for deliverance from most cruel 
tribulations.  
After ODE VI, the Kontakion of the Resurrection, and its Ikos.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: O ineffable wonder! * He Who delivered the holy Children from the 
fiery furnace * boweth His head and asketh baptism of a servant, * cleansing 
those who cry: * O God our Redeemer, blessed art Thou!  
The Church of Russia is glorified by your sufferings, O new martyrs, our kinsmen 
of every rank and estate, who have been slain for Christ by the godless, for the 
salvation of us who chant: O God, our Redeemer, blessed art Thou!  
Having the Cross as a spear and faith in Christ as a shield, ye accepted sufferings 
and death, for the salvation of us that chant: O God our Redeemer, blessed art Thou!  
The holy hierarch John of Riga, set afire by the minions of Satan whose conscience 
burned with fire, denounced their malice; likewise did they that were hanged: Tikhon, 
holy hierarch of Voronezh, the priest Alexis of Simferopol, and others wickedly slain. 
And they cry out to Thee, O Lord, in Thy radiant kingdom: O God our Redeemer, 
blessed art Thou!  
Like pure birds into the nest of heaven doth the Lord receive the passion-bearing 
children who were slain, and who sing unceasingly in paradise: O God our Redeemer, 
blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O faithful Redeemer of thy people, implore thy Son and God to 
deliver thy home again from tribulations more cruel than all that have been before, 
that, saved by thee, with compunction we may say to Him: O God our Redeemer, 
blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII 
Irmos Be ye astonished and afraid, O heaven, * and let the foundations of the 
earth be shaken; * for lo! He Who of old burnt the sacrifice of the righteous 
man with water * doth clothe Himself in water! * Him do ye children bless, ye 
priests hymn, * ye people exalt supremely throughout all ages!  
Ye washed your robes in your blood and made them white in the Blood of the 
Lamb Who was slaughtered for man’s sake: Whom ye children bless; ye priests, 
hymn; ye people, supremely exalt throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Let us bless the holy hierarchs Joseph of Petrograd, the zealot of the purity of the 
mystical Church, who in his banishment had his bed with unclean swine. And let us 
hearken to him say to the ear of our heart: by your sufferings and faithfulness 
supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
Glorious in their life and end were the holy hierarchs Seraphim of Uglich, and 
Maximus of Serpukhov, who was a physician blessed for a secret episcopate. Of great 
difficulty is the ministry of the persecuted Church, and they that undertook it have 
come to stand before Christ God, interceding with Him on behalf of His flock, ever 
glorifying Him throughout the ages.  
O tireless chorus chanting heavenly praise, right victorious new martyrs of the 
Russian land: now ye ever commune with the ever-living Lamb for Whom ye were 
slain by the godless. Him do ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, supremely 
exalt throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O most holy Sovereign Lady, save and free thy servants who suffer 
even to this day; and grant them endurance and strength. On thee do we set all our 
hope, and we ever bless thee and supremely exalt thy Son and God throughout the 
ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Weep not for Me, O Mother, * beholding in the tomb the Son Whom 
thou hast conceived * without seed in the womb; * for I shall arise and shall be 
glorified, * and as God I shall exalt with glory * unceasing those that with faith 
and love magnify thee. 
O new passion-bearers, ye took up the struggle against the malice of the godless 
ones, holding up the Faith of Christ as a shield before the teaching of this world, and 
showing us an example of patience and endurance of evils as is meet.  
O, the steadfastness and valor of the host of Christian martyrs slain for Christ! 
They have adorned the Orthodox Church and given their blood in their land as the 
seed of the Faith. Let them be honored as is meet, together with all the saints.  
Let us all hear how the wondrous Lydia, though she wept, was steadfast in her 
sufferings, and moved Cyril to suffer with her. And he became a shield for her, but a 
sword for the bestial tormentors. And having recounted these things to the Church, 
Alexis also suffered. By the prayers of these three, O God, have mercy upon us!  
O ye saints whom we have remembered here, and ye countless multitude of those 
unknown, forgive the poverty of these words, that praises may be written more fitting 
for you. To reckon your number is not possible. By the prayers of all of you may we 
that honor you receive from the Lord and Master of our life grace and great mercy.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned Mother, even though thy great Church of the Caves 
hath been demolished by the wicked, wherein the hieromartyr Vladimir, when the day 
of his murder drew nigh, read the akathist hymn with great compunction, praying to 
thee, yet thy mercy for repentant people doth not fail forever. Rejoice, O joyous one, 
who in thy dormition hath not forsaken us!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Exapostilarion: 
O holy new martyrs and confessors, exceeding luminous is your struggle for us in 
these days which are darkened by faintheartedness: for faith hath failed because of the 
multitude of our iniquities; love hath grown cold, and hope hath been shaken; but 
your valor hath enlightened the Church of Russia with new glory.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the Resurrection, and 4 of the new martyrs, in Tone VI: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Our sacred and great Council of All Russia * heard the dreadful report * of the 
persecutions raised against the Church of God, * and its members all joined in one 
conciliar thought * and appointed prayers for the persecuted and the slain, * 
confessors and martyrs, * on the day of the suffering and death of the holy hierarch 
Vladimir. * He that today doth reason with the Church doth know: * the days of the 
repose of those who have departed unto God amidst torment * are called the days of 
their birth. * Wherefore, let us celebrate this feast ** as the nativity of the new 
passion-bearers of Russia.  
The first who were slain for the Faith and the Church * were the first commemo-
rated by name by the most holy Patriarch. * O holy hierarch Vladimir, lamb of the 
Caves, * and ye senior priests: * John, Peter, Joseph and Paul, * ye venerable martyrs 
Gervasius and Gerasimus, * and ye hieromartyrs Paul, Peter and Theodore, * Michael, 
Vladimir and Constantine, * Deacon John, Novice Anthony and custodian John, * 
with the vast multitude of clergy, monks and laity, * whose names are all known unto 
the Lord: ** entreat Him, that we be saved.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
He greatly delight.  
O ye that with the holy Tsar were oppressed every day, * O holy and passion-
bearing Tsaritsa and royal virgins, * holy royal son, * and faithful fellow sufferers who 
served you: * unjustly were ye all slain at night; * and utterly consumed as victims for 
justice, * ye are become mediators for us, * like incense well-pleasing unto God. * Ye 
also who on the next day were buried alive amid dreadful torments * with the holy 
Princess and her friend. * And now, O Tsar Nicholas, * leading all that suffered with 
thee, * O holy lamenter of our generation, ** like a new Job, entreat the Lord to 
forgive all.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Condemned by the godless, * the priests of God whom the holy Patriarch had 
blessed * to undergo torments and death for Christ * refused to ask for mercy. * And 
when on the morrow they were led to execution, * the guardsmen were at a loss how 
to drive back the faithful who came forth to meet them. * For the people kissed the 

--- PAGE 16 ---
doomed ones condemned to death * and their sacred hands and the hem of their 
garments, * and some chanted triumphantly: * Christ is risen from the dead, * 
trampling down death by death! ** O Lord, through the prayers of these 
hieromartyrs, have mercy upon us!  
Glory ..., the Evangelical Sticheron (or the Doxasticon from the Triodion).  
[N.B.]: If the temple be dedicated to the new martyrs:  
Glory ..., the Sticheron of the martyrs, in Tone I:  
It is not men that save the Church; and accord with her enemies profiteth naught. 
Rather, the Church saveth men by the power of Christ, as your struggle hath shown. 
O invincible new martyrs of Russia, truly ye are the glory of the Church, for which do 
ye earnestly pray, that Christ make it steadfast and unshakable.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: Most blessed art thou ... 

--- PAGE 17 ---
AT LITURGY:  
At the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia from the Oktoechos, and 4 for the new martyrs:  
Remember, O Lord, the dreadful torments which the new passion-bearers suffered 
for Thee, who have now sprouted forth from our race; and accept their entreaties for 
our salvation.  
O righteous Judge, Thou hast opened the kingdom of heaven unto the confessors 
of the Church of Russia. Hearken, O Lord, unto their righteousness, and give ear 
unto their supplication for the salvation of our souls.  
Glory: O most divine Trinity, return us from our captivity! We know that sin hath 
increased in our land more than ever before; yet grace also hath shone forth in the 
struggle of the new saints, who also entreat Thee, O thrice-holy God, for the 
salvation of our souls!  
Now and ever: Gather the dispersed; raise up the faint-hearted; call those who have 
renounced the holy Faith and convert them, O gracious and most pure Virgin Mary, 
entreating Christ the Savior, with the holy new martyrs and confessors, for the 
forgiveness and salvation of our souls.  
After the Entrance, the Troparia in accordance with the prescription of the 
Typicon concerning when the services of saints whose services are of vigil rank 
fall on Sunday. If the feast of the new martyrs falleth within the period of the 
Triodion, see the Service of Mark for January 30th. For those who conduct 
Reader’s services the following is presented: 
Troparion of the new martyrs, in Tone IV: 
O ye holy hierarchs, royal passion-bearers and pastors, * monks and laymen, * ye 
countless new martyrs and confessors, * men, women and children, * flowers of the 
spiritual meadow of Russia, * who blossomed forth wondrously in time of grievous 
persecutions, * bearing good fruit for Christ in your endurance: * entreat Him as the 
One Who hath planted you, * that He deliver His people from godless and evil men, 
* and that the Church of Russia be made steadfast through your blood and suffering, 
** unto the salvation of our souls.  
Kontakion of the new martyrs, in Tone II:  
O ye new passion-bearers of Russia, * who by your confession finished the course 
of this earth, * receiving boldness through your sufferings: * beseech Christ Who 
strengthened you, that we also, * whenever the hour of trial find us, * may receive the 
gift of courage from God. * For ye are a model for us that venerate your struggle, * 
for neither tribulation, prison, nor death could separate you ** from the love of God.  
Prokeimenon of the Tone (or the Triodion), and of the martyrs:  
In Tone VII: For Thy sake, O Lord, * we are slain all the day long.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
FOR THE NEW MARTYRS: ROMANS, §99 (8:28-39)  
Brethren: We know that all things work together for good to them that love God, 
to them who are the called according to his purpose. For whom he did foreknow, he 
also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the 
firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also 
called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he 
also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be 
against us? He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall 
he not with him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of 
God’s elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that 
died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also 
maketh intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall 
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As 
it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for 
the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that 
loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor 
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Nor height, nor 
depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, 
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
Alleluia of the tone, and of the Martyrs, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and 
the Lord heard them, and He delivered them out of all their afflictions.  
 
GOSPEL FOR THE MARTYRS: LUKE §106 (21:12-20)  
The Lord spake unto His disciples saying: But before all these, they shall lay their 
hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into 
prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name’s sake. And it shall turn 
to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what 
ye shall answer: For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries 
shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and 
brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to 
death. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake. But there shall not an hair 
of your head perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.  
 
Communion verse I: Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the 
highest.  
Communion verse II: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
AT THE SERVICES OF SUPPLICATION  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: For Thy sake, O Lord, * are we slain all the day 
lung.  
Verse: We are counted as sheep for the slaughter.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, §36 (10:16-22). 
The Lord spake unto His disciples saying: Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the 
midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware 
of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues; And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a 
testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end 
shall be saved. 
PRAYER TO THE NEW MARTYRS AND CONFESSORS OF RUSSIA:  
O holy new martyrs and confessors of the Church of Russia: hearken unto our 
earnest entreaty. We know that certain of you, while yet in your youth, when hearing 
of the. passion-bearers of old, pondered in your hearts how wonderful and virtuous it 
would be to emulate those whom neither torment nor death could separate from the 
love of God. Well was it for you that ye followed after the faith and patience of them 
of whom ye had heard and whom ye loved. And inasmuch as it is possible that at any 
moment unexpected trials might befall us, beg ye for us of the Lord the gift of 
courage, which is so useful in man’s life. O ye that in your sufferings have sanctified 
all the ends of the Russian land, as intercessors in general for us all, entreat God, that 
He deliver the Russian land from that yoke which is more onerous than any other, 
and that we and all of our generation be forgiven the sin which weigheth down the 
Russian nation: the slaying of the Tsar, the anointed of God, and of the holy 
hierarchs, the pastors and their flock, and the sufferings of the confessors, and the 
defilement of our holy things. Let schisms be abolished in our Church, that all may be 
one; and may the Lord lead forth His husbandmen for the harvest, that is, may the 
Church never lack good shepherds who will illumine with the light of the true Faith 
the vast multitude of those who are ignorant of the Faith or that have turned away 
from the Faith. Unworthy are we of the mercy of God, yet for the sake of your 
sufferings may Christ our God take pity on us and have mercy on us that call upon 
your aid. Contrition for our sins and thanksgiving for all things let us ever offer up to 
Him, our Savior, together with His Father and the Holy Spirit, glorifying Him unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. 
