--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 21st DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER MAXIMUS THE GREEK  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Having renounced all earthly mindedness, * O father Maximus, * and having en-
lightened thy reason with the Cross, * thou didst choose Christ, * the most precious 
Pearl, Who showed thee to be most wise, * enmeshing thee in the net of faith. * 
Wherefore, we beseech thee, O father Maximus: * Entreat Christ God, that He make 
us wise ** and save our souls. (Twice)  
When thou didst undertake thy journey * for the sake of Christ, O most wise 
Maximus, * quenching all the burning arrows of the evil one * by the Cross, thou 
didst acquire the grace of the Holy Spirit, * Who glorified thee as a wonderworker, * 
revealing cures and healings. * Wherefore, we pray to thee, O father Maximus: * 
Entreat Christ God, that He grant us His grace ** and save our souls. (Twice) 
When thou didst translate many books from Greek * into the Slavonic language, O 
venerable Maximus, * elucidating the Faith by the Cross, * thou wast slandered and 
condemned to prison, * where, though lacking ink, thou didst compose a canon to 
the Holy Spirit, * inscribing it upon the wall with coal. * Wherefore, we pray to thee, 
O much-suffering Maximus: * Entreat Christ God, that He strengthen us ** and save 
our souls. (Twice)  
When thou didst enlighten * the false darkness of despondency, O holy Maximus, 
* making thy soul steadfast by the Cross, * thou didst acknowledge God to be the 
true Father, * Who called thee to the kingdom of heaven as a son, * making thee 
whiter than snow. * Wherefore, we pray to thee, O father Maximus: * Entreat Christ 
God, that He grant us peace ** and save our souls. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone I:  
On the day of thy departure unto God, O venerable Maximus, our hearts are filled 
with pity, and wellsprings of tears stream forth, for the multitude of monks who 
crown thee, their father, teacher and instructor, with words of compunction, and the 
whole land of Russia, have been eternally adorned with thy sweet discourses.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Let us hymn the whole world’s glory, * who sprang forth from mankind and who 
gave birth to the Master, * the Portal of heaven, Mary the Virgin, * the hymn of the 
Bodiless Powers and adornment of the faithful; * for she hath been revealed as the 
Heaven and Temple of the Godhead. * By destroying the middle wall, she hath 

--- PAGE 2 ---
brought forth peace, * and opened wide the Kingdom. * Therefore, holding fast to 
her as a firm confirmation of the faith, * we have as our champion the Lord born 
from her. * Take courage therefore, take courage, O ye people of God; ** for as the 
Invincible one he shall conquer our adversaries. 
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand; for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth; and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 

--- PAGE 3 ---
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds; that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
Aposticha Stichera, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Thou art the dwelling-place of * the Holy Spirit * and an heir to the kingdom, O 
Maximus. * Pray thou on behalf of us ** who honor thy holy memory.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Thy tomb hath been shown * to be an abode of grace, * O most wise Maximus. * 
Pray on our behalf ** who have recourse unto thee.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Let thy new home, * the holy Lavra, * together with Athos, * praise thy struggles 
and sufferings ** with hymns.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
O habitation of the Holy Trinity, * adorn thyself and exult, * for thou art 
possessed of a lamp which, * though under a bushel, ** shineth more brightly than 
the sun.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in the same tone and melody:  
Thou art the dwelling-place of God, * the palace of the King * and the heavenly * 
bridal-chamber, * O most pure one, ** our hope and protection.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Made brilliant by the radiance of the Spirit, * through divine wisdom thou wast 
vouchsafed the intelligence of rhetors, * enlightening with the light of piety the hearts 
of men, which were darkened by ignorance; * and thou wast shown to be a most 
splendid lamp of Orthodoxy, O venerable Maximus. * Wherefore, having become a 
stranger and wanderer * in thy zeal for Him Who seeth all things, * thou wast a so-
journer in the land of Russia, * suffering imprisonment and incarceration at the 
command of the sovereign; * yet thou art crowned by the right hand of the Most 
High, * and workest most glorious miracles. ** Be thou also a true mediator for us 
who honor thy holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the saint, in Tone VIII:  
Made brilliant by the radiance of the Spirit, * through divine wisdom thou wast 
vouchsafed the intelligence of rhetors, * enlightening with the light of piety the hearts 
of men, which were darkened by ignorance; * and thou wast shown to be a most 
splendid lamp of Orthodoxy, O venerable Maximus. * Wherefore, having become a 
stranger and wanderer * in thy zeal for Him Who seeth all things, * thou wast a so-
journer in the land of Russia, * suffering imprisonment and incarceration at the 
command of the sovereign; * yet thou art crowned by the right hand of the Most 
High, * and workest most glorious miracles. ** Be thou also a true mediator for us 
who honor thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
As thou didst zealously elucidate the difficult words of the divine proclamation and 
didst denounce ungodly writings, thy mind soared aloft to God on high, and thou 
didst endure bonds of suffering through the assaults of thine adversaries, O venerable 
Maximus; wherefore, thou wast shown to be a model, and yet more the boast, of 
monks.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion VIII: 
O thou who dost surpass the divine incorporeal ranks in incomparable purity, I 
entreat thee, O all-hymned one: Cleanse my defiled soul of iniquitous thoughts, that I 
may worthily glorify thee.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Unto thy noetic desire thou gavest wings to fly unto God, and with all thy soul 
thou didst follow His summons without turning back, making thine abode in the end 
at the Monastery of Saint Sergius; and dwelling there like an angel, thou didst become 
for many a path to salvation. Wherefore, the Lord hath glorified thee, enriching thee 
with miracles, for which cause we all cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Maximus our father, 
thou miraculous boast of the Monastery of the Trinity!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
I beseech thee, O most pure one: Disdain me not who am cruelly foundering in 
the vile mire of sin, but do thou rid me of its stench by the fragrant myrrh of thy 
supplications, and enlighten all the darkness of my soul with the most sweet light of 
thy divine love.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We bless thee, O venerable father Maximus, 
and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the 
angels.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
As a most radiant star, which having made its transit from the lands of the East 
and arrived in the North, illumineth the gloom, enlighteneth all the dismal darkness, 
so wast thou, O venerable Maximus, when, at the request of the sovereign, thou didst 
become a stranger and traveler from Athos to Great Russia, and wast shown to be 
wondrous and excellent in the correction of the divine writings. Thou didst suffer the 
assaults of trials inflicted by the lying foe, yet for thy sufferings and incarceration in 
prison didst receive from God on high the gift of working miracles. And now we 
beseech thee: Ever entreat Christ, that He grant peace to the whole world and great 
mercy to our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV:  
O Lady, have pity upon me who flee unto thee, and deliver me, who am ashamed, 
from the violence of the evil minions of the wicked serpent who, like adders, wound 
my soul. For even though I am an unprofitable servant, O Lady, I still place my hope 
in thee.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, §43 (11:27-30)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of my Father: 
and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, 
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and 
learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 
For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
When thou didst endure sufferings, O venerable Maximus, weeping and lamenting 
thou didst plead with the holy hierarch Macarius: “Grant that I may see the Holy 
Mountain, which prayeth on behalf of the whole world!” But, shedding tears, he cried 
out to thee: “O Maximus, I perceive thee to be an innocent man of prayer, and I am 
moved to contrition; but I am unable to help thee. Yet earnestly pray to God and His 
Mother, O venerable father, that we may be saved, unharmed by the snares of the 
enemy.”  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, with the Irmos; 
and that of venerable Maximus, with 8 Troparia, in Tone I: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us all ye people sing a song of victory, * unto Him that freed Israel 
from the bitter bondage of Pharaoh * and led them dry-shod through the 
depths of the sea, * for He hath been glorified.  
What tongue, O most wondrous father, is able to fittingly hymn thy great 
corrections, sublime teachings, thy martyric torment, and longsuffering in prison and 
bonds?  
How shall we hymn and what shall we call thee, O all-valiant father? Prophet, in 
that thou didst easily foretell what we have come to know and recognize? Apostle, for 
by the teachings of divine Scriptures thou didst make steadfast the Christian Faith, 
which was shaken by contrary winds? Or teacher, for truly thou art an instructor no 
less than or inferior to the great ecumenical teachers.  
Hymning and worshiping the holy Paraclete in prison, thou wast commanded by 
an angel to compose a canon to the Holy Spirit, Who had enlightened thee to compile 
sacred and godly inspired books. 
Theotokion: O ye people, let us all hymn the holiness and glory of the most pure 
and all-hymned Mother of God, who is higher than the heavens and all the noetic 
hosts, and who bore Emmanuel in her most pure womb, for she is holy and most 
glorious!  
Katavasia: The Irmoi of the feast of the Meeting of the Lord. 
ODE III  
Irmos: Establish me, O Christ, upon the immovable rock of Thy 
commandments, * and enlighten me with the light of Thy countenance; * for 
there is none more holy than Thee, * O Lover of mankind.  
In thy heart, O venerable Maximus, thou didst establish divine fear, having hated 
all carnal lusts; wherefore, as a simple child thou wast made wise, and thou didst 
hasten after the Lord.  
Having the Lord Jesus Christ as thy confirmation, O venerable Maximus, to thy 
kinsmen, friends and acquaintance thou didst become likened to an unknown 
stranger, homeless, bereft of a homeland and possessions, and misunderstood.  
Anchoring thyself to the commandments of the Lord, through the bitterness of 
imprisonment thou didst become as one dead for many days; yet thou didst make 
supplication on behalf of those of evil ways, saying: “O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the 
living God, hold not to account for this sin those who slander me with lies!”  
Theotokion: Render us steadfast for thy praise, O Virgin, and preserve us from 
harm and every wile of the evil one; and grant that we may stand at the right hand of 
thine only-begotten Son, to Whom is due all glory, honor and worship, throughout 
the ages of ages.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Having adorned thy mind with the divinely inspired Scriptures, with watchful 
prayer and God-pleasing vigils thou didst confirm thy heart in the Lord by keeping 
His salvific commandments; wherefore, Athos and the people of Russia continually 
glorify thee, and the Monastery of Vatopedi crieth out with us: O most wise 
Maximus, forsake us not who pray to thee!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
I beseech thee, O most pure Mother of God Most High, only consolation of my 
soul, my hope, delight, divine protection, light, help and salvation: By thy 
supplications grant that I may hear the voice which calleth the blessed to enter the 
bridal-chamber of the Master.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Great is the mystery of Thy dispensation, O Christ! * For when 
Habbakuk foresaw it from on high in a divine vision, * he cried unto Thee: * 
Thou hast come forth for the salvation of Thy people, * O Lover of mankind.  
No secret false heretical teaching could stay concealed from thee, O venerable 
Maximus; but through the grace of the adored Holy Spirit they were all revealed by 
thee.  
Thou not only showed thyself to be a true and faithful champion of the mystical 
dogmas of the Orthodox Faith, but thou wast shown to be a finely honed scythe, 
mowing down all heresies under the heavens.  
Thou wast truly shown to be an initiate of the mysteries of the Holy Spirit, a lover 
of the life of heaven and a teacher of the law of the Lord, O most wise Maximus.  
Theotokion: Moses, who beheld God, was taught a great mystery when he saw the 
unburnt bush: the bush being the weakness of human nature, and the fire being the 
divinity of the only-begotten Son of God; for our God is a Fire which doth consume 
our sins, as the divine apostle said.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Out of the night we wake at dawn * and praise Thee, O Christ, * Who 
art co-beginningless with the Father, * and art the Savior of our souls; * grant 
peace unto the world, O Lover of mankind.  
The moon at night and the sun during the day enlighten and gladden all visible 
creation; and the manner of life and the wisdom of the saints enlighten and gladden 
the souls of all men who desire to be saved and come to a knowledge of the Truth. 
Thus also do the writings of the venerable Maximus the Greek sound forth like 
divinely blown trumpets.  
When thou didst pray at night in thy prison cell, by the providence of the divine 
and supremely good Trinity the angel of the Lord heard thee, and said: “O elder, 
thanks to these torments thou shalt avoid eternal torments.”  

--- PAGE 8 ---
At night, O most wise Maximus, thou didst sing like a sweet-voiced and melodious 
nightingale: “Be not grieved, neither sorrowful nor downcast, O my beloved soul! 
Thou sufferest unjustly, yet thy reward will be great in the heavens!”  
Theotokion: Rising at dawn, we hymn thee, O Virgin, the daughter of the King, 
arrayed in golden vesture inlaid with many colors, the ladder which Jacob beheld, the 
mountain whereon God was well-pleased to dwell, for the Lord made His abode 
there to the end.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Thou didst save the Prophet from the sea monster, O Lover of 
mankind; * lead me up also I pray, * from the abyss of transgressions.  
Like a prophet thou didst rebuke the people, O venerable Maximus, leading them 
to repentance, saying: “We have strayed, we have strayed from the straight and 
unerring way of life which holy monks lead, and have mindlessly run after high-
minded secular honors.”  
Thou wast shown to be a prophet of repentance, O venerable Maximus, acquiring 
watchfulness of soul through divine discourse, and leading up from the pit of the 
passions those darkened by sins.  
The writings of the prophets, which were uttered in secret, hast thou made clear, 
O most wise Maximus; wherefore, mankind doth ever pay great heed to thee.  
Theotokion: The prophets proclaimed thee beforehand, O pure Virgin, the 
apostles preached thee, all the saints called thee blessed, and we cry out with the 
archangel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee!”  
Kontakion, in Tone VIII:  
With divinely inspired writings and the preaching of theology * thou didst 
denounce the vanity of the heretics, O most noetically rich father; * and establishing 
them firmly in Orthodoxy, thou didst guide them to the path of true understanding. * 
And like a divinely melodious harp thou didst delight and unceasingly gladden * the 
minds of those who hearkened unto thee, O right wondrous Maximus. * Wherefore, 
we beseech thee: Entreat Christ God, that He send down forgiveness of sins ** upon 
those who with faith hymn thy most holy repose, O Maximus our father.  
Ikos: How can we hymn the all-valiant Maximus, the namesake of greatness, the 
beauteous crown of the venerable, the firm rule of athletes, the true humiliation of 
heretics, the unshakable pillar of the Church, the renowned instructor of the virginal 
and champion of honorable marriage, the most wise sage of philosophers, the ever-
flowing fountain of Truth, the boast of monks and true adornment of all mankind? 
Wherefore, we beseech thee, O right wondrous Maximus: Entreat Christ God, that 
He send down forgiveness of sins upon those who with faith hymn thy most holy 
dormition, O Maximus our father.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: When the harmonious music summoned the people together * to offer 
adoration to the image, * the Children of David, singing a hymn * from the 
odes of Sion like their fathers, * destroyed the wicked command of the tyrant * 
and transformed the flame into dew as they sang: * O supremely exalted God 
of our fathers, blessed art Thou.  
Giving utterance to a hymn of thanksgiving to the image of the providence of the 
most holy Trinity, O venerable Maximus, thou didst summon us all to bless in purity 
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the one God in three Hypostases.  
O holy Maximus, thou wast shown to be a model of the endurance of evils, and of 
patience and prayer, and even more of hope, for God the Judge is just, mighty and 
long-suffering, and He will render unto each according to his deeds.  
Thou didst acquire the image of sublime theology, O most wise Maximus, of the 
dogmas of the divine apostles and fathers, poured forth by the Holy Comforter, 
whereby thou dost instruct us by thy divinely wise writings.  
Theotokion: The image of thy most pure birthgiving is ineffable and 
incomprehensible, O Virgin Mother; for without being consumed thou didst become 
the dwelling-place of the pre-eternal and only-begotten Son of the Father.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Praise ye the Lord Who preserved The Children * in the fiery flame of 
the furnace, * descending unto them in the guise of an Angel, * and supremely 
exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Thou didst desire the radiance of the flame of the divine Paraclete, O venerable 
Maximus; wherefore, with the most sweet light of doctrine and the fire of miracles 
thou dost drive away all the darkness of the demons.  
Thou didst teach mankind to flee the flame of Gehenna, O venerable Maximus, 
calling upon them to embody the commandments of Christ in deed, and to shun 
malice, fornication, lying, pride, falsehood and the unjust theft of things which belong 
to others.  
As with flame thou didst burn up the ungodliness of heretics, O most wise 
Maximus, making brilliant the divine confession of the unblemished Christian Faith.  
Theotokion: Moses the God-seer beheld thee in the fiery flame of the burning 
bush, O most pure Virgin, and proclaimed thy seedless birthgiving; wherefore, free us 
from the carnal passions.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: O Thou radiant lamp, * the Mother of God, * most wondrous glory, * 
who art more exalted than all creation, * thee do we magnify with hymns.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
We know thee to be a radiant lamp, an excellent mind and an unshakable pillar; 
and we proclaim thee to be an instructor of monks and a denouncer of heresies.  
Thou didst shine forth brilliantly from the noonday lands, O venerable Maximus, 
exhibiting a radiant manner of life, dispelling the darkness of evil, and shining forth in 
goodly-pleasing supplications.  
As a torch of divine understanding, thou didst attain unto the knowledge of the 
Son of God, becoming a perfect man according to the measure of the stature of 
Christ; wherefore, we cry out to thee: Truly blessed art thou in all things, through the 
struggles, thou didst receive glory and grace from on high!  
Theotokion: In hymns we magnify thee out loud, O thou who art a radiant beacon 
amid the night of the passions, a shelter of goodness, and an unassailable defense 
against the assaults of the enemy.  
Exapostilarion in Tone III: 
The light of divine discourses and precepts shone upon the venerable Maximus; 
wherefore, he hath been shown forth to us as a secondary luminary and a most 
excellent intellect.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III:  
The angelic hosts were stricken with awe, beholding the Virgin holding in her arms 
the Light which shone forth from Light, and who hath given birth in purity, for the 
Light hath shone forth upon us from the Virgin’s womb.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
Thou didst deny thyself, O venerable Maximus, and didst show thyself to be a 
stranger to the whole life of vanity, delighting neither in sweet foods, nor in glory, nor 
in any possession, nor yet in friendship with the powerful. But having renounced all 
these things at once, by the acquisition of thy way of life; thou art ever filled with 
gladness, finding delight in noetically nurturing thyself on the beauty of God, in tears 
and in solitude, in prayers, vigils, and the reading of sacred books. (Twice)  
The venerable Maximus, like the fathers of old, did not hesitate to struggle, at 
times against the heretics by his discourses, at times strengthening the faithful to 
stand unshakably in the Faith; for neither the cruel storms of obstacles, nor 
imprisonment, nor yet the chains which fettered his body, were able to shake this 
father, but rather, they enlightened his soul.  
The most wise Maximus, a much-suffering cherub on earth, doth lay before us a 
divine banquet on the day of his commemoration. Let us eagerly make haste, O ye 
who love the feasts of the Church, to this all-sweet and abundant spring, which doth 
quench the burning thirst caused by the false teachings of the heretics, and which 
doth bear souls up to the mansions on high.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., in Tone III:  
Save us by Thy grace, O most holy Trinity, Creator and Sustainer of all; and keep 
us pure who in this present life worship Thee in Orthodox manner. And in the age to 
come grant that we may be enrolled in the divine choir of Thine elect, where there is 
the pure sound of those who keep festival and a voice of ineffable gladness.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Without seed didst thou conceive by the Holy Spirit; * and glorifying thee, we 
hymn thee: ** Rejoice, most holy Virgin!  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the venerable one.  
In thy heart, O venerable Maximus, thou didst establish divine fear, having hated 
all carnal lusts; wherefore, as a simple child thou wast made wise, and thou didst 
hasten after the Lord. (Twice) 
Having the Lord Jesus Christ as thy confirmation, O venerable Maximus, to thy 
kinsmen, friends and acquaintance thou didst become likened to an unknown 
stranger, homeless, bereft of a homeland and possessions, and misunderstood.  
Anchoring thyself to the commandments of the Lord, through the bitterness of 
imprisonment thou didst become as one dead for many days; yet thou didst make 
supplication on behalf of those of evil ways, saying: “O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the 
living God, hold not to account for this sin those who slander me with lies!”  
Like a prophet thou didst rebuke the people, O venerable Maximus, leading them 
to repentance, saying: “We have strayed, we have strayed from the straight and 
unerring way of life which holy monks lead, and have mindlessly run after high-
minded secular honors.” 
Thou wast shown to be a prophet of repentance, O venerable Maximus, acquiring 
watchfulness of soul through divine discourse, and leading up from the pit of the 
passions those darkened by sins.  
The writings of the prophets, which were uttered in secret, hast thou made clear, 
O most wise Maximus; wherefore, mankind doth ever pay great heed to thee.  
Theotokion: The prophets proclaimed thee beforehand, O pure Virgin, the 
apostles preached thee, all the saints called thee blessed, and we cry out with the 
archangel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee!”  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Made brilliant by the radiance of the Spirit, * through divine wisdom thou wast 
vouchsafed the intelligence of rhetors, * enlightening with the light of piety the hearts 
of men, which were darkened by ignorance; * and thou wast shown to be a most 
splendid lamp of Orthodoxy, O venerable Maximus. * Wherefore, having become a 
stranger and wanderer * in thy zeal for Him Who seeth all things, * thou wast a so-
journer in the land of Russia, * suffering imprisonment and incarceration at the 
command of the sovereign; * yet thou art crowned by the right hand of the Most 
High, * and workest most glorious miracles. ** Be thou also a true mediator for us 
who honor thy holy memory with love.  
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Kontakion, in Tone VIII:  
With divinely inspired writings and the preaching of theology * thou didst 
denounce the vanity of the heretics, O most noetically rich father; * and establishing 
them firmly in Orthodoxy, thou didst guide them to the path of true understanding. * 
And like a divinely melodious harp thou didst delight and unceasingly gladden * the 
minds of those who hearkened unto thee, O right wondrous Maximus. * Wherefore, 
we beseech thee: Entreat Christ God, that He send down forgiveness of sins ** upon 
those who with faith hymn thy most holy dormition, O Maximus our father.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, § 213 (GAL. 5:22-6:2)  
Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who 
are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the 
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking 
one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who 
are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (6:17-23)  
At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre 
and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who 
were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude 
sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He 
lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the 
kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye 
that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when 
they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your 
name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, 
behold, your reward is great in heaven.”  
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
