--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 21st DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR AGNES OF ROME 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O wondrous solemnity! * O sacred memorial! * The martyred maiden, * adorned 
with virginity and arrayed in light, * is received into the eternal habitations, * her 
garments whitened on earth in the blood of the Lamb; * wherefore, we join chorus 
with the angels, * and clapping our hands, cry aloud: ** Rejoice, O Agnes, thou bride 
of Christ!  
O most glorious passion-bearer, * thou unblemished ewe-lamb, * thou meek 
turtledove, * thou chosen vessel of purity: * how can we hymn thy sufferings, * how 
can we venerate thy wounds? * Yet, marveling at thy struggles, * we cry out to thee 
with compunction: ** Rejoice, O Agnes, thou bride of God!  
O Peter, preeminent among the apostles, * who wast a good shepherd for thy 
lambs and sheep, * in the city which received thy blood * greet the unblemished ewe-
lamb who now cometh forth from there, * and hath been slaughtered for Christ * and 
with her own blood doth purify it of pagan defilements. * Wherefore, lead her quickly 
unto the Lamb, to be wedded, * while the angels and the choirs of the righteous chant 
in hymnody: ** Rejoice, O Agnes, thou bride of Christ!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
The Christians hid thy suffering body beneath the earth, O immaculate Agnes, 
shedding bitter tears, persecuted and oppressed by the heathen; but the maiden 
Emerentiana, obtaining boldness, denounced their mindlessness, and, slain by 
stoning, she died a martyr’s death at thy grave. And when thou didst appear with her 
in joy and glory undimmed, all the faithful ineffably rejoiced in thee. And now, having 
recourse to the precious shrine of thy relics, we fervently cry to thee: Forget us not, O 
Agnes, in thy most bold supplications!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
A sword passed through thy heart, * O most pure Sovereign Lady, * as Symeon 
said, * when thou didst behold Him Whom, at His ineffable utterance, * shone forth 
from thee * lifted up upon the Cross, * as One condemned from among the 
iniquitous, * given vinegar and gall to drink, * His side pierced, His feet and hands 
nailed; * and, lamenting, thou didst exclaim, * crying out maternally: “What is this 
new mystery, ** O my Child most sweet?”  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and, Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Having set all her hope upon Christ the Savior, Agnes, the immaculate maiden, 
was cast into a den of sin; yet was she arrayed in divine light as in a robe. She 
confounded the mindless and ungodly, raising from the dead one struck down by the 
wrath of God, and then was unjustly beheaded with a sword, that, standing in heaven 
before the life-creating Trinity, she might intercede for the world and pray with 
boldness on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Thy pure Virgin Mother was wounded within, as Symeon foretold, beholding the 
most iniquitous of people nailing Thee unjustly to the Tree.  
Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Thy ewe-lamb Agnes, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “ Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos; and 
that of the martyr, with 4 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “The unblemished ewe-lamb is slain for 
God”, the composition of Valeria, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: There is none likened unto Thee, * O exceedingly glorious Lord; * for 
by Thy mighty arm * Thou didst deliver the people * whom Thou hast ac-
quired, O Lover of mankind.  
Having followed the Lamb of God on earth, O most glorious martyred maiden, 
standing before Him in heaven thou dost rejoice.  
Come thou from Rome, O immaculate bride of Christ! For, lo! the heavenly 
Father extendeth His arms to thee, and the divine Bridegroom calleth thee to the 
bridal-chamber of light.  
Having preserved the incorrupt purity of virginity, and been slain unjustly for 
God, O martyr, with the virgins on high thou chantest a hymn of victory, emulating 
the holy Miriam.  
Theotokion: He Who beforehand portrayed the image of thy birthgiving in the 
Red Sea hath been formed of thee, O most pure one, in His extreme love for 
mankind.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Preserving the flower of chastity, O Agnes, thou didst flourish like a sweet-
smelling lily amid the thorns of sin; and delighting now in the divine garden of 
paradise, thou art resplendent in never-fading glory.  
The alabaster phial of thy virginal body, which held the priceless myrrh of thy soul, 
did the ungodly mindlessly destroy; but thy soul, like myrrh, hath been poured out 
upon the faithful in the perfume of sweet spiritual fragrance.  
Not with sword, nor with opposition and power, but with faith free from doubt 
and with great purity didst thou vanquish the impious, O Agnes, thou meek turtle-
dove.  
Theotokion: O Mary Theotokos, thou only daughter of a barren woman, the 
righteous Anna, O only Mother of the Beginningless One: make supplication for us 
who entreat thee.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
The triumph of the great purity of virginity is witnessed today; for, lo! when they 
shamelessly stripped her of her garments, the holy maiden was clothed in light instead 
of raiment; he who intended evil against her was smitten by the wrath of God, and all 
were filled with fear. But she prayeth with boldness on behalf of our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
O Theotokos, thou didst mystically contain within thy womb the Unapproachable 
and Uncircumscribable One Who is consubstantial with the beginningless Father. 
And, magnifying thy birthgiving in the world, we acknowledge the Godhead of the 
Trinity to be One and Unconfused. Wherefore, we cry out to thee with thanksgiving: 
Rejoice, O joyous one!  
 Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure unwedded Mother, O Christ, * upon seeing Thee 
hanging dead upon the Cross, * said, weeping maternally: * “How hath the iniquitous 
and thankless council of the Jews * repaid Thy many and great wonders, O my Son, * 
Thou Who filled them with Thy gifts? ** I hymn Thy divine condescension!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: This is our God, Who hath become incarnate of the Virgin * and hath 
deified our nature! * Hymning Him, let us cry aloud: * Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
He who devised evil against thee was struck dead in an instant; yet thou, O 
innocent lamb, didst raise him from the dead by thy supplication, crying: Glory to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Having loved the heavenly Father more than thine earthly father, and choosing the 
Church of Christ as thy mother, thou didst wed thyself to Christ, the Son of God, O 
most glorious passion-bearer.  
O divinely elect child of Rome, thy native city ever hath recourse with love to the 
shrine of thy relics; and throughout all the earth, from noonday even unto the 
midnight lands, Christians send up prayers to thee. 
Theotokion: God hath come forth from Theman, the Holy One from thee, the 
mountain overshadowed and densely wooded, O all-immaculate and blessed one; 
wherefore, all the earth is full of thy glory, O Theotokos.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Having acquired the chosen people by Thy blood, O Lord, * do Thou 
grant us peace, * preserving Thy flock in oneness of mind.  
A divine light which miraculously shone forth suddenly concealed thee from the 
eyes of the shameless, O right victorious virgin martyr, as the angels watched thy 
sufferings.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
With the hair of thy head thou didst cover thy virginal nakedness, O Agnes; and by 
thine intercession protect me, who am stripped naked of every good deed, from the 
assaults of the enemy.  
O unblemished ewe-lamb of the flock of Christ, when the cruel wolves beset thee, 
thou didst flee to the good Shepherd Who now feedeth thee in the everlasting 
pastures.  
Theotokion: Thou didst reveal the Light to the world, O Virgin Theotokos; for 
ungodliness hath ceased, and those who live on earth have learned righteousness. For 
by thee have we been taught to cry aloud: O Lord our God, grant us peace, for Thou 
hast given us all things!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: For three days O Christ, Jonah lay within the sea monster, * prefiguring 
Thee, the Immortal One, * for Thou didst willingly lay dead for three days * in 
the heart of the earth.  
Those who worshiped Christ, Who sojourned through the Sabbath in the bosom 
of the earth, hid themselves underground out of fear of the heathen; and with them, 
like Jonah from the belly of the sea monster, thou didst send forth thy supplications, 
O Agnes.  
We fervently bow down before thy shrine and lovingly venerate thine icon; we 
marvel at thy purity, praise thy faith, and honor thy dormition, O virgin martyr.  
Rescue us from the temptations and tribulations which surround us, and deliver us 
from the sorrows which beset us, O thou who didst gladly bow thy head beneath the 
sword, O most joyous martyred maiden.  
Theotokion: Who can describe the sorrows of thy heart, O Sovereign Lady, when 
thy Son and God spent three days in the heart of the earth? Wherefore, thou dost 
suffer fervently with men, changing their sorrows into joy.  
Kontakion, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Finding thy holy relics to be an ever-flowing well-spring * of healing for our 
afflicted souls and bodies, * O holy martyr, all of us, the faithful, cry out to thee in 
thanksgiving: * O most blessed Agnes, * thou innocent and unblemished ewe-lamb of 
the flock of Christ * the Chief Shepherd, ** pray thou unceasingly, that our souls be 
saved!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Blessed art Thou, O supremely exalted God of our fathers, * O only 
begotten Son and beginningless Word, * Who didst exist in the beginning * 
with the Father and the Spirit.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having made thine immaculate body a temple of the Holy Spirit, thou didst 
commit thine innocent soul into the hands of God, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O 
supremely exalted God of our fathers!  
Having betrothed thyself to God, thou didst reject an earthly bridegroom; and, 
passing unharmed through the fire of trials, O Agnes, thou didst cry aloud: Blessed 
art Thou, O supremely exalted God of our fathers!  
Loving Christ exceedingly, thou dost quickly render aid to all who honor thy 
memory and chant in thanksgiving for thee: Blessed art Thou, O supremely exalted 
God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Shadrach and his friends prefigured the glory of thy perpetual 
virginity, O most pure one: they glorified God and have taught us to chant: Blessed 
art Thou, O supremely exalted God of our fathers!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Christ Who dost bear all things in His unapproachable glory, * 
bedewed The venerable children in the midst of the flame, * who cried aloud 
unto Him: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
O meek turtle-dove, O innocent lamb, when thou didst offer thyself as a sacrifice 
unto God, thou didst cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Having joined the martyric tribe of Abel, O Agnes, standing on the sea of glass 
before the Lamb of God, thou dost chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
A heavenly swallow heralding the spiritual springtime, thou didst soar aloft from 
the winter of sin to the land of Eden, where thou dost ever chant: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: If thou hadst not been shown to be worthy to become the Mother of 
the Almighty, God would not have appeared to mankind; and celebrating thee, O 
Theotokos, we cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: With hymns do we magnify thee, O most glorious Bride, * and all-holy 
Theotokos, * who hast given birth to the Creator of all things, * visible and 
invisible.  
As many things as are lovely, glorious and desirable dost thou now enjoy, O 
martyr. Before the throne of the Almighty remember us who magnify thee.  
Deprive us not of thy confident intercession, O passion-bearing virgin; for with 
fervor we fall down before thy shrine, crying out with our hearts and mouths: 
Remember us who magnify thee with love! 
 Behold, O martyred maidens Agnes and Emerentiana, ye have passed over from 
sorrows to things which are full of joy, and from sorrows to things which are 
profitable; and we who do battle on earth are in need of your aid, which do thou 
render quickly unto us who magnify you with love.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: Show us thine ineffable tender compassion, O thou who hast 
revealed to the world the invisible God and Savior; for, lo! confessing our weakness, 
we cry out unceasingly: Save those who magnify thee, O Theotokos!  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III:  
Great is the wonder! An innocent lamb hath driven away cruel wolves! A meek 
dove hath slain a hawk! Soft wax hath destroyed tempered steel! Drops of heavenly 
dew have quenched the fire of Gehenna! Weakness hath proved mightier than 
strength, and purity hath mocked the council of the sin-loving and iniquitous! For a 
David hath again slain Goliath, and the power of God hath been most gloriously 
revealed in a martyred maiden. Wherefore, we cry out to Christ: Through the 
supplications of the holy Agnes, O Savior, save Thou our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Thee do we sinners have as our aid O most pure Virgin. By thy maternal 
supplications render thou thy Son reconciled with us.  
 
AT LITURGY 
Troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV: 
Thy ewe-lamb Agnes, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “ Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone II:  
Finding thy holy relics to be an ever-flowing well-spring * of healing for our 
afflicted souls and bodies, * O holy martyr, all of us, the faithful, cry out to thee in 
thanksgiving: * O most blessed Agnes, * thou innocent and unblemished ewe-lamb of 
the flock of Christ * the Chief Shepherd, ** pray thou unceasingly, that our souls be 
saved!  
 
