--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 21st DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR & 
OF THE HOLY MARTYR NEOPHYTUS  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS EUGENE, CANDIUS, VALERIAN & 
AQUILA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
O venerable Maximus, * thou didst preach Him Who, in His tender compassion, * 
became a man in His good pleasure, * Who is known as having two wills and 
activities; * and didst thereby stop the gaping mouths * of the abominable ones * 
who, by the temptation of the devil, * the author of evil, ** worship Him as having a 
single will and activity.  
With the cords of thy doctrines, O father Maximus, * thou didst strangle Pyrrhus, 
the evil-minded trifler, * and enduring persecution and tribulations, * O ever-
memorable one, * thou wast cruelly wounded, * by the cutting off of thy tongue, * 
and the severing of thy divine hand, * which ever stretched forth to God, ** and 
writing with which thou didst compose exalted words.  
O blessed one, thy tongue was holy, * sharpened by the Spirit * like the pen of a 
scribe, * inscribing the law of the divine virtues * with comely letters of grace * upon 
the tablets of our hearts * and imparting by thy doctrine * the incarnation for 
mankind, in two essences, ** of Him Who desired to appear in a single Hypostasis.  
And 3 Stichera of the martyr Neophytus, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O most glorious wonder! * The dove which came from on high * conversed with 
the martyr Neophytus * in human speech, * revealing him as resplendent in the 
angelic life * for which he suffered mightily, though but a youth. * O the godly works 
of the martyr tortured in five ways! * By his supplications save our souls, O Christ, ** 
as Thou art compassionate.  
O most glorious wonder! * Neophytus of perfect wisdom, from earliest infancy * 
performeth miracles through the activity of the Spirit: * by his entreaties he caused 
water to pour forth from a rock, * and raised up the dead woman, whose offspring he 
was. * O the godly works of the martyr * tortured in five ways! * By his supplications 
save our souls, O Christ, ** as Thou art compassionate.  
O most glorious wonder! * the thrice-blessed Neophytus who suffered for Christ, 
* put to fright the enemy with his excellent visions, * quenched the fire when cast 
therein, * and showed savage beasts to be terrified. * O the invincible might * 
wherein the athlete * hath caused all to marvel! ** By his supplications save us, O 
God!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
O venerable father, word of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth. 
Wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, destroying 
hordes of the demons, and attaining unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou 
didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ, ask peace for our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: 
 Spec. Mel. In Tone VI: “Having set all aside ...”:  
When, of old, the unblemished ewe-lamb and immaculate Sovereign Lady, * 
beheld her Lamb * upon the tree of the Cross, * she exclaimed maternally, and 
marveling cried aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new and most 
strange sight I see? * How hath the thankless synagogue * betrayed Thee to the judg-
ment-seat of Pilate * and condemned Thee to death, * Who art the Life of all? * Yet 
do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, ** O Word!”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
We honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks, * O Maximus our father; 
* for by thy steps we have truly learned to walk aright. * Blessed art thou who, serving 
Christ, * didst denounce the power of the enemy, * O converser with the angels, * 
companion of the venerable * and the righteous. ** With them beseech the Lord, that 
our souls find mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
“What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O Master? * How is it 
that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the Tree and diest, * 
granting life unto all?” * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon seeing God and 
man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the Cross.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
O instructor of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, * beacon of all the world, 
divinely inspired adornment of monastics: * O most wise Maximus, by thy doctrines 
thou hast enlightened all. ** O harp of the Spirit, entreat Christ God, that our souls 
be saved.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the martyr Neophytus, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, O Lord, * Thy martyr Neophytus received an imperishable 
crown from Thee, our God. * For, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the 
tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications 
save Thou our souls!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion in Tone IV.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT COMPLINE  
Canon of the martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the four victorious martyrs”, 
in Tone II: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Traversing dryshod the impassible, peculiar path in the sea, * Israel the 
chosen cried aloud: * Let us chant unto the Lord, * for He hath been glorified!  
Illumined with the radiance of the grace of the threefold Sun, O glorious martyrs, 
enlighten those who hymn your most honored memory, delivering them from 
sufferings and evil circumstances.  
Enlightened by the all-holy Spirit, O wise and glorious martyrs, having left behind 
the tempest of the world, ye withdrew into the mountains, and, training for the divine 
contest, ye finished it splendidly.  
Made steadfast by the might of the Creator and His omnipotent power, O godly 
martyrs, ye showed yourselves to be unmoved by the manifold storms which assailed 
you during your tortures, and trampled all the power of the enemy underfoot.  
Theotokion: Vouchsafe that, through thine intercessions, I may be deemed worthy 
to receive divine mercy, O blessed Lady who gavest birth in the flesh to the 
exceedingly merciful Word, Who is readily placated and accepteth those who have 
recourse unto Him.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
Wounded by the love of the Master, ye endured multifarious tortures; for, 
scourged savagely with thongs of hide and cruelly burned all over by fire, ye remained 
unshaken, O spiritual athletes.  
Strengthened by the power of the Lord, ye went forth to do battle with the enemy 
and cast him down, O spiritual athletes, crying out to Christ: Thou art our God, and 
there is none righteous save Thee, O Lord!  
Dancing with the angels in the highest, and united with the assemblies of the 
martyrs, with them pray that, those who honor you may be delivered from all 
tribulation and evil circumstance, O divine martyrs.  
Theotokion: Together we bless thee, O all-hymned one, through whom the never-
waning Light hath ineffably shone forth upon us; and we cry aloud: Save thy servants 
from all oppression, for thou art the helper of the faithful!  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE IV  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.  
Chanting piously, let us honor the boldness of Eugene, the valor of Aquila and the 
endurance of Candius, likewise honoring with them the might of Valerian.  
The tyrant, held fast in savagery, commanded that they beat thee without mercy, 
who wast being torn asunder by ropes, O Eugene, and lacerate thee with an iron 
implement, and burn thy body with torches.  
The mindless tyrant, intent upon breaking your steadfastness with tortures, 
subjected you to torments yet more bitter, O wise martyrs; but by the grace of Christ 
the Creator of all, ye put him to shame.  
Theotokion: As thou art the only help of the faithful, O most blessed Theotokos, 
from all tribulations deliver thy servants who with fervor call thee blessed and have 
recourse to thy divine protection.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
Truly showing forth a martyr’s patience, thou didst adamantly stand firm, O 
martyr Eugene, enduring bitter torments and crying out to the Creator with 
thanksgiving: We know none other God than Thee!  
By thy most sacred supplications to the Creator thou didst commit the gods of the 
idolaters to oblivion, O martyr Eugene; and didst endure multifarious tortures, thy 
whole body pitilessly beaten with staves.  
Theotokion: Deliver us from all harm, O all-holy Virgin; for thou art the 
intercessor for us who cry out to thy divine Offspring: We know none other God 
than Thee!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: From within the sea monster Jonah cried unto the Lord: * “Lead me up 
from the abyss of Hades, I pray Thee; * for with a voice of praise as to my 
Redeemer, * in the spirit of truth * I offer myself to Thee.”  
Stretched out upon a tree and lacerated with iron implements, their shoulders 
mercilessly cut by scourges and burned with fire through the wrath of judge, the right 
victorious martyrs rejoiced.  
O glorious Eugene, stretched out upon a tree, thou didst endure the burning thy 
body with torches, and salt poured mercilessly into thy wounds through the cruelty of 
the iniquitous tyrant.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: May we who have recourse to thy protection be delivered from every 
attack and sorrow, O divinely joyous one, for we ever piously glorify thee as the all-
immaculate Mother of God.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Resplendent with beauty, the four steadfast martyrs have illumined as with rays of 
light, the four ends of the earth with their martyric sufferings and power; and among 
them the great Eugene doth shine forth most splendidly.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
With splendid struggles thou didst array thyself against falsehood, O Eugene, and, 
becoming a victor through thy godly stance, thou hast found the reward of thy labors 
and chantest with the angels: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having the Cross of Christ as a divine weapon, O athletes, together ye brought to 
naught the host of the devil and the efforts of the torturers, receiving crowns of 
victory from the life-bearing right hand of God, the Judge of the contest.  
In thy purity of mind thou wast not shaken by the assaults of tortures, O Eugene, 
but, beaten continually with staves, thou didst most excellently cut off the heads of 
thine invisible opponents and foes with the opposition of thy sufferings.  
Theotokion: Behold, as thou didst foretell, O all-pure one, all of us, the 
generations of mankind, call thee blessed, as is meet, and fittingly glorify thee; for 
thou hast given birth to the Word Who with the Father is co-beginningless, that, 
incarnate of thee, He might save mankind.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Valerian, and with him the glorious Aquila and the godly Eugene, together with 
Candius, the valiant athlete, opposed every evil devising of the persecutors.  
Now hath dawned the divinely radiant memorial of the wondrous athletes 
Valerian, Eugene, Candius and the godly Aquila, which we celebrate with joy and 
love.  
Shining radiantly upon us with beams of splendor, the yearly commemoration hath 
dawned of the athletes of Christ, the godly Aquila, with Candius, Eugene and 
Valerian.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: In latter years, O pure Virgin who knewest not wedlock, the Son, 
Who is equally everlasting and beginningless with the Father, issued forth from thee 
to save us. Him do thou never cease to entreat, moving Him to have mercy upon us.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Thou didst defeat the assault of the tyrants, most gloriously passing over to God 
after many torments, receiving the honors of victory as a valiant warrior, a great 
champion, a chosen soldier of Christ, O most excellent Eugene.  
Having joined the angels’ choirs, the assemblies of the martyrs and the ranks of 
the righteous, O martyrs, with them pray now that we who hymn you be given 
cleansing of our sins and deliverance from all tribulations.  
O divinely wise Eugene, all-glorious martyr Aquila, Valerian, and your fellow ath-
lete Candius, earnestly entreat the supremely good Christ on behalf of us who piously 
celebrate your splendid memorial.  
Theotokion: The multitudes of the angels and all the generations of mortals most 
joyously call thee blessed, O all-holy Virgin; for thou hast given birth to the Savior, 
our Creator, Master and God. Him do thou entreat on our behalf.  
Stichera of the martyrs, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
With hymns, O ye faithful, let us truly praise the divine warriors and athletes of 
Christ: the wise Eugene and Valerian, the glorious athlete Candius, together with 
Aquila, blessing them with faith as ones who suffered strangely, that they may rescue 
us from torment at the hour of condemnation.  
O martyred athlete of Christ, thy body shot through with arrows, thou wast 
grievously broken by the wrath of the tyrant, mercilessly scorched with fire, beaten, 
burned with torches, thy wounds rubbed with salt and vinegar, Yet thou didst endure 
all these for the sake of thy Lord, O blessed martyr Eugene.  
Having the law of salvation manifest within thy heart, thou didst withdraw from 
the world, O martyr, and taking thyself to the mountains, didst train thyself for the 
divine contest which thou didst truly joyously finish, even enduring the breaking of 
thy whole body and most cruel torching with fire, O blessed martyr Valerian.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II: 
All creation doth cry unto thee: * “Rejoice! Rejoice, O all-holy Virgin! * Rejoice, 
thou scepter of David! * Rejoice, thou who gavest rise to the mystical Grape! * 
Rejoice, O portal of heaven and bush unburnt! * Rejoice, thou light of the universe! * 
Rejoice, joy of all! * Rejoice, rejoice, thou aid of those who flee to thy help in purity, 
** O all-immaculate one!”  

--- PAGE 7 ---
 Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding her Lamb led of His own will to the slaughter 
as a man, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud weeping: * “Dost Thou now 
hasten to leave childless, * the one who gave Thee birth, O Christ? * What is this that 
Thou hast done, O Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine extreme 
goodness * which passeth understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of mankind!”  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia; and two for the saints, each 
with 4 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “Let the most magnificent 
Maximus be glorified!”, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII 
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
O divine Maximus, from thy tongue flowing with sweet honey let fall all the grace 
of the Spirit upon me.  
Thou didst show thyself to be a fire burning up heresy, O blessed one; for with the 
zeal of the Spirit didst thou purge it.  
The irrational doctrine of monothelitism proceeded from a most wicked volition, 
O father, but it was denounced by thy words.  
Theotokion: The never-waning Light, Whose good pleasure it was to be born of 
thy womb, O Bride of God, is all desire and sweetness.  
Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise thee, O martyr, thou new 
garden of Christ”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us now sing. 
Knowing thee to be a new plant of Christ which blossomed forth in the garden of 
martyrdom and put forth the sacred fruits of piety, O all-blessed Neophytus, we 
hymn thee.  
Showing thyself to be a fulfiller of the words. of God from childhood, O blessed 
one, thou didst wisely choose the good portion and wast a guide for the lost.  
When thou wast a child, desiring to see Christ Who for our sake became a babe in 
the flesh through the Virgin, thou didst bring the understanding of children to 
perfection.  
Letting drop the sweetness of the knowledge of God from thy sacred mouth, O 
divinely wise one, with honor thou didst sweeten souls which had been bewitched by 
the malice of the alien.  
Theotokion: O thou who hast given birth to the Creator by nature, thou hast 
deified all of human nature. Wherefore, we confess thee to be the true Theotokos, O 
Virgin Bride of God.  
ODE III  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
By the shedding of his blood, the most magnificent Maximus truly showed himself 
to be a martyr and preacher of the pious Christian Faith.  
O blessed Maximus, through fasting thou didst become a pure dwelling-place of 
philosophy, meet for God.  
Thy tongue, O right honorable and all-blessed Maximus, thou nurturer of wisdom, 
poured forth a river of Christian doctrines.  
Theotokion: O Master, Thou showest us the path which leadeth to holiness. Thou 
didst make Thine abode in the womb of the all-holy one, in a most holy manner.  
Canon of the martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
The pure Spirit preserved thee unharmed who offered thyself wholly to the most 
compassionate Word, O glorious one.  
Seeing the resurrection from the dead of her who had given thee birth, which thou 
didst perform, O martyr, multitudes of the faithful hymned the Lord.  
The dove radiant with light called thee with a human voice to the paths of 
salvation, O Neophytus.  
Theotokion: Having received immortality for thy sake, O Mother of God, the 
human race ever offereth thee joyous hymnody.  
Kontakion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee the champion leader ...”: 
With fitting hymns, O ye faithful, let us honor the great Maximus, * the lover of 
the Trinity, who manifestly teacheth us the divine Faith, * to worship Christ in two 
natures, two wills and activities; ** and let us cry aloud: Rejoice, thou preacher of the 
Faith!  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
Having suffered persecution for the Faith, O father, thou didst drive out all 
heresy; and, thy hand and tongue cut off, O blessed Maximus, thou hast received 
from the hand of the Creator the magnificent crown of confession. Him do thou now 
unceasingly entreat, that our souls find mercy.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up upon the Cross ...”: 
Thou didst spring forth in the gardens of Christ’s athletes like a newly flourishing 
tree, O glorious Neophytus, and didst put forth the fruits of divine understanding, in 
which those who honor thee with faith find nourishment, O athlete right wise. By thy 
supplication ever save us, interceding before God.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O Theotokos, fleeing to thy divine protection after God, * I fall down and beseech 
thee: * Have mercy, O most pure one, * for my sins have submerged my being, * and 
trembling O Sovereign Lady, I fear the torments to come, * O pure one, entreat thy 
Son, ** that I may be delivered from them.  
 Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? * I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Mortals honor thee, and the ranks of heaven marvel; for through love of wisdom 
thou didst show thyself to be like one of the incorporeal ones, O father.  
Savage was the tyrant, yet thy patience was unshakable. Wherefore, thou hast been 
called blessed, but the most wicked one hath been cast out.  
Thy two blessed disciples suffered with thee, O Maximus, sharing thy sufferings. 
Wherefore, they have received equal honors.  
The Church of Christ, watered by the torrents of thy blood, O venerable one, hath 
given rise to the divine seed of the Tradition of the fathers through thy doctrine.  
Theotokion: Delivered from the debt of sin by thy birthgiving, O all-immaculate 
Bride of God, we send up joyous hymnody to thee.  
Canon of the martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
A great multitude, beholding thy blameless life and undaunted reason, turned to 
God, O glorious martyr.  
Guided by the divine Spirit, thou didst reach the mountain and didst make thine 
abode there, O blessed one; and, fed by an angel, thou didst show thyself to be a peer 
of the angels.  
In sympathy thou didst distribute what thou hadst to the poor, as is commanded, 
O blessed one, receiving the reward which passeth not away forever.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou hast given birth to Him Who, in the richness of 
His goodness, willingly impoverished Himself and hath taken pity on our lowliness.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE V  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Having acquired the knowledge of mortals and angels, Maximus hath justly been 
called a philosopher.  
With boundless desire for wisdom, thou didst show thyself to be a most excellent 
emulator of thy Christ, O glorious Maximus.  
Thou wast driven out by the rage of the tyrant, O blessed one, but didst find the 
consolation of Christ.  
Theotokion: Let those who did not acknowledge thee as the Theotokos never see 
the light of Him Who was born of thee, O most pure Mother of God.  
Canon of the martyr  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why has the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Replete with ineffable mysteries, O right wondrous martyr Neophytus, thou didst 
depart to the impending contest of the struggles of martyrdom, unafraid of tortures 
or death.  
By the ineffable providence of Him Who directed thy steps, the divine angels, 
presenting themselves to thee, drew thee from the mountain to thy contest, and, like 
another Moses, thy face was glorified with divine radiance. 
Having the living Word in thy heart, O all-glorious martyr Neophytus, with 
boldness of mind thou didst cry out to the persecutors: “I have been found, not 
because those who sought after me called me, but that I may denounce the weakness 
of your religion!”  
Theotokion: The divine mystery which was hidden from before all the ages hath 
been made known to the ends of the world through thee, O all-immaculate Virgin 
Maiden: the Son and Word of God Who became flesh and deified mankind.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Unceasingly dost thou offer entreaty unto God, O divinely wise one, that He 
deliver me from the passions, both spiritual and bodily, and from corruption.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
All the turgid springs of heresies hath been dried up, O glorious Maximus, stopped 
by the sound of thy tongue.  
Cleanse me, O Christ Who alone art good, and by the supplications of Thy 
venerable one pour forth upon my heart a well-spring of grace.  
Theotokion: Thy Son, O all-pure one, Who is comely beyond all the sons of 
mankind in the beauty of His divinity, became flesh for our sake.  
Canon of the martyr  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O my 
God. 
Lifted up upon a tree, O all-blessed one, thou wast mercilessly lacerated with iron 
implements; but thou didst break the stony heart of the deceiver who commanded 
thee to sacrifice to the gods and to deny our immortal God.  
Torn apart and dragged along, O martyr, thou didst utterly bind falsehood; by the 
power of the Spirit thou didst show the headlong rushing of the enemy to be of no 
effect and didst hasten to heaven, to stand, crowned, before the Lord.  
Enjoying the beauties of the Master, thou didst cleave unto Him, crying: “O Word 
of God, I willingly sacrifice myself for the sake of Thee Who sacrificed Thyself, most 
manifestly emulating Thine honored and divine sufferings!”  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou wast shown to be an exceedingly radiant throne of the 
King of heaven, wherein, of His own will, He rested in the flesh, taking away our 
great debt. And He hath sat mankind upon the throne of the Father, as was His good 
pleasure.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Fulfilling the dispensation concerning us ...”:  
The thrice-radiant light which abode in thy soul * showed thee forth as a chosen 
vessel, O all-blessed one, * revealing things divine even to the ends of the earth. * O 
blessed Maximus, * elucidating the understandings of things hard to comprehend * 
and preaching clearly unto all ** the transcendent and beginningless Trinity!  
Ikos: Having shown thyself to be an emulator of the sufferings of Christ, and 
having Him in thy soul, O most noetically rich and blessed one, thou didst make 
ascent in thy heart; wherefore He granted thee grace from heaven. Manfully opposing 
the tyrants, O wise one, and preaching the divine Trinity, one in essence, thou didst 
denounce the heretics who fought against God, and endure countless trials, O all-
praised and venerable one, including the cutting off of thy tongue and hand, yet didst 
not cease to speak with boldness and make steadfast the faithful with thy divine 
teachings, manifestly preaching to all peoples the transcendent and beginningless 
Trinity.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
ODE VII  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Thou didst speak of one essence, one will, one activity of the Trinity, and didst 
preach God incarnate in two natures, wills and activity. O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Thou didst not preach two separated wills, which is contrary to reason and lacking 
in substance, O father, but made a distinction in their essences. O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou! 
Holding thy divine words to be a pillar of Orthodoxy, O father, we worship One 
of the Trinity in two essences and wills. O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Bearing the little Babe Who is God from before the beginning of 
time and was incarnate of thee, O all-immaculate one, cease thou never to pray that 
He save those who chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the martyr  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
The most iniquitous one, making a furnace of living flame, enclosed thee in it for 
three days; yet thou wast in nowise consumed, O Neophytus, crying out: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Standing in the midst of the flame, O blessed martyr, thou didst most gloriously 
delight in hymnody, for the dew of God cooled thee, who cried out: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Every mind doth marvel at the magnificent miracle wrought in thee, O divinely 
wise one, for the fire in nowise burnt thee, but, pouring forth, consumed those who 
are inheritors of fire.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be more exalted than the angels, having 
given birth to the Angel of Great Counsel, O pure Theotokos, to Whom we all chant: 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Greatly loving Him Who doth exceedingly love the human race, thou didst take up 
thy cross and wast crucified with Him, O blessed one, chanting: Bless the Lord, ye 
works of the Lord!  
Withdrawing thyself from every deadly pleasure, O blessed one, thou didst make 
thyself a divine mirror of great clarity, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord!  
Receiving life-bearing radiance from the one Godhead in three Hypostases, thou 
wast shown to be a sun to those lost in darkness, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be the Mother and Bearer of God our Life, O 
Theotokos, we all bless thee with Orthodox faith, theologizing together concerning 
thy birthgiving and supremely exalting thee throughout the ages, O pure one.  
Canon of the martyr  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer, * ‘O ye Youths bless, O ye priests praise, * O ye people, supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages’. 
With thy young body and thy perfect intellect thou didst destroy the malice of the 
author of evil, O most comely plant who sprang forth in the courts of Him Who 
grew from the root of Jesse; and thou didst cry out to Him unceasingly: Ye priests, 
hymn; ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
In the arena the wild beasts were afraid of thee, like the sacred Daniel of old; for 
they recognized thee as a witness to the sufferings of Christ. Confessing Him, thou 
didst endure unbearable tortures, crying aloud: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
The immense lion, who had come to know thee on the mountain, O athlete 
Neophytus, was brought into the arena and during thine ordeal was loosed at thee, 
who wast bound; but, recognizing thee, he bowed down before thee with fear, 
constrained by shame and reverently shedding streams of tears with compunction, O 
blessed of God.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth to the new Babe Who was ineffably begotten 
of the Father before all creation, O all-pure one. Him do thou beseech, that He now 
restore me who am grown old through transgressions and cry aloud: Ye children, 
bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire of 
the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the salvation 
of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we magnify thee. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
O all-blessed and great Maximus, thy blood, like that of Abel, proclaimeth the di-
vinely inspired dogmas to the Church of Christ forever, with a clear voice.  
Thy hand was cut off, yet, by the finger of God, using as pen and ink thy severed 
tongue and thy precious blood, it doth inscribe the Orthodox Faith on the hearts of 
the faithful.  
Thou hast taken thy place before the throne of God with the martyrs whose zeal 
and faith thou didst share, O father. Make us to be thy Master’s own and render us 
thine emulators.  
Theotokion: Thou art our sword and bulwark, O Theotokos; thou art the help of 
those who have recourse to thee. Thee do we now appoint to make entreaty, that we 
may be delivered from our enemies.  
Canon of the martyr  
Irmos: All are awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * for the 
Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man in the 
Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure Theotokos. 
Thou didst stand before the cruel tormenters who would slay thee, O martyr 
Neophytus, like a lamb led voluntarily to the slaughter; and when thy side with 
pierced by a spear, thou didst receive a blessed end, O most valiant athlete of Christ.  
O blessed one, thou didst offer thyself to God as a sacrifice, as a comely lamb, as 
an honorable immolation, as an offering of the holy temple, as a pure holocaust, as a 
chosen bird, as a bullock of great value, as a new tree of paradise.  
Thy manner of suffering was likened to that of Him Who, in His goodness, 
suffered for our sake, O martyr, and through a similar spear thou didst truly achieve 
glory and dwellest now in the heavens, adorned with a diadem of victory and filled 
with incomparable joy.  
Theotokion: Bearing as with tongs the Ember of heaven Who consumeth all the 
tinder of my heart’s passions, O Theotokos, deliver me from the fire of Gehenna, I 
pray, that I may glorify thee, the hope of the faithful, O all-immaculate one.  
Exapostilarion in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “O Light immutable ...”:  
Thou didst show thyself to be the trumpet of wisdom, affrighting the legions of 
the adversary with thy brilliant tongue, O Maximus, thou light of monastics. 
Wherefore, nurtured by thy words, we acknowledge this to be most true.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Birthgiver of God, thou hast shone forth the Redeemer 
and Master as the noetic Light of gladness in the world. Wherefore pray thou, that He 
illumine the eyes of my soul with the light of divine radiance. 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
AT LITURGY  
At the beatitudes, 4 Troparia from ODE III to the venerable one, and 4 from 
ODE VI of the martyr 
By the shedding of his blood, the most magnificent Maximus truly showed himself 
to be a martyr and preacher of the pious Christian Faith. (Twice) 
O blessed Maximus, through fasting thou didst become a pure dwelling-place of 
philosophy, meet for God.  
Thy tongue, O right honorable and all-blessed Maximus, thou nurturer of wisdom, 
poured forth a river of Christian doctrines.  
Lifted up upon a tree, O all-blessed one, thou wast mercilessly lacerated with iron 
implements; but thou didst break the stony heart of the deceiver who commanded 
thee to sacrifice to the gods and to deny our immortal God.  
Torn apart and dragged along, O martyr, thou didst utterly bind falsehood; by the 
power of the Spirit thou didst show the headlong rushing of the enemy to be of no 
effect and didst hasten to heaven, to stand, crowned, before the Lord.  
Enjoying the beauties of the Master, thou didst cleave unto Him, crying: “O Word 
of God, I willingly sacrifice myself for the sake of Thee Who sacrificed Thyself, most 
manifestly emulating Thine honored and divine sufferings!”  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou wast shown to be an exceedingly radiant throne of the 
King of heaven, wherein, of His own will, He rested in the flesh, taking away our 
great debt. And He hath sat mankind upon the throne of the Father, as was His good 
pleasure.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
O instructor of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, * beacon of all the world, 
divinely inspired adornment of monastics: * O most wise Maximus, by thy doctrines 
thou hast enlightened all. ** O harp of the Spirit, entreat Christ God, that our souls 
be saved.  
Troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, O Lord, * Thy martyr Neophytus received an imperishable 
crown from Thee, our God. * For, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the 
tormenters and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications 
save Thou our souls!  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
The thrice-radiant light which abode in thy soul * showed thee forth as a chosen 
vessel, O all-blessed one, * revealing things divine even to the ends of the earth. * O 
blessed Maximus, * elucidating the understandings of things hard to comprehend * 
and preaching clearly unto all ** the transcendent and beginningless Trinity!  

--- PAGE 17 ---
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I might 
not be shaken.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 330 (11: 33-40)  
Brethren: All the saints who, through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought 
righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the 
violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, 
waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Women received their 
dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they 
might obtain a better resurrection: And others had trial of cruel mockings and 
scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were 
sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in 
sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; (Of whom the world 
was not worthy); they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves 
of the earth. And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not 
the promise: God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us 
should not be made perfect.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 64 (LK. 12: 8-12)  
The Lord said: Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man 
also confess before the angels of God: But he that denieth me before men shall be 
denied before the angels of God. And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son 
of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy 
Ghost it shall not be forgiven. And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and 
unto magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, 
or what ye shall say: For the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same hour what ye 
ought to say”  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
