--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 23rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR CLEMENT, BISHOP OF 
ANCYRA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord; I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the hieromartyr: 3 in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Abiding in the Faith, as in the vineyard of Christ, * for a time thou didst accept the 
husbandry of pangs in divers forms, O martyr; * wherefore, in accordance with thy 
name * thou didst produce the fruit of salvation * for the King and Husbandman, ** 
O glorious hieromartyr Clement.  
Thy twenty-eight years of torture * were truly shown to be precious * to God and 
the angels, and to all mankind, O wise one. * Going about the cities and countryside, 
* subjected to cruel burning and mutilation, and manifold wounds, ** thou didst not 
depart from the love of Christ.  
Having excelled in pastorship, O hieromartyr of Christ, * thou didst undertake 
feats of suffering, O valorous one, * receiving a single crown for both, * being 
adorned in both * the priesthood and the pangs of martyrdom. ** Wherefore, pray 
thou, that we be saved.  
And 3 Stichera in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Thou wast shown to be * a branch of the vine of life, * grafted thereon with 
mystic husbandry, O father; * wherefore, having been pruned * with the pangs of 
asceticism * and cut down by the sword of martyrdom, * thou hast mingled for us the 
wine of compunction, O blessed one. * And all of us, having drunk our fill thereof, ** 
celebrate thy most sacred memory with faith.  
When as priest thou didst offer * the awesome, most perfect and transcendent 
sacrifice, * thou didst also offer thyself * as thou performed thine office, O all-wise 
one; * and with a most earnest heart * thou didst mingle thy blood with the blood of 
thy Master. * And, sprinkled therewith, * O blessed and divinely eloquent one, ** 
thou wast shown to be wholly pure and most sacred.  
Offering in sacrifice the Lamb of God * Who cleanseth the world of sin * and 
hath destroyed corruption and death, * like an innocent lamb thou wast sacrificed, * 
O divinely wise and blessed one, * joined to Him by the likeness * of His life-bearing 
death. * And now, O right blessed one, ** thou hast received His kingdom.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Thou wast taken about the cities and countryside for twenty-eight years, O thou 
who wast called by God, beaten, lacerated and crucified for Christ; yet neither the 
fire, nor the sword, nor wounds broke the firmness of thy soul, and thou didst 
destroy the might of the demons, O hieromartyr Clement. Wherefore, pray thou to 
Christ, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “The martyrs of the Lord ...”: 
‘I cannot bear O my child, to behold Thee, Who dost grant life and health unto all, 
hung upon the Tree; for of old those who were lulled into the sleep of death by the 
fruit of the transgression have been awakened and granted divine and salvific life and 
health by Thee’, thus said the Virgin weeping, whom we magnify. 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone I: 
The martyr Clement, wondrous among priests, through long testing by torture 
hath been vouchsafed ever to receive sweetness and divine riches among the blessed, 
having anointed many for the contest by his own example, and subdued the flesh, 
that his mind might be above death. To him let us cry out, O ye faithful: O glorious 
great martyr, by thy supplications unto the Lord release us from the chronic state of 
our passions, and deliver us from evils by thine entreaties.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Standing before the Cross of thy Son and God, * and beholding His long-
suffering, O pure Mother, * thou didst say, weeping: * “Woe is me, O my Child most 
sweet! * How is it that Thou dost suffer unjustly, O Word of God, ** that Thou 
mightest save mankind?”  
Troparion, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast been given to the faithful, O most sacred one, * as a branch of holiness 
and a stem of struggle, * a most sacred flower and divinely bestowed and ever-
blossoming fruit. * As a fellow sufferer of the martyrs and a fellow prelate of 
hierarchs, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, with 8 Troparia, including the irmos of the first; 
and the canon of the hieromartyr, with 4 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the scion of the noetic 
branch”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory.  
Standing before Christ with the heavenly choirs as a priest and a glorious martyr, 
do thou earnestly pray, that those who praise thee may receive thine effulgence.  
Undertaking extensive struggles on earth, O venerable one, thou wast counted 
worthy to receive the crown of the kingdom of heaven, and life everlasting and 
indestructible.  
Delivered by the suffering of the Dispassionate One, through suffering thou didst 
strive to hasten to Him, manifestly becoming an emulator of His sufferings, O thou 
who dwellest with the angels.  
Theotokion: Supremely adorned with the beauty of the virtues, O most pure 
Mother of God, thou didst conceive for us the true God, our Benefactor, Who 
poureth forth a well-spring of good things.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
As the scion of the life-bearing Branch, thou didst bring forth beautiful fruits; and, 
adorning them with the radiance of martyrdom, and dedicating them to the Savior of 
all.  
Thou didst show thyself to be an emulator of Paul, passing over the whole world, 
O all-blessed one, sanctifying it with deifying baptism and the sprinkling of the blood 
of thy confession.  
Theotokion: There is none as immaculate as thou, O most pure Theotokos; for 
thou alone, in a manner past all telling, hast given birth to God the Word, the true 
God and Creator of all, Who existeth from before time.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Let us piously honor Clement, the star divinely shining forth from Ancyra, the 
boast of the Cappadocians, the much-suffering martyr, the glory of priests, the praise 
of the venerable, the intercessor for orphans, the champion of the poor, who, having 
suffering over a period of twenty-eight years, enlightened many and hallowed his 
native land. And the much suffering martyr prayeth to Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of transgressions unto those who with love honor his holy memory.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, call thee blessed, in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; for the 
fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, and thou didst feed the Creator and 
Lord with milk as an infant. Wherefore, we, the race of men and of angels, glorify thy 
birthgiving, and together we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God to grant forgiveness 
of sins unto those who with faith worship thy most holy Offspring.  
 Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer upon the 
Cross, the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: “The 
world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, 
beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful loving-kindness. 
O long-suffering Lord, Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring of mercy, take pity, 
and grant forgiveness of sins unto those who hymn Thy divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Going about the whole world, thou didst stretch forth the branch of thy struggles, 
exuding the joy of suffering and the sweetness of goodly fragrance, O all-blessed 
spiritual athlete.  
Beholding the meadow of thy contest, O blessed one, rejoicing, we garner the 
flowers of thy wounds and gladden our senses with thy divers miracles.  
Thou wast a child of the day and the never-waning light, O wondrous one, shining 
unceasingly with the light of the threefold Sun and the effulgence of preaching.  
Theotokion: O all-pure Mary, as thou wast the receptacle of purity which held the 
divine Presence, do thou expunge the defilement and mire of my soul.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Enduring wounds for many long years, O all-wise one, thou didst suffer greatly; 
and now thou hast inherited the everlasting sweetness of incorruptible blessedness.  
Making the steadfast faith thine anchor, and hope and love as thy foundation, thou 
didst set thyself up as a temple consecrated to the adored Trinity, O spiritually rich 
father.  
The divinely adorned and most radiant man struggled in the arena of suffering, 
receiving everlasting life; and joining chorus and rejoicing with the angels.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: Desiring to save corrupted human nature from corruption, the Lord 
and Creator made His abode within the womb of the pure one, ineffably forming 
Himself therein.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Having suffered lawfully, ye have received from the hand of the Master crowns, 
the rewards of divers gifts, and the grace of healings, to cure the infirmities of the 
faithful.  
A godly life, lengthy struggles and extensive wounds were to thee a mystical 
crowning of magnificence, a diadem of beauty and vesture of incorruption.  
Theotokion: O all-pure Lady who hast given birth for mortals to the Lord and 
Guide: still thou the grievous turmoil and inconstancy of my passions, and grant 
peace to my heart.  
Kontakion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Thou wast a precious scion of Christ the branch, * O much-suffering and all-
praised Clement, * and thou didst cry aloud * with those who suffered: ** “Thou art 
the radiant joy of the martyrs, O Christ!”  
Ikos: With hymns let us faithfully honor the scion of Christ the King, the Branch, 
who was nurtured with sanctity from childhood; for he hath been truly shown to be 
honored with gladness and beauty, steadfast amid tortures and sufferings, a model 
hierarch in the priesthood, an heir to the kingdom of God. For, considering the 
temples of the idols and the rage of the tyrants to be as naught, with joy he confessed 
the one Savior in the midst of the arena, crying: “Thou art the radiant joy of the 
martyrs, O Christ!”  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In Babylon the Children feared not the fiery furnace; * but cast into the 
midst of the flames * they were bedewed and sang: * ‘O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou.’ 
Thou didst illumine the whole world with the radiance of martyrdom, chanting to 
Christ in purity of thought and soul: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
The most sacred celebration of thy corrections, which shineth with a heavenly 
light, illumineth those who cry: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou wast the Mother of supremely wise Wisdom Who 
wisely guideth all with natural goodness. Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O all-pure 
one!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Suffering affliction for the sake of the laws of their fathers, * the blessed 
Children in Babylon * scorned the foolish decree of the King. * Standing 
together in the midst of the flames, they remained unharmed, * and sang a 
song fitting for almighty God: * ‘O ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.’ 
Having been shown to be most radiant beacons upon the earth, O ye who are 
most spiritually rich, ye illumine the firmament of the honored Church, and the 
celebration of the first-born in the heavens, with the splendor of your suffering; and 
ye rejoice, crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
With gladness we celebrate now the joyous memory of thy struggles; for like one 
of the incorporeal beings thou didst endure the threefold billows of tortures, and in 
their stead hast worthily received everlasting sustenance and rich recompense, crying: 
Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Having arrayed thyself in vesture of glory most splendidly broidered instead of 
grievous despondency of spirit, O most noetically rich hierarch, thou didst exchange 
torments for an angelic abode, receiving life everlasting, and crying: Hymn the Lord, 
ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: The Word Who is equally everlasting and properly understood to be 
begotten of the eternal Father, became incarnate in latter times of the Virgin, 
rendering His human guise divine, uniting Himself hypostatically thereto without 
commingling. Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Made perfect through the font of radiant baptism and the anointing of the 
priesthood, and washed in the blood of martyrdom, O blessed, divine blessed one, 
adorned and rejoicing thou didst hasten to the armies of heaven.  
The Word of God, the never-setting Sun of righteousness, the Crown of the holy 
martyrs, adorned thy holy brow with the crown of spiritual gifts, O wondrous one; 
and for His sake thou didst endure long struggles, rejoicing.  
Theotokion: At the good pleasure of the Father and the cooperation of the divine 
Spirit, the beginningless Son and Word of God assumed flesh and became incarnate, 
the Son of the Virgin. And He hath wholly restored my corrupted form, in that He is 
omnipotent.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Exapostilarion in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Like the Apostle Paul thou didst traverse the whole world over, and by thy long 
struggles didst put forth a branch, O Clement; and with the net of faith thou didst 
ensnare Agathangelus, thy companion and fellow martyr, the spiritual athlete and 
namesake of glad tidings.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II:  
Thou art my help and mighty refuge, O most pure one; thou art mine intercessor 
and protection; and before thee I fall down crying aloud: Deliver me from my 
tribulations, in that thou hast given birth to Joy, and do thou rescue me from 
everlasting fire, O Virgin, for I have set my hope on thee.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos; and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the hieromartyr.  
As the scion of the life-bearing Branch, thou didst bring forth beautiful fruits; and, 
adorning them with the radiance of martyrdom, and dedicating them to the Savior of 
all. (Twice) 
Thou didst show thyself to be an emulator of Paul, passing over the whole world, 
O all-blessed one, sanctifying it with deifying baptism and the sprinkling of the blood 
of thy confession.  
Theotokion: There is none as immaculate as thou, O most pure Theotokos; for 
thou alone, in a manner past all telling, hast given birth to God the Word, the true 
God and Creator of all, Who existeth from before time.  
Troparion of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast been given to the faithful, O most sacred one, * as a branch of holiness 
and a stem of struggle, * a most sacred flower and divinely bestowed and ever-
blossoming fruit. * As a fellow sufferer of the martyrs and a fellow prelate of 
hierarchs, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
Thou wast a precious scion of Christ the branch, * O much-suffering and all-
praised Clement, * and thou didst cry aloud * with those who suffered: ** “Thou art 
the radiant joy of the martyrs, O Christ!”  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS §334 (13:7-16)  
Brethren: Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto 
you the word of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. 
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. Be not carried about with 
divers and strange doctrines: for it is a good thing that the heart be established with 
grace; not with meats, which have not profited them that have been occupied therein. 
We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle. For 
the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high 
priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might 
sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth 
therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. For here have we no 

--- PAGE 9 ---
continuing city, but we seek one to come. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of 
praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name. But 
to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well 
pleased.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation 
for Himself.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN §36 (JN, 10:9-16)  
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: I am the door: by me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 
know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
