--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 28th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER  
EPHRAIM THE SYRIAN  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Looking toward the beauties of paradise, * and richly delighting in the meadows of 
incorruption, * thou didst blossom forth upon the world * with the knowledge of 
God; * and with spiritual love partaking thereof, O venerable one, ** our souls 
spiritually flourish. (Twice)  
Having written concerning the coming of the Judge * with streams of tears, * thou 
dost teach all to light the lamps of their souls, * announcing the arrival of the 
Bridegroom, * that we may all clothe ourselves with splendid vesture ** to greet 
Christ the Bridegroom. (Twice)  
 Protecting thy body with abstinence, * thou didst mortify the movements of the 
passions, O father, * by prayers and vigils. * Wherefore, the power of the Spirit which 
dwelt within thee * hath shown thee to be a noetic beacon ** for the whole world. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Having resolved to forsake the tumults of life, O ever-memorable Ephraim, thou 
didst attain unto the desert with the love of stillness; and thereby actively led unto 
God, thou didst shine forth as a lamp upon the world, pouring forth the words of life 
upon mankind. Wherefore, cease thou never to make us steadfast by thy prayers, that 
our souls may be delivered from the alien foe, O venerable father.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
 Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding our Life suspended upon the Tree, * the all-
immaculate Theotokos cried aloud, * maternally lamenting: ** O my Son and my 
God, save those who hymn Thee!  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos;  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone IV: 
Wetting thy couch with tears, as did the prophet, and by the experience of life 
acquiring repentance, thou hast shown us the fear of judgment through thy works and 
discourses; wherefore having assembled, we all honor thy memory, O ever-
memorable Ephraim, all-blessed accomplisher of the glorious deeds of the Lord, and 
entreat thee to pray unto Christ God on behalf of our souls.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, * the ewe-lamb 
who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * “O most desired 
Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? * How is it that 
Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-suffering Word, ** 
and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
Troparion of the venerable father, in Tone VIII:  
With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, * and with sighs 
from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, * 
and didst become a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. ** O 
Ephraim our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without martyria, with 8 Troparia, including the 
Irmos; and that of the saint, with 6 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor Ephraim, the noetic 
Euphrates”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI:  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory.  
With the Euphrates-like flood of thy supplications water thou my soul, which hath 
become dry with the burning heat of the passions, and inspire discourse within me 
who praise thy festival, O all-blessed one.  
Shining forth noetic light, thou didst show thyself to be a radiant sun, O Ephraim, 
illumining all the fullness of the faithful with brilliant virtues and teachings.  
Extinguishing the flame of the passions with the streams of tears, O divinely 
blessed Ephraim, thou wast a precious vessel of the Holy Spirit, pouring forth well-
springs of doctrines.  
Theotokion: Having received the incorrupt Word in thy womb, thou hast given 
birth to Him Who delivereth from corruption those who ever worship Him, O pure 
Mother and Virgin, who art truly the portal of Life.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Having purified thyself of the mire of the passions, thou didst reveal thyself to be 
a true receptacle of the virtues and a vessel containing the gifts of the Holy Spirit.  
In nowise giving slumber to thine eyes, thou didst show thyself to be a temple of 
the Holy Trinity and a treasury of wisdom, enriching the world with the golden rays 
of teachings, O blessed one.  
The honored Church of Christ doth recognize thee as a golden-streamed 
Euphrates, flowing with torrents of wise doctrines and watering all creation.  
Theotokion: Incarnate of thy precious blood, One of the Holy Trinity divinely 
issued forth in two natures, saving by grace the children of Adam, O all-pure one.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:  
O ye faithful, on the day of his commemoration let us hymn the treasury of the 
wisdom of the mysteries of Christ, the cup of divine compunction, for in accordance 
with his name the godly Ephraim doth ever gladden the hearts of the faithful with 
divine discourses, as a performer and initiate of the mysteries of the revelations of the 
Lord. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
O fervent and invincible intercessor, diligent and unashamed hope, rampart, 
protection and haven of those who have recourse to thee, O pure Ever-virgin do 
thou, together with the angels, entreat thy Son and God, that He grant peace, 
salvation and great mercy to the world.  
 Stavrotheotokion: Through the Cross of thy Son, * O thou who art full of the 
grace of God, * hath the deception of idolatry been utterly vanquished, * and the 
might of the demons hath fallen; * wherefore, we, the faithful, ever hymn and bless 
thee as is meet, ** confessing thee to be the true Theotokos.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
The power of thy words hath passed through the whole world, O blessed one, 
driving away the blindness of men’s souls by the exalted radiance of humility.  
Thou didst render thy life blameless, cleansing thyself with tears, O right 
wondrous and divinely revealed one, and by thy wise discourses hast described to all 
the coming of the Judge.  
Having beheld the most glorious height of thy humility, the Lord gave thee exalted 
discourse, whereby the grievous uprisings of heresies have been humbled.  
Strengthened by the grace of the Almighty, thou didst array thyself against the 
princes of the demons, O father, and having vanquished them, fervently pray on 
behalf of us who praise thee.  
Theotokion: Let us bless the Virgin as a divine temple, as a holy mountain, as a 
wellspring of incorruption, as the one who alone was the chosen of God our Creator.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
With torrents of tears, O father, thou didst utterly dry up the depths of pleasures; 
and with the outpourings of thy doctrines thou hast staunched the torrents of 
heresies, O blessed one. 
Thy mind, illumined by seeking God, O father Ephraim, began to take pleasure in 
the full vision of God, receiving immaterial revelation as if a mirror of the divine 
Spirit.  
Thou didst truly become a temple imbued with the Trinity, adorned with grace and 
the radiance of pure virtues, and the fullness of teaching, O father.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: Eating of the tree in Eden through the wicked treachery of the 
serpent I was revealed to be mortal; but thou, having given birth to Christ, the 
Bestower of life, hast brought me to life, O thou who alone art full of God’s grace.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Setting thy foundation not on sands, but on the inviolate Faith, O God-bearer, 
thou didst remain undaunted by all the assaults of the enemy, guided by the hand of 
the Invincible One.  
Thy tongue was truly like the pen of a swiftly-writing scribe, showing forth a most 
pious intellect and tracing the law of the Spirit upon the tablets of our hearts, O 
father.  
Those who navigate the calm expanse of thy dogmas, O divinely wise Ephraim, 
are delivered from the soul-destroying billows of the abyss and, awakened, are saved 
by faith from the storm of heresies.  
Theotokion: Incarnate, He Who as God is above all noetic beings and visible 
creatures, issued forth from thy womb, preserving thee incorrupt as thou wast before 
birthgiving, O Virgin Mother.  
Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Ever looking forward to the hour of judgment, * thou didst bitterly lament, O 
Ephraim; * and though a lover of stillness * thou wast also a teacher of activity, O 
venerable one. ** Wherefore, O universal father, thou dost motivate the slothful to 
repentance.  
Ikos: Do thou let but a drop of the waters of thy grace bedew my soul, purifying it 
of every unclean defilement, that cleansed, it may complete the remaining time of life 
zealous in all things profitable, and partake of the divine sweetness which thou didst 
enjoy, for thou dost quench the thirst of all who burn with passions, inspiring the 
slothful to repentance by thy discourses.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Thou wast shown to be a most excellent giver of laws for monastics, O most 
honored one, rescuing them from all the machinations of the enemy. Wherefore, O 
blessed one, they honor thine honored and sacred memory on earth.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou wast an excellent instrument of the Spirit, ever sounding forth thine 
inspirations and playing the saving hymn of repentance for us who hymn thee, O 
ever-memorable one.  
Theotokion: Thy conception was beyond description, O Bride of God, for thou 
hast given birth to the Word of God Who hath delivered all mankind from 
irrationality granting them the words to cry: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thou wast shown to be like another sun, O blessed one, and, emitting the beams 
of thy teachings upon the ends of the earth, thou hast driven away the lightless gloom 
of all sin with the light of repentance.  
Surrounded by the streams of divine dogmas, thou didst flow forth like another 
river from Eden, watering the face of the earth, O wondrous one, inundating the 
tares of ungodliness.  
Theotokion: Confessing thee to be the true Theotokos, like the angel we cry out to 
thee with faith: Rejoice! For thou alone hast given birth to Joy on earth, O ever 
joyous and blessed one.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Wounded by the love of the Almighty O venerable one, thou didst reach the end 
of thy life, lamenting and crying out with fear: “Assuage my passing with the waves of 
thy grace, O Savior, richly preserving me therewith in the life to come!”  
Thy sweet discourse was replete with compunction and full of enlightenment for 
those who have recourse to thee, O right wondrous God-bearer Ephraim; and thy life 
was blameless, adorned and illumined with all manner of divinely radiant virtues.  
Thou wast a temple of the Spirit, a river full of life-giving waters, the unshakable 
foundation of the Church, the confirmation of monastics, and an ever-flowing stream 
of divine compunction, O right wondrous Ephraim.  
Theotokion: The mind of man cannot understand the mystery of thy birthgiving 
which passeth understanding, O Virgin; for, making His abode within thy womb, 
God did not violate the seal of thy virginity, as He, Who is unapproachable alone 
knoweth.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Exapostilarion in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars ...”: 
Through thy compunction, O venerable father Ephraim, thou wast shown to be a 
cup of the hidden treasures of the wisdom of Christ, and by thy divine teachings thou 
dost gladden the souls of the faithful.  
Theotokion in Tone III: With thine almighty protection preserve all of us, thy 
servants O pure one, unharmed by the attacks of the enemy; for thee alone do we 
have as our refuge in need. 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos,  
Glory ..., the composition of Cyprian, in Tone II:  
Thou didst flourish like the palm-tree described by David, O venerable father 
Ephraim, and didst cut off the tongues of the blasphemous as with a sword. Thou 
didst dry up the depths of the passions with abstinence, and, taking up the Cross as a 
weapon, wast shown to be an instrument of the Holy Spirit. Unceasingly entreat 
Christ on behalf of us who ever celebrate thine honored memory with faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Upon beholding the Creator of all things * enduring great injustice * and lifted up 
upon the Cross, * the all-pure one groaned, saying: * “O all-hymned Lord, my Son 
and God, * how is it that, desiring to honor Thy creation, * Thou dost endure 
dishonor in the flesh? * Glory to Thy great compassion ** and Thy condescension, O 
Lover of mankind!”  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos; and from ODE III of 
the canon of the saint.  
Having purified thyself of the mire of the passions, thou didst reveal thyself to be 
a true receptacle of the virtues and a vessel containing the gifts of the Holy Spirit.  
In nowise giving slumber to thine eyes, thou didst show thyself to be a temple of 
the Holy Trinity and a treasury of wisdom, enriching the world with the golden rays 
of teachings, O blessed one.  
The honored Church of Christ doth recognize thee as a golden-streamed 
Euphrates, flowing with torrents of wise doctrines and watering all creation.  
Theotokion: Incarnate of thy precious blood, One of the Holy Trinity divinely 
issued forth in two natures, saving by grace the children of Adam, O most pure one.  
Troparion of the venerable father, in Tone VIII:  
With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, * and with sighs 
from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, * 
and didst become a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. ** O 
Ephraim our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable father, in Tone II: 
Ever looking forward to the hour of judgment, * thou didst bitterly lament, O 
Ephraim; * and though a lover of stillness * thou wast also a teacher of activity, O 
venerable one. ** Wherefore, O universal father, thou dost motivate the slothful to 
repentance.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS §203 (5:22-6:2)  
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 43 (MT. 11: 27-3O)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: 
and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, 
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and 
learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly of heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 
For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
