--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 31st DAY OF THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY WONDER-WORKERS & UNMERCENARY 
PHYSICIANS CYRUS & JOHN  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Illumining the whole world with the rays of miracles, * O Cyrus and John, * most 
radiant beacons, * ye were like unto the heavens in grace, * displaying like stars ** the 
virtues of your exalted life. (Twice)  
O martyrs of the Lord, * O rain-bearing clouds * excelling in manifold miracles of 
grace, * ye noetically water the whole world, * prevailing upon the healthy ** to offer 
hymnody to God. 
Truly receiving from God the skill * to heal the sufferings of soul and body, * O 
martyrs of the Lord, * ye supra-naturally heal all * not by means of human medicines, 
** but by the inspiration of God.  
Surrounded by the hosts of heaven, * O radiant luminaries Cyrus and John, * O 
valiant spiritual athletes, * ye heal the bodies of those on earth * and wounded souls 
for Christ’s sake. ** Entreat Him, that He save us.  
Following Christ, the Fountain of glory, * ye have been revealed to all as well-
springs of immortality, * pouring forth sweet streams * which cure and heal * men’s 
bodies and souls; ** for ye zealously shed streams of blood for Christ.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Two martyrs have shone forth upon us today, healing the ills of our souls: Cyrus 
and John, the wonder-workers. The one, embracing the angelic life and living it to the 
end, united himself to Christ by the blood of martyrdom; and the other, shining forth 
among the military ranks, is now enrolled in the armies of heaven. Wherefore, they 
impart healing to those who with faith celebrate their memory, praying for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
‘I cannot bear O my child, to behold Thee, Who dost grant life and health unto all, 
hung upon the Tree; for of old those who were lulled into the sleep of death by the 
fruit of the transgression have been awakened and granted divine and salvific life and 
health by Thee’, thus said the Virgin weeping, whom we magnify. 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Come, ye assembly of the faithful, and with hymns let us crown Cyrus and John 
today: the soldiers of grace and most generous fulfillers of petitions; for in manifold 
ways they have been shown unto all as most splendid physicians. Wherefore, they 
pray for our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Upon beholding the ripe Cluster, * Whom thou didst bear in thy womb without 
being tilled, * hanging upon the Tree, O pure one, * thou didst exclaim lamenting and 
crying aloud: * ‘I beseech Thee O my Child, * pour forth that sweetness by which the 
drunkenness of the passions * is taken away, for my sake, * O Benefactor, who didst 
bear Thee ** in Thy tender compassion! 
Troparion of the saints, in Tone V:  
O Christ God Who hast given us the miracles * of Thy holy martyrs as an 
invincible rampart, * through their supplications set at naught the counsels of the 
heathen * and strengthen the scepters of kings, ** in that Thou alone art good and 
the Lover of mankind.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without the martyria; and that of the saints, with 6 
Troparia, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
 Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Thou didst receive authority against falsehood, O blessed Cyrus, having the 
glorious John as the fellow sufferer of thy pains; wherefore, ye delight in the highest 
sweetness in the heavens.  
Girded about with spiritual skill in battle, O most honored Cyrus, and having 
forsaken the earthly army, O all-praised John, ye have received from Christ victories 
over the demons.  
Emulating the virtue of the blessed woman Thecla, ye piously arrayed yourselves 
in the angelic vesture of virginity and together were drawn to the contest by your love 
for martyrdom.  
Theotokion: Without seed, by the will of the Father, thou didst conceive the Son 
through the divine Spirit of God and didst give birth in the flesh to Him Who was 
begotten of the Father without mother and, for our sake, from thee without father.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
The weakness of their flesh fortified by the sufferings of Christ, the right glorious 
martyrs cast down the murderer of mankind.  
Receiving incorruptible sweetness through the Spirit, the martyrs of Christ rejoiced 
amid the sufferings of their flesh.  
By the Cross the weak nature of women was strengthened; wherefore, they 
manfully vanquished the adverse serpent.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, thou alone art the mediatress of good things for 
mortals in a manner transcending nature; wherefore, we cry aloud to thee: Rejoice!  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “O Thou Who wast lifted up ...”:  
Trampling underfoot the pleasures which drag men down, ye were taken up 
radiantly by grace to the divine heights of martyrdom, O athletes Cyrus and John, ye 
luminaries of all the world. Wherefore, we beseech you: from the darkness of sin and 
addictions deliver us, entreating Him Who is God over all. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in, Tone IV:  
O Theotokos, fleeing to thy divine protection after God, * I humbly fall down and 
beseech thee: * Have mercy, O most pure one, * for my sins have submerged my 
being, * and trembling O Lady, I fear the torments to come, * O pure one, entreat thy 
Son, ** that I may be delivered from them.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
 Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
The effulgence of never-waning grace hath cast down the enemies who loved 
darkness, showing forth Cyrus and John, who fought against them, to be radiant 
luminaries.  
Cyrus and John delighted in the love of the Trinity and, as martyrs exceedingly 
beloved by God, they were shown to be divine instruments through a higher union.  
In that your honored temple is hateful to evil spirits, it doth dispel the infirmities 
of all who ail, O invincible martyrs, imparting the grace of healing.  
Theotokion: Without knowing wedlock, O Virgin, thou hast given birth, yet wast 
shown to be virgin even after birthgiving. Wherefore, with unwavering faith, O 
Sovereign Lady, we ever cry out to thee saying: Rejoice!  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
The two martyrs desired Thee, O Savior; and Thou Who art holy among the saints 
hast granted repose to Cyrus and John as is meet.  
Thy work, O Good One, is the destruction of the enemy, and by the Cross Thou 
hast made them martyrs of piety, crowning them with glory.  
Having anointed themselves with virginity that they love Thee alone with wisdom 
undaunted, John and Cyrus showed forth courage.  
Theotokion: We set thee before us as an invincible weapon against the enemy, O 
Bride of God; for thee do we have as the steadfastness and hope of our salvation.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
The martyrs, desiring to be slain for Christ rather than offer sacrifice to idols, 
offered themselves to the wicked tyrant for the sake of Him Who like a lamb was 
slaughtered for us in His loving-kindness.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
The martyrs rendered weak those who cut them pitilessly apart, and, wounded by 
darts, they themselves wounded the children instead; for they were most gloriously 
made steadfast by the divine Spirit.  
Confessing the Lord and King of all creation with faith, the two martyrs were of 
one mind, and suffering together they opposed the iniquitous ones, even to the 
shedding of their blood.  
Theotokion: O wonder newest of all wonders! For the Virgin, having conceived in 
her womb, without knowing a man, Him Who sustaineth all things, did not confine 
Him.  
Kontakion of the saints, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Receiving the gift of miracles from divine grace, * O saints, ye work wonders 
unceasingly, * cutting down all our passions with invisible skill, * O divinely wise 
Cyrus and glorious John; ** for ye are divine physicians.  
Ikos: Offering yourselves to God, O saints, ye endured every trial for His sake, 
dying zealously, O valiant martyrs; and even after your repose pouring forth divine 
gifts upon all who are infirm in many ways, healing many of afflictions, of whom I am 
first, wretch that I am. For I suffer in body and soul because of cruel wounds, and 
with faith I cry out to you: Heal me, for ye are divine physicians.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Measuring wisdom as if in the balance of a scale, with the weight of the most pure 
glory of martyrdom, the athletes, suspended aloft, cried aloud: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Not ignorant of the machinations of the adversary, the martyrs, spurning alike all 
manner of torture and sufferings, cried aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, O Lord!  
Crowned with the endurance of wounds, Cyrus and John, the defenders of the 
Trinity, cried out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Rejoice, all-hallowed and divine habitation of the Most High! For 
through thee, O Theotokos, joy hath been granted to those who cry: Blessed art thou 
among women, O all-immaculate Lady.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
The impious ones cruelly called upon Cyrus and John to deny Him Who is God by 
nature; but the invincible martyrs revealing the Fashioner of all creation, cried aloud: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Raging with anger and deceit, and with their minds set on earthly things, the 
tormenters, sent to life - by death - those who obtained indestructible life in the 
heavens, and who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The relics of the martyrs, having disclosed to all the world the brilliance of 
miracles, O Christ, put to shame the phantasmal delusions of the evil demon, 
magnificently imparting healings to those who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works 
of the Lord!  
Theotokion: The Incorporeal One, Who was begotten of the Father without 
mother before time, was later incarnate through thee, O all-pure one, desiring in His 
compassion to save those who sing: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Cyrus and John, the two invincible martyrs, showed themselves to be obedient to 
the divine commandments of the Master even unto death. Wherefore, they placed 
their souls in the hands of the Creator.  
The two luminaries shining with the radiance of miracles from the only light-
bearing Source, pour forth incorruptible grace upon the infirm. Wherefore as is meet 
we magnify them.  
Manfully the two invincible martyrs theologized concerning the Unity of the 
divine Essence, the Trinity of Hypostases, and the one Christ, the Word incarnate in 
two natures.  
Theotokion: Have pity on me, O Christ, when Thou comest to judge the world 
with glory, lifting the darkness of my passions by the entreaties of her who gave birth 
to Thee, and of Thine honored martyrs, in that Thou art good and abundantly 
merciful.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”:  
O wonder-working luminaries Cyrus and John, having received from the Lord the 
grace of healings; cure ye our infirmities of soul and body.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Thou wast the cause of the good things given by God to the world, O Theotokos. 
Entreat God, Who is easily reconciled, for the salvation of us all.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
With worthy hymns of laudation, O ye faithful, let us magnify Cyrus and John, 
who were of one blood in spirit, and brotherly-minded in the flesh, praising with 
them the valiant Athanasia and her offspring, Theodota, Eudoxia and Theoctistus, 
the ever-virginal athletes, who entreat Christ on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
“Lament not for Me, O Mother, * beholding Me thy Son and God hanging upon 
the Tree, * Who hath suspended the earth * upon the waters unsupported, * and hath 
fashioned all creation; * for I shall arise and be glorified, * and shall crush the 
kingdoms of Hades with strength; * destroying its power * and delivering those in 
bondage * from its wickedness, * for I am compassionate; * and shall bring them to 
My Father, ** in that I am the Lover of mankind.”  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the saints.  
The weakness of their flesh fortified by the sufferings of Christ, the right glorious 
martyrs cast down the murderer of mankind.  
Receiving incorruptible sweetness through the Spirit, the martyrs of Christ rejoiced 
amid the sufferings of their flesh.  
By the Cross the weak nature of women was strengthened; wherefore, they 
manfully vanquished the adverse serpent.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, thou alone art the mediatress of good things for 
mortals in a manner transcending nature; wherefore, we cry aloud to thee: Rejoice!  
Troparion of the saints, in Tone V:  
O Christ God Who hast given us the miracles * of Thy holy martyrs as an 
invincible rampart, * through their supplications set at naught the counsels of the 
heathen * and strengthen the scepters of kings, ** in that Thou alone art good and 
the Lover of mankind.  
Kontakion of the saints, in Tone III: 
Receiving the gift of miracles from divine grace, * O saints, ye work wonders 
unceasingly, * cutting down all our passions with invisible skill, * O divinely wise 
Cyrus and glorious John; ** for ye are divine physicians.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §153 (I COR. 12: 27-13: 8)  
Brethren: Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And God hath set 
some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that 
miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. Are all 
apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles? Have all the 
gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? But covet earnestly the 
best gifts: and yet shew I unto you a more excellent way. Though I speak with the 
tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, 
or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all 
mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove 
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to 

--- PAGE 9 ---
feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it 
profiteth me nothing. Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity 
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her 
own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in 
the truth; Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. 
Charity never faileth.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Behold now, what is so good or so joyous as for brethren 
to dwell together in unity?  
Verse: For there the Lord commanded the blessing, life for evermore.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §34 (10: 1, 5-8)  
At that time, when Jesus had called unto Him His twelve disciples, He gave them 
power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and 
all manner of disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying: 
“Go not into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter not; 
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying: 
The kingdom of heaven is at hand! Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, 
cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.”  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
 
