--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 4th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER ISIDORE OF PELUSIUM  
If this day fall outside the Great Fast, the service for the Afterfeast of the Meeting and of Saint 
Isidore. But if this day fall within the Great Fast, then only that of the saint.  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the afterfeast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
He Who is the Lover of mankind, * fulfilling the law of the Scriptures, * is now 
borne into the temple; * and the elder Symeon * receiveth Him in his arms, crying 
aloud: * “Lettest me now depart to Thy blessedness, * for today I have seen clad in 
mortal flesh * Him Who hath dominion over life ** and mastery over death!”  
Thou didst show Thyself * to be the Light of revelation, * the Sun of 
righteousness * seated upon a light cloud, * fulfilling the shadow of the law, * and 
revealing the beginning of the new grace. * Wherefore, Symeon, seeing Thee, cried 
aloud: * “Set me free of corruption, ** for I have seen Thee today!”  
Without being separated * from the bosom of the Father in Thy divinity, * 
voluntarily incarnate, * Thou wast held in the embrace of the Ever-virgin, * and Thou 
Who holdest all things in Thy hands * wast given into the arms of Symeon the God-
receiver, * wherefore, he cried aloud with joy: * “Lettest me Thy servant, now depart 
in peace, ** for I have seen Thee, O Master!”  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in the same tone,  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Elevating thyself to God * by contemplation and activity, * thou didst perfect thy 
life, O all-wise one; * and, ascending to vision through activity, * thou didst desire the 
ultimate love, * O wise one, * and harboring that desire within thyself, * thou wast 
deemed worthy of a blessed end ** and the radiance of the threefold Sun.  
With the flowing waters of grace * and the outpouring of thy words * thou hast 
watered all the divinely wise; * and, placing thy mouth * to the cup of supreme 
wisdom, * as from a wellspring thou didst richly draw forth in abundance, * shedding 
beams of teaching upon all, * sending forth epistles, and instructions, ** O right 
wondrous one.  
By abstinence thou didst mortify the wisdom of the flesh, * arraying thyself in a 
life-bearing mortification; * clearly expanding the breadth of thy soul, * O venerable 
one, * thou didst make thyself a receptacle of the gifts of the Spirit * rendering thyself 
a habitation * of divinely inspired teachings * and a dwelling-place of that wisdom ** 
which transcendeth understanding.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast,  
The composition of Germanus in Tone II: 
Today, Symeon hath received in his arms the Lord of glory, Whom Moses beheld 
before in the darkness, and Who gave him the tablets on Mount Sinai. He Who is the 
Creator of the law, and Who spake through the prophets, of Whom David 
proclaimed, filling all things with awe, He Who is greatly and abundantly merciful.  
If this day fall during the Great Fast, then:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion. Or if it be Wednesday or Friday: 
 Stavrotheotokion, in Tone II:  
Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, * the ewe-lamb 
who gave birth to Thee * lamented and maternally cried aloud to Thee: * “O my Son 
most desired, * How is it that Thou art suspended upon the Tree of the Cross, * O 
Long-suffering One? * How have Thy hands and feet * been pierced with nails by the 
iniquitous, O Word! ** And how hast Thou shed Thy blood, O Master? 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Receive, O Symeon, * the Lord of glory * as thou wast told * by the Holy Spirit. ** 
For, lo! He is come. 
Verse: Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, * O Master, according to 
Thy word.  
Bearing the Creator and Master * as a Babe * in her arms, * the pure and most 
pure Virgin ** entereth the temple.  
Verse: A Light of revelation to the gentiles, * and the glory of Thy people 
Israel.  
Great and awesome and strange * is the mystery of God’s dispensation: * He Who 
embraceth all things * and createth infants ** is borne in arms as a Babe.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same tone: 
The sacred Virgin brought the Sacred One to the priest in the temple; and 
stretching forth his hands, Symeon received Him, rejoicing, and crying aloud: Now 
lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Lord and Master, according to Thy word.  
Troparion of the saint, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Isidore. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
 Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection. (Twice)  
Glory ..., the Troparion of the saint, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Isidore. 
Both now ..., that of the feast.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of angels ...”:  
He Who is with the Father seated upon the holy throne, hath come to earth born 
of the Virgin; He Who is unbounded by time, hath become a babe; and Symeon, 
receiving Him in his arms rejoicing, saith: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O 
Compassionate One, having gladdened me!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before ...”:  
Christ our God, Who became a babe through His Mother who knew not a man, 
didst thou take up in thine elderly arms, and gloriously receive the fulfillment of the 
promise, enabling thee by the effectual working of grace to depart, wherefore, we all 
glorify thee as is fitting.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Canon of the feast, with 8 Troparia, including the irmos; and that of the venerable 
one, with 4 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, in Tone III:  
Irmos: The Sun once passed over dry land * in the midst of the deep. * For the 
water on both sides became firm as a wall * while the people traversed the sea 
on foot, * chanting in a manner pleasing to God: * Let us sing unto the Lord; * 
for gloriously hath he been glorified. 
Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun Who is borne aloft upon a light 
cloud is brought to the temple as a babe in the arms of the unblemished one. 
Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously 
hath He been glorified!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, 
hasten straightway to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: 
Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For 
Christ the Fashioner, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, 
is borne by the Virgin Mother as a babe to God the Father, He Who was before all 
the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn thee, the glory of 
monastics, O father”, in Tone VI:  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory.  
Hearkening to the groaning of a contrite heart, O Master, by the supplications of 
Thy venerable saint, O Christ, heal Thou the grievous contrition of my soul, in that 
Thou art almighty.  
Having entered upon active virtue through pure vision, and ever conversing with 
God by beauteous revelations, O God-bearing Isidore, thou wast manifestly enriched.  
Thy mouth, upon receiving the cup of wisdom O most wise one, didst draw forth 
a stream of spiritual gifts therefrom, chanting to God a hymn of victory.  
Theotokion: Christ the Creator, as One mighty, came upon thee on a light cloud, 
O pure Lady, to cast down the idols of Egypt, in that He is omnipotent.  
ODE III  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Lord, the firm foundation of those who put their trust in Thee, * do 
Thou establish the Church, * which Thou hast purchased * with thy precious 
blood. 
He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the first-
born Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam.  
God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-formed man, who 
through deception had become childish of mind.  
Without undergoing change, the Creator became a Babe, rendering our nature 
divine, the product of earth to which it returneth again.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Having with keenness of intellect gathered knowledge of the nature of that which 
is, O wise and most glorious one, thou hast thereby attained unto the primal Cause, as 
a pure theologian.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Clearly setting forth instruction for mortal life, O thrice-blessed God-bearer, thou 
didst mortify the material causes of the passions, held fast by the desire for 
dispassion.  
Rejoicing, thou didst follow after Christ, bearing thy cross in steadfast fasting, O 
father, and as far as thou wast able, thou didst emulate Him in purity of life.  
Theotokion: Giving birth to the Master in a manner transcending the laws of 
nature, O Virgin Theotokos, thou didst abolish the ancient curse of disobedience, 
pouring forth a spring of blessing.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
The Church, hath found thee to be another morning-star, * O all glorious one, * 
and crying out to thee, * it is illumined by the lightning-flashes of thy words: ** 
Rejoice, O all-blessed and divinely wise Isidore!  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”:  
Thou didst appear to the most holy Spirit as a book written with a wealth of 
understanding of the doctrines of the Faith, revealing divine things to those in need, 
and laying up life for those who desire it. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that 
He grant us great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having risen ...”:  
Thou wast born on earth, O Thou Who art co-beginningless with the Father, and 
wast carried into the temple, O Unapproachable One. And, rejoicing, the elder took 
Thee in his arms, crying aloud: “Now let me depart, whom Thou hast visited 
according to Thy word O God, Whose good pleasure it is to save the race of 
mankind!”  
But if this day fall during the Great Fast:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III: 
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, O only all-pure Virgin Mother, who 
hast surpassed the angels in purity. With the divine waters of thy supplications cleanse 
me, who more than all others am dust and defiled by carnal transgressions, O pure 
one, and grant me great mercy. 
 Or, if it be Wednesday or Friday, the Stavrotheotokion in Tone III: 
The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin Mother, upon 
beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain hanging upon the Cross, 
cried out, lamenting maternally: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou 
sufferest willingly, desiring to deliver mankind from the indignity of the passions?”  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE IV 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Thy virtue, hath covered the heavens, O Christ, * for having come forth 
from the Ark of Thy sanctification, * from Thine undefiled Mother, * Thou 
hast appeared in the temple of Thy glory * as an infant borne in arms, * filling 
all with Thy praise. 
Rejoicing, the Theotokos cried aloud: O Symeon, initiate of ineffable mysteries, 
take in thine arms Christ, the Word Who hath become a babe, of Whom thou wast 
informed of old by the Holy Spirit, and cry out to Him: All things are filled with Thy 
praise!  
O Symeon, rejoicing take up Christ, the little Child, on Whom thou hast set thy 
hope, the Consolation of the Israel of God, the Creator and Master of the law, Who 
fulfilleth the tenets of the law; and cry aloud to Him: All things are filled with Thy 
praise!  
Beholding the beginningless Word borne as a babe in the flesh by the Virgin as on 
the throne of the cherubim, the Author of all, Symeon marveled and cried aloud to 
Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Submitting to Christ unstintingly, O venerable one, as a right dutiful servant thou 
didst distribute the wealth given thee, wherefore the Master hath deemed thee worthy 
of ineffable joy.  
Traversing the deep of wisdom, like a good merchant thou didst obtain the goodly 
Pearl, jealously cherishing Him alone as thy treasure.  
Illumined by the divine Spirit, like the sun thou hast emitted beams of discourse 
upon all, desiring the salvation of the faithful, divinely revealed by God.  
Theotokion: Truly, O Ever-virgin Theotokos, the mysteries of thy birthgiving to 
God are ineffable and unapproachable to those on earth and in heaven.  
ODE V 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * borne 
aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have foreseen God 
made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the King of peace.’ 
The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was revealed of old to the prophet, 
and beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried aloud: Rejoice, O pure one, 
for like a throne, God the unwaning Light. Who reigneth with peace, is held by thee!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who 
kneweth not wedlock, said: O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant 
God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!  
Isaiah, purified by the burning ember brought by the seraphim, and the elder 
illumined by the O Mother of God, cried to her: thou hast given me Him Whom 
thou dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with 
peace.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Being outside the body through the mortification of the passions, O all-wise one, 
with love thou didst draw nigh to God, the most holy and supremely radiant Light, 
Who alone requireth purity.  
Illumining his mind with Thy divine radiance, O Good One, the God-bearer 
became a most luminous pillar, sending forth upon all the divine rays of God’s light, 
dispelling the darkness of ignorance.  
He Who desireth that all should be saved, in that He is good, showed thee to be a 
guide for the lost, turning many to the path of salvation, O all-wise, thrice-blessed, 
and most noetically rich father Isidore.  
Theotokion: With my mouth and soul, O good Sovereign Lady of the world, I 
confess thee to truly be the one who hath given birth to God in the flesh, O pure and 
all-immaculate one, and with faith I set thee forth as the intercessor of my life.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The Elder, having seen with his eyes the salvation * that was to come 
unto the peoples from God, * cried aloud unto Thee: * ‘O Christ, Thou art my 
God.’ 
In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the 
disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful.  
Clearly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, in Thy 
tender compassion Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of the earth-born.  
Now lettest him that worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of 
the Virgin, God become a Child, depart in peace.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Adorned with judicious words as a priest, thou didst judge rationally, with body 
and soul, reasonably making that which is lower subject to that which is higher, O 
right wondrous God-bearer.  
O glorious boast of monastics, with the blows of asceticism thou didst mightily 
smite the passions and sustenance of Egypt, subjecting them to scrutiny, smoothing 
the way for the faithful.  
Theotokion: He Who beareth all things by His divine power and upholdeth them 
in his hands, in that He is compassionate, O most pure one, is carried, incarnate, as a 
babe, though He is of the same essence as the Father.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I: 
O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth * and didst bless the 
hands of Symeon as was meet, * by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O 
Christ God. * But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, * and 
strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, ** O Thou Who alone lovest 
mankind.  
Ikos: Let us make haste to the Theotokos, desiring to behold her Son borne unto 
Symeon. Looking upon Him from heaven, the bodiless hosts in amazement proclaim: 
“We behold things wondrous, most glorious, unapproachable and ineffable: for He 
Who created Adam is borne as an infant; He Whom naught can contain is held in the 
elder’s arms; He Who is in the infinite bosom of His Father is willingly constrained in 
the flesh, but not in His divinity, He Who alone is the Lover of mankind.”  
ODE VII  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Thou who in the midst of the fire * bedewed the children as they 
discoursed on things divine, * and Who didst take up Thy dwelling in the pure 
Virgin: * O Word of God Thee do we reverently praise chanting: * O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
I go to announce glad tidings unto Adam and Eve who dwell in Hades, cried 
Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
God, the Redeemer of the race of mortals shall go even unto Hades; He shall grant 
forgiveness to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the 
God of our fathers!  
And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt 
one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of 
our fathers!  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
The Master hath set thee in the firmament of the Faith like a sun, O father, to 
illumine with noetic radiance the souls of those who cry out earnestly: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
With the outpourings of thy tears thou didst wash away defilement of the flesh and 
spirit, O God-bearer, and as a light for those on earth thou hast taught all to cry out: 
O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Standing upon the immovable foundation of the Faith, O pure 
Mother of God, we confess thee to be the Theotokos; for without seed thou hast 
given birth to God the Word for our sake. Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O most 
pure one!  
ODE VIII 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the flame, * 
the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all ye works of 
the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
O people of Israel, beholding your glory, Emmanuel, the Babe born of the Virgin, 
join ye now in chorus in the presence of the Ark of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Behold, cried Symeon, this One Who is both God and Babe shall be a sign of 
contradiction. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
God the Word, being Life itself and having become a Babe, shall be the downfall 
of the disobedient, but the restoration of those who chant with faith: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
As a reasonable sacrifice of sweet savor, O father, thou didst offer up thy whole 
life, unto Christ, Who hung suspended upon the Cross for thy sake. Him do we 
supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
Even after thy death thou dost increase thy wealth of thine animate discourses, 
leaving them as an inheritance of great worth to all the faithful who supremely exalt 
Christ throughout all ages.  
Thou didst adorn thyself with the beauty of thy discourses, O most blessed one; 
for thou wast shown to be the pen of the Holy Spirit, piously expressing the mind of 
God in writing for those who supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: I flee to thy protection, O all-immaculate one, and put thee forward 
now as the intercessor for my life, who, in a manner past understanding, hast given 
birth to God the Word, Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern a 
figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to God. 
* Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the beginningless 
Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not known a man. 
The ancients were wont to offer a pair of new-born doves and two young birds, 
but the godly elder and the chaste prophetess Anna serve in their stead, magnifying 
the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and is borne into 
the temple.  
Thou hast imparted unto me the joy of Thy salvation, cried Symeon. Accept Thou 
Thy servant, for I am weary of the shadow, as a mystic and sacred preacher of the 
new grace, magnifying Thee in praise!  
The aged Anna, chaste and venerable, prophesying in sacred manner, openly con-
fessed the Lord in the temple, and she magnified the Theotokos, proclaiming her to 
all present.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Like a ray of light hath the discourse of grace shone forth in thy soul, O venerable 
one; and through thee all the earth hath been filled with their radiance. Partaking of it, 
O father, we marvel at the treasury of thy wisdom.  
Following the doctrines of the fathers, with divine wisdom thou didst teach 
theologians to worship the uncreated, beginningless Trinity, the three Hypostases in a 
Unity of essence, Who poureth forth enlightenment upon all the faithful.  
Having found the reward of thy labors in the heavens and received life everlasting, 
O most wise and blessed Isidore, thou standest now with the angels before the throne 
of God asking for the salvation of those who hymn thy memory.  
Theotokion: The incorrupt Word of God, taking upon Himself a corruptible form, 
hath clothed mankind in incorruption, making His abode within thee, O joyous one, 
as was the Father’s good pleasure. Wherefore, O most pure one, with the armies of 
heaven we magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Exapostilarion of the feast:  
The elder, brought into the temple by the Spirit, took the Master of the Law in his 
arms, crying: Do Thou now loose me from the bond of the flesh according to Thy 
word: for mine eyes have seen the revelation of the Gentiles, and the salvation of 
Israel!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
On the Aposticha, Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Christ is born of the Virgin, * a stranger to defilement, * as He was begotten 
incorruptibly of the Father, * the Son Who existed before the morning-star, ** Who 
delivereth Adam.  
Verse: Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, * O Master, according to 
Thy word.  
Open wide, ye gates of heaven! * For Christ is offered * to God the Father * in the 
temple, as a babe, ** by His Virgin Mother.  
Verse: A Light to enlighten the gentiles, * and the glory of His people Israel.  
Christ Who appeared as a burning ember * to the divine Isaiah * is now given to 
the elder * by the hands of the Theotokos, ** as with tongs.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VII: 
Thou hast come from heaven to earth, O our Savior, as a light of revelation to the 
gentiles, and, having come forth from the Virgin, thou hast given rest to the righteous 
Symeon; for it was fitting that Thou, O Bestower of life upon all, be recognized by 
the elder, in that Thou didst come to let him depart, according to Thy word, O Thou 
Who hast great mercy.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY 
The Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Isidore. 
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
The Church, hath found thee to be another morning-star, * O all glorious one, * 
and crying out to thee, * it is illumined by the lightning-flashes of thy words: ** 
Rejoice, O all-blessed and divinely wise Isidore!  
The Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I:  
O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth * and didst bless the 
hands of Symeon as was meet, * by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O 
Christ God. * But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, * and 
strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, ** O Thou Who alone lovest 
mankind.  
 
