--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 5th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
AFTERFEAST OF THE MEETING OF OUR LORD COMMEMORATION OF OUR 
FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, THEODOSIUS, ARCHBISHOP OF CHERNIGOV, 
WONDERWORKER OF ALL RUSSIA 
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Thy most radiant feast hath dawned like the sun, O divinely wise Theodosius, 
summoning the people to gladness and illumining all with rays of joy; for in thee hath 
the glory of Christ, the glory of the Orthodox Church, been revealed, shining forth 
with wondrous miracles. Wherefore, with love we cry to thee: Pray for us ever, O 
most sacred father! (Twice)  
When the time before appointed by God had come, then did God, Who is 
wondrous in His saints, glorify thee, for truly the wonder is most glorious: for many 
years hath thy body remained incorrupt, and now it hath been shown to be a source 
of healings for all who have recourse to thee with love. Glory to Him that gaveth thee 
strength! Glory to Him that crowned thee! Glory to Him that worketh healings for all 
through thee!  
Now doth the land of Russia radiantly hold chorus, glorifying thy holy memory, O 
holy hierarch, father Theodosius, for it hath found in thee a new intercessor and a 
fervent advocate at the throne of God, a speedy aid amid misfortune and a physician 
for the ailing that taketh no fee. Glory to Him that hath given thee the gift of healing! 
Glory to Him that hath glorified thee! Glory to Him that doth glorify His holy 
Church through thee!  
Glory ..., in the same tone and melody: 
With hymns let us praise today the most glorious wonderworker, whom Christ 
hath bestowed upon His Church, setting forth the truth of our Orthodox Faith to the 
reproof of those who reason vain things and for the instruction of those who have 
gone astray. Rejoice, O holy hierarch Theodosius, our father, most radiant star in the 
heavens of the Church! Rejoice, wondrous boast of the land of Russia! Rejoice, ready 
and prayerful comforter of the ailing and the sorrowful! Rejoice, thou fervent 
intercessor for our souls!  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Today the sacred Mother, who is more exalted than the holy temple, hath entered 
into the holy temple, revealing to the world the Lawgiver and Creator of the law. And 
the elder Symeon, receiving Him in his arms, cried out, rejoicing: “Now lettest Thou 
Thy servant depart, for I have seen Thee, the Savior of our souls!”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Or if it be not the feast, the Theotokion from the Oktoechos.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Thou hast been shown to be the dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit, * O all-blessed 
father Theodosius, * having cleansed thy soul and body of the passions * and adorned 
thyself with love and humility, ** as a fit habitation for Him.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice. 
O father Theodosius, * thou boast of holy hierarchs * and glory of monastics, * 
standing before the throne of the most holy Trinity ** pray thou unceasingly on 
behalf of our souls.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Hearken unto the supplications of thy children * that have recourse to thee in 
love, * O holy hierarch Theodosius, our father, * and grant the heartfelt petitions ** 
of those who honor thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
O holy hierarch Theodosius, our father, who can recount the labors which thou 
didst take up for the sake of the love of Christ? For by fasting, vigil and ceaseless 
prayer thou didst slay the arrogance of the flesh; and by humility, patience and love 
for thy neighbor thou didst prepare thyself as an abode for the Holy Spirit. 
Wherefore, thou now dost dwell in the mansions of heaven, where, now making thine 
abode, do thou ever pray on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone II: 
“Receive, O Symeon, * the Lord of glory * as thou wast told by the Holy Spirit. * 
For, lo! He is come!” the Most Pure One cried aloud.  
But if it be not the feast, then the following Theotokion, in tone VIII:  
O Sovereign lady, * accept the supplications of thy servants, ** and deliver us from 
all want and grief. 
Troparion, in Tone IV:  
O holy hierarch Theodosius, most honored among hierarchs, * thou wast a beacon 
to thy flock; * then thou didst pass on to the mansions of heaven. * Pray thou at the 
throne of the King of glory, * that He deliver us from the evils which beset us * and 
save our souls, O holy one, ** by thine intercessions.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
But if it be not the feast, we chant the Resurrectional Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera.  
4 Stichera of the Feast, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
The uncircumscribable and transcendent Word, * Who is borne aloft with glory * 
by the heavenly thrones, * doth Symeon receive in his arms, crying: * ‘Now let me 
depart according to Thy word, O Savior, ** Thou salvation and delight of the 
faithful!’ (Twice)  
Beholding Thee as a babe, the wondrous Symeon cried aloud: * I am afraid, and 
fear holding Thee the pre-eternal Word, * begotten of the Father, * in mine arms, O 
Master; * but since Thou seekest Thy servant in peace, ** so now let me depart, in 
that Thou art lovingly compassionate.  
Now let the gates of heaven be opened! * The Word of God, Who was born of 
the Father without seed, * hath been born of the Virgin, * voluntarily assuming 
human flesh, * to restore our nature, in that He is good, ** and to set it at the right 
hand of the Father.  
And 4 Stichera of the Saint, in Tone II: 
O holy hierarch Theodosius, our father, though thou hast finished thy course in 
secret struggles, yet the wondrous fragrance of thy humility, beloved of God, cannot 
be hid. Wherefore, thou hast been shown to be a most radiant lamp which hath not 
been hidden beneath a bushel, but hath been set upon the lampstand of the Church 
of God and glorified by God, Whom do thou entreat on behalf of our souls. (Twice)  
O holy hierarch Theodosius, our father, though thou wast led up to a hierarchal 
throne as a man full of grace, yet didst thou preserve the simplicity of monastic life, 
remaining in good obedience to thy spiritual father and showing to all an example of 
humility, following the example of the Lord Jesus, Whom do thou entreat on behalf 
of our souls.  
O divinely wise father Theodosius, though thou wast not long a pastor of the 
Church of Christ, yet didst thou acquire the great love of thy flock, embracing all in 
thy love, comforting the sorrowful and making haste to assist the orphaned and the 
widowed. Wherefore, even after thy blessed repose, the sorrowful and ailing, having 
recourse to thee as to one who is alive, receive an abundance of grace, glorifying 
Christ God, Who is wondrous in His saints, Whom do thou entreat on behalf of our 
souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O man of God and faithful servant, minister of the Lord, man of divine desires, 
chosen vessel of the Holy Spirit, pillar and ground of the Church, heir of the 
kingdom: Cease thou never to pray for us to the Lord!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VI: 
Let the gates of heaven be opened today; for the beginningless Word of the 
Father, receiving a beginning under time, without abandoning His divinity, is 
voluntarily borne by His Virgin Mother into the temple of the law as a babe forty 
days old. And Symeon taking Him in his arms, cried aloud: “Let Thy servant depart, 
O Master, for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation! O Lord Who hast come into the 
world to save the human race, glory be to Thee!”  
But if it be not the feast, the Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS  
The memory of the righteous man calleth forth praises, and the blessing of the 
Lord is upon his head. Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that 
getteth understanding. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of 
silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies; and all 
the things thou canst desire are not to be com pared un to her. Length of days is in 
her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honor. Her ways are ways of 
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. Out of her mouth truth proceedeth, and law 
and mercy she carrieth on her tongue. Hear me, then, O children, for I will s peak of 
excellent things; and happy is the man that will keep unto my ways, for my paths are 
the paths of life, and the desire is fashioned of the Lord. Wherefore, I entreat you and 
put forth my voice before the sons of men, for I with wisdom set up everything; I 
have called forth counsel, understanding and knowledge. Counsel is mine and sound 
wisdom, mine is understanding and strength is mine. I love them that love me, and 
those that seek me shall find grace. Understand, then, O ye simple, the cunning, and 
ye uninstructed-direct your hearts unto it. Hearken unto me again, for I will speak of 
honorable things, and the opening of my mouth shall be right things, for my mouth 
shall speak truth and wickedness is an abomination to my lips. All the words of my 
mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing froward or perverse in them. They are all 
plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge. For I will 
teach you the truth, so that your hope may be in the Lord and ye may be filled with 
the Spirit.  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS  
The mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom; but the froward tongue shall be cut 
out. The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable; but the mouth of the wicked 
speaketh frowardness. A false balance is an abomination to the Lord, but a just 

--- PAGE 6 ---
weight is His delight. When pride cometh, then cometh shame, but with the lowly is 
wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them; but the perverseness of trans-
gressors shall destroy them. Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness 
delivereth from death. The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way: but the 
wicked shall fall by his own wickedness. The righteousness of the upright shall deliver 
them, but transgressors shall be taken in their own haughtiness. When a wicked man 
dieth, his expectation shall perish: and the hope of unjust men perisheth. The 
righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead. A hypocrite 
with his mouth destroyeth his neighbor, but through knowledge shall the just be 
delivered. When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth: and when the 
wicked perish, there is shouting. By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted, but 
it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked. He that is void of wisdom despiseth his 
neighbor: but a man of understanding holdeth his peace.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
But though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was loved of him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted he to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in their minds, 
That his grace and mercy is with his saints, and that he hath respect unto his chosen.  
At the Litiya, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel: “When from the Tree ...”:  
When thou didst pass on from earthly things to those of heaven, O holy hierarch 
Theodosius, our father, then did God, Who is wondrous in His saints, bestow upon 
thee the grace of healing; for thou didst appear to the ailing hierarch John and, 
commanding him to celebrate the liturgy on the morrow, didst straightway restore 
him to health. Wherefore, joyously bowing down before thy relics, with compunction 
he cried out: Glory to Him that doth glorify His saints!  
O holy hierarch, thou dost intercede for all that have recourse to thy protection 
with faith, for thou art shown to be a comforter amid sorrows, a gracious physician 
amidst afflictions, a most wise guide on the path of salvation, and a most fervent 
intercessor for all before God. Wherefore, honoring thy holy memory with love, as to 
our most merciful father, we cry to thee: Pray thou on our behalf, O holy hierarch 
Theodosius!  
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., in Tone III: 
Through thee did God make manifest marvelous and most glorious wonders, O 
father Theodosius, when it was His good pleasure to glorify thy precious and much-
healing relics, for the blind regained their sight, the dumb waxed eloquent, paralytics 
and the lame were cured, and the name of God was glorified by all; for in thee hath 
the Lord visited the land of Russia, and through thee have we beheld the mighty 
works of God. Wherefore, reverently honoring thy holy memory, we fall down before 
thee and entreat thee: Pray thou for the salvation of our souls!  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone V: 
The Ancient of days, having become a babe, is borne into the temple by the Virgin 
Mother, fulfilling the promise of His own law; and Symeon, receiving Him, said: 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word; for mine eyes 
have seen Thy salvation, O Holy One!”  
 But if there be no feast, we chant this Theotokion, in the same tone: 
O Theotokos, intercession for all who pray to thee; * In thee do we make bold, * 
and in thee do we glory; * to thee do we flee, entreating thee: ** Pray thou for the 
salvation of our souls!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel: “Rejoice, thou life-bearing Cross ...”:  
Rejoice, O holy hierarch Theodosius, * most glorious adornment of the Church of 
Russia, * radiant boast of the city of Chernigov, unshakable pillar of Orthodoxy, * 
who wast glorified by God for the reproof of the arrogance of the impious, * and 
wast revealed as a worker of wonders! * Rejoice, O our new intercessor before God! * 
Standing ever before Him with all the saints, ** pray thou for the salvation of our 
souls.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Rejoice, O sacred one, * divinely wise guide of monks, * who didst love Christ 
from thy youth, * and Whose easy yoke thou didst bear with joy! * Rejoice, thou that 
leadest all to God, * not only by word, but also by deed and the example of thy life! * 
Standing now before Him, * pray thou on behalf of thy children * that honor thy holy 
memory with faith and love, ** O holy hierarch Theodosius, our father!  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Rejoice, O hierarch of God, * who hast been adorned with the beauty of the 
episcopal rank * and dost shine forth in virtue! * Rejoice, thou mirror of humility, * 
splendid model of meekness and guilelessness * and inexhaustible treasury of love! * 
Rejoice, thou that even after thy repose didst not forsake thy flock, * but dost ever 
benefit it, * and showest thyself to be a father who loveth his children! * Wherefore, 
celebrating thy memory, * we flee unto thee, as to our father, * and cry out to thee 
with love: * Pray for us, O our father, ** that our souls may be saved! 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 Glory ..., in the same tone and melody: 
Come, ye Christian people, and with hymns let us crown the new and most 
marvelous worker of wonders whom Christ, Who is wondrous in His saints, hath 
glorified and bestowed upon the land of Russia as a fervent intercessor. Rejoice, O 
Theodosius, our father, ready comforter amid our sorrows! Rejoice, most merciful 
physician of the afflicted! Rejoice, thou that art ready to ask of the Lord those things 
which lead to salvation for each and every one! And now, standing before the throne 
of His majesty, as a good and faithful servant of the Lord summoned to the joy of thy 
Master, entreat Him for the salvation of our souls.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VIII:  
He Who is borne upon the cherubim and hymned by the seraphim, hath been 
borne into the temple of God today in accordance with the law, sitting in the arms of 
the elder as upon a throne, and as God doth receive the offerings from Joseph: a pair 
of turtledoves - the undefiled Church and the people newly-chosen from among the 
gentiles; and two young pigeons - the Old, and the beginning of the New. And 
Symeon, having finally received the fulfillment of the promise made to him, blessed 
the Virgin Mary, the Theotokos, foretelling in imagery the sufferings she would 
endure and asked from God deliverance, and cried aloud: “Lettest now Thy servant 
depart, O Master, as Thou didst tell me before; for I have seen Thee, the pre eternal 
Light, the Savior and Lord of the Christian people!”  
But if there be no feast, we chant the Theotokion, in Tone V:  
Thou art the temple and portal, * the palace and throne of the King, * O most 
honored Virgin, * through whom Christ the Lord, my Redeemer, * Who is the Sun of 
righteousness, * hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in darkness, * deigning 
to enlighten those * whom He hath fashioned in His image by His own hand. * 
Wherefore, O all-hymned one, * as thou hast acquired a mother’s boldness before 
Him, ** entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be saved. 
At the Blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
O holy hierarch Theodosius, most honored among hierarchs, * thou wast a beacon 
to thy flock; * then thou didst pass on to the mansions of heaven. * Pray thou at the 
throne of the King of glory, * that He deliver us from the evils which beset us * and 
save our souls, O holy one, ** by thine intercessions. (Twice) 
And that of the feast, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection. (Once) 
If the Saint’s day fall on a Sunday: Rejoice, O Virgin..., (Twice); of the Saint (Once)

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection. (Twice)  
 Glory ..., that of the saint, in Tone IV:  
O holy hierarch Theodosius, most honored among hierarchs, * thou wast a beacon 
to thy flock; * then thou didst pass on to the mansions of heaven. * Pray thou at the 
throne of the King of glory, * that He deliver us from the evils which beset us * and 
save our souls, O holy one, ** by thine intercessions.  
Both now ..., that of the feast.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
As of old the ailing were cured by touching the hem of Christ’s garment, and as 
the handkerchiefs and aprons of Paul healed incurable diseases, so also are many of 
the sick now healed on touching the vestments wherewith thy relics have been 
clothed, O holy hierarch Theodosius. Wherefore, rejoicing and glorifying God, with 
love we cry out to thee: By thy supplications heal thou also our diseases of body and 
soul, O all-blessed one!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Thou art truly the strength of the helpless, O most holy Virgin Mother. Hence we, 
the lowly, are exalted through thee, and in thee are we caught up on High, for thou 
art the protection and mediatress before God for all mankind. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
As a forthright witness to the truth before those who abound in heresy and trouble 
simple souls hath Christ shown thee forth in His Church, for thou hast vanquished 
the superstition of men not by words, but by the incorruption of thy relics, 
confirming the holy Faith with many signs and wonders, O holy hierarch Theodosius, 
our father, to the joy and salvation of all that honor thy holy memory and cry out to 
God: Glory to Him that doth glorify His saints!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O all-immaculate Virgin, * who hast given birth to the transcendent God, * do 
thou, together with the Hierarch Theodosius, * unceasingly entreat Him to grant us 
remission of sins * before our end, * for as is meet, we hymn thee with faith and love, 
** O only all-hymned one. 
The Magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Theodosius, and we 
honor thy holy memory, for thou dost entreat Christ God for us!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Selected Psalm Verse: 
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the World.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
Even after thy repose art thou truly shown to be a pastor and father, and a grace-
filled guide, O Theodosius, our father; for, appearing to the afflicted in dreams, thou 
dost teach them to honor the Church of God and her divine precepts, to partake of 
the Mysteries of God for the salvation of one’s soul, and to offer up supplications 
unto the most pure Mother of God. With her do thou ever pray for the salvation of 
our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Show forth thy ready protection and aid * upon thy servants, O pure one; * still 
the waves of my vain thoughts, * and raise up my fallen soul, O Theotokos. * For I 
know, O Virgin, ** I know that whatsoever thou dost desire, thou canst do.  
Then, the Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath ..., 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (JN. 10:9-16).  
I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and 
out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to 
destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more 
abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. 
But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth 
the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and 
scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for 
the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As 
the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the 
sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and 
they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
O holy hierarch Theodosius, favorite of God and co-communicant of Christ, as is 
thy name, so also was thy life; for in offering the whole of thyself unto God as a gift, 
thou wast truly shown to be a gift of God to the Russian land. Glorious was thy life, 
and thy repose is with the saints. Pray thou for our souls!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Canon of The feast, with 6 Troparia; and that of the saint, with 8 Troparia: 
ODE I  
Canon of the Meeting, in Tone III:  
Irmos: The Sun once passed over dry land * in the midst of the deep. * For the 
water on both sides became firm as a wall * while the people traversed the sea 
on foot, * chanting in a manner pleasing to God: * Let us sing unto the Lord; * 
for gloriously hath he been glorified. 
Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun Who is borne aloft upon a light 
cloud is brought to the temple as a babe in the arms of the unblemished one. 
Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously 
hath He been glorified!  
Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, 
hasten straightway to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: 
Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For 
Christ the Fashioner, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, 
is borne by the Virgin Mother as a babe to God the Father, He Who was before all 
the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Canon of the saint 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Accept this praise offered thee by unworthy lips, and by thy fervent prayers to 
God grant peace to those who honor thy holy memory, O Theodosius, our father!  
From thy youth thou didst love the Lord, preserving thy purity undefiled; from 
childhood didst thou cleave to Him with thy pure soul, keeping thy heart in simplicity 
and guilelessness. Wherefore, thou wast truly a child of God, O holy Theodosius.  
It is good for a man when he beareth the yoke in his youth, saith the Scriptures. 
Following this saying, with joy didst thou take up the yoke of the Lord from thy 
youth, and didst become an exemplary monk, O blessed Theodosius.  
Theotokion: O most holy Virgin Mother of God, our hope unashamed: save us, 
hearken unto us that are cruelly held fast by the passions, and grant us a helping hand 
by thine intercessions.  
ODE III  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Lord, the firm foundation of those who put their trust in Thee, * do 
Thou establish the Church, * which Thou hast purchased * with thy precious 
blood. 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the first-
born Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam.  
God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-formed man, who 
through deception had become childish of mind.  
Without undergoing change, the Creator became a Babe, rendering divine our na-
ture, the product of earth to which it returneth again.  
Canon of the saint 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Blessed are the poor in spirit, saith the Lord. Heeding this salvific word, thou didst 
strive to acquire poverty of spirit more than all other virtues, O venerable one, loving 
it as a mighty defense against every temptation and as the God-loving mother of all 
virtues.  
Knowing that humility is born of obedience and dispassion of humility, thou didst 
love obedience with all thy heart, cutting down evil thoughts in all things by thy will, 
wherefore, thou didst attain even unto dispassion, having prepared thy soul as a pure 
habitation for the most holy Spirit.  
Thou didst acquire great meekness, O divinely wise Theodosius, courageously 
enduring all sorrows, and lovingly covering every offense and abasement with silence. 
Wherefore, thou hast received an inheritance in the land of the living, where the 
righteous dwell forever, glorifying the Lord Jesus.  
Theotokion: We have no boldness before thy Son and God, O most holy 
Sovereign Lady; nor would we have boldness before thee, ever defiled as we are by 
sins, O all-immaculate and merciful Mother, were thou not to summon us, the errant, 
to repentance, driving from us all despondency and indifference with the hope of 
salvation.  
The Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I:  
O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth * and didst bless the 
hands of Symeon as was meet, * by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O 
Christ God. * But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, * and 
strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, ** O Thou Who alone lovest 
mankind.  
Ikos: Let us make haste to the Theotokos, desiring to behold her Son borne unto 
Symeon. Looking upon Him from heaven, the bodiless hosts in amazement proclaim: 
“We behold things wondrous, most glorious, unapproachable and ineffable: for He 
Who created Adam is borne as an infant; He Whom naught can contain is held in the 
elder’s arms; He Who is in the infinite bosom of His Father is willingly constrained in 
the flesh, but not in His divinity, He Who alone is the Lover of mankind.”  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sessional Hymn of the saint, in Tone IV: 
Thou wast shown to be a grace-bearing beacon, O Theodosius our father, 
resplendent with the calm light of humility, illumining us with thy love. Wherefore, 
honoring thy memory with love, we cry to thee: Pray for us, O holy hierarch of God, 
thou newly revealed wonderworker!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Having minds darkened by many transgressions, * we cry out for thy mighty aid, 
O Virgin Theotokos: * Enlighten the eyes of our souls, and shine upon us the 
radiance of repentance, * through the prayers of the holy hierarch Theodosius * who 
was pleasing unto thee, ** O thou who alone art pure and blessed!  
ODE IV  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Thy virtue, hath covered the heavens, O Christ, * for having come forth 
from the Ark of Thy sanctification, * from Thine undefiled Mother, * Thou 
hast appeared in the temple of Thy glory * as an infant borne in arms, * filling 
all with Thy praise. 
Rejoicing, the Theotokos cried aloud: O Symeon, initiate of ineffable mysteries, 
take in thine arms Christ, the Word Who hath become a babe, of Whom thou wast 
informed of old by the Holy Spirit, and cry out to Him: All things are filled with Thy 
praise!  
O Symeon, rejoicing take up Christ, the little Child, on Whom thou hast set thy 
hope, the Consolation of the Israel of God, the Creator and Master of the law, Who 
fulfilleth the tenets of the law; and cry aloud to Him: All things are filled with Thy 
praise!  
Beholding the beginningless Word borne as a babe in the flesh by the Virgin as on 
the throne of the cherubim, the Author of all, Symeon marveled and cried aloud to 
Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!  
Canon of the saint 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Weighed down by illness and exhausted by old age, the arch pastor Lazarus first 
made thee his concelebrant and afterwards his successor, O holy hierarch 
Theodosius, and a beacon to the Church of Chernigov. By thy prayers illumine it 
forever!  
Truly thou wast shown to be worthy of a hierarch’s honor and authority, O father 
Theodosius, being most wise of word, virtuous of life, learned in the divine Scriptures 
and exceeding content to guide the rational sheep.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Adorned with piety and renowned amongst all the people of the land of Chernigov 
for thy spiritual life, thou wast unanimously chosen by them for the great ministry of 
the Church of God, O father Theodosius. By thy prayers do thou now watch over it!  
Theotokion: The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much, saith 
James, the brother of the Lord; and the prayer of the holy hierarch Theodosius also 
availeth much, rendered effectual by thy maternal supplication, O most holy 
Theotokos and Sovereign Lady; for thou art our intercession, protection and help, O 
gracious one.  
ODE V  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * borne 
aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have foreseen God 
made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the King of peace.’ 
The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was revealed of old to the prophet, 
and beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried aloud: Rejoice, O pure one, 
for like a throne, God the unwaning Light. Who reigneth with peace, is held by thee!  
The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who 
kneweth not wedlock, said: O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant 
God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!  
Isaiah, purified by the burning ember brought by the seraphim, and the elder 
illumined by the O Mother of God, cried to her: thou hast given me Him Whom 
thou dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with 
peace.  
Canon of the saint 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why has the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
The people of the city of Chernigov rejoiced, beholding thee vested in the 
splendor of the hierarchal rank, standing before the throne of the grace of God with 
their archpastor Lazarus, lifting up thy venerable hands on behalf of thy flock and 
giving thanks unto Christ. And their hearts were moved to compunction.  
In life, love and spirit, faith and purity thou wast an example to all the flock 
entrusted to thee by God. Wherefore, it was not only thine own sheep that cleaved 
unto thee with love, but even the heterodox honored thee as a man of God, O 
Theodosius our father.  
Thou wast truly a shepherd to thy rational flock, ready to lay down thy life for thy 
sheep, O holy hierarch Theodosius. Wherefore, thou hast been shown to be an 
invincible champion of the oppressed, a fearless zealot reproving the mighty of this 
world with love and paternally instructing thy flock, most wisely guiding the erring to 
the right path.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: Grant life unto my slain soul; raise it up, for it is fallen; heal it, for it is 
wounded. Enlighten my mind; still the waves of temptations, O Mother of God, most 
holy Virgin, and save me through thine intercessions, O most pure one.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The Elder, having seen with his eyes the salvation * that was to come 
unto the peoples from God, * cried aloud unto Thee: * ‘O Christ, Thou art my 
God.’ 
In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the 
disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful.  
Clearly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, in Thy 
tender compassion Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of the earth-born.  
Now lettest him that worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of 
the Virgin, God become a Child, depart in peace.  
Canon of the saint 
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Being an exemplary monk from thy youth, thou didst lovingly found monastic 
habitations and there didst set everything in good order for the good of monastic life, 
ever guiding all to God with thy paternal instructions, O divinely wise Theodosius our 
father.  
Most beautifully fashioning of thy soul a temple for the Spirit of God by thy 
virtues, thou didst love the splendor of the house of God; and taking most diligent 
care therefore, thou didst erect yet new temples to the glory of God the Creator Who 
hath beautifully adorned the whole world with ineffable comeliness.  
With angelic joy didst thou rejoice, O holy hierarch of God, when thou didst 
behold thy children walking in the truth; and as a father that loveth his children thou 
didst pray for the salvation of all, embracing all with thy love and interceding for all, 
O holy hierarch Theodosius our father.  
Theotokion: Come, all ye faithful, let us fall down before the Mother of God, the 
fervent intercessor for our race; and in compunction of heart let us cry aloud: O 
Sovereign Lady, most holy Theotokos, shelter us beneath thy gracious protection and 
deliver us from all evil by thine intercessions.  
Kontakion of the saint, in Tone IV: 
O holy hierarch Theodosius, * for Christ the Chief Shepherd thou didst labor, * 
nurturing thy rational sheep in the spiritual pasture; * and from Christ God didst thou 

--- PAGE 16 ---
receive the gift of healing * to cure spiritual and bodily infirmities * of all who with 
faith have recourse to thy healing relics. * Wherefore, pray thou now, O holy one, * 
that all who call upon thy name ** be saved from the assaults of the enemy, and that 
our souls find mercy.  
Ikos: God’s gift to the land of Russia hast thou truly been shown to be, O holy 
Theodosius, for, having offered thyself to God from thy youth, thou didst fight the 
good fight until the end and didst receive great gifts, being a chosen vessel of grace. 
Wherefore, as in thy life, and yet more so after thy blessed repose, thou dost lift up 
thy venerable hands with boldness, standing before the throne of the most holy Trin-
ity, praying fervently for thy flock and for the whole Russian land. Thus, having 
recourse unto thee with faith and love, all that sorrow receive consolation abundantly 
and the ailing are deemed worthy of healing. With them we also cry out to thee, as to 
a father who loveth his children: Pray for those who call upon thy name, O holy one, 
that our souls be saved from the assaults of the enemy!  
ODE VII  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Thou who in the midst of the fire * bedewed the children as they 
discoursed on things divine, * and Who didst take up Thy dwelling in the pure 
Virgin: * O Word of God Thee do we reverently praise chanting: * O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
I go to announce glad tidings unto Adam and Eve who dwell in Hades, cried 
Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
God, the Redeemer of the race of mortals shall go even unto Hades; He shall grant 
forgiveness to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the 
God of our fathers!  
And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt 
one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of 
our fathers!  
Canon of the saint 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Ever meditating upon the memory of death, it was thy desire to keep the Cross of 
the Lord continually before thine eyes, and the depiction thereof was with thee as an 
inseparable companion even while thou didst journey, that thou mightest ever cry out 
to the Lord from thy heart: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
Even after death thou dost, through the grace of God, remain with thy children as 
one who is alive; and after thy repose thou art shown to be a good shepherd unto 
them, O father Theodosius, guiding those who are ignorant of the faith in visions 
during sleep, and teaching all to cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, 
throughout the ages!  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Thou didst command the ailing monk to go to the church of God and to pray, O 
father Theodosius, standing before him in a dream; and instructing him paternally, 
thou didst remind him of his sins, calling him to repentance; and thou didst grant him 
healing, that he might continually glorify the Lord, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
God, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Having dissipated my mind, my heart hath waxed gross and my will 
hath grown feeble. O Sovereign Lady Theotokos, take pity upon me, a sinner; heal 
thou my soul, and save me, for thou art the good Mother of my good Savior, that I 
might continually cry out to Him: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the 
ages!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the flame, * 
the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all ye works of 
the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
O people of Israel, beholding your glory, Emmanuel, the Babe born of the Virgin, 
join ye now in chorus in the presence of the Ark of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Behold, cried Symeon, this One Who is both God and Babe shall be a sign of 
contradiction. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
God the Word, being Life itself and having become a Babe, shall be the downfall 
of the disobedient, but the restoration of those who chant with faith: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon of the saint 
Irmos: Seated upon the throne of glory, * and unceasingly glorified as God, * 
O ye angels and heavens bless, ** hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!. 
Who can declare all thy wonders as is meet, O holy hierarch Theodosius? For thou 
dost show thyself to be a peerless physician even un to the ailing that seek thee not, 
and thou dost call upon all to confess the glory of God Who doth glorify His saints 
and is supremely exalted throughout all ages!  
Thou hast shown thyself to be a helper and refuge for those who are afflicted by 
unclean spirits, O holy hierarch Theodosius, with the power of God driving all 
demonic activity away from those who with faith have recourse to thy relics, that the 
name of God may be glorified throughout all ages.  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Thy name, O holy hierarch Theodosius, poured forth like myrrh, is wafted, like the 
fragrance of God’s paradise, over the face of all the land of Russia, delighting the 
hearts of the faithful and moving them to hymn in spiritual joy the Lord Who is 
supremely exalted throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: Disdain not the supplications of thy servants, O Mother of God. 
Accept our prayers, for the sake of the holy hierarch Theodosius who was pleasing 
unto thee, and bear them to the throne of thy Son and God, that His name may be 
glorified by all creation throughout all ages. 
ODE IX  
Canon of the feast  
Refrain: O Virgin Theotokos, thou hope of Christians, preserve and save those 
who trust in thee.  
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern a 
figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to God. 
* Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the beginningless 
Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not known a man. 
The ancients were wont to offer a pair of new-born doves and two young birds, 
but the godly elder and the chaste prophetess Anna serve in their stead, magnifying 
the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and is borne into 
the temple.  
Thou hast imparted unto me the joy of Thy salvation, cried Symeon. Accept Thou 
Thy servant, for I am weary of the shadow, as a mystic and sacred preacher of the 
new grace, magnifying Thee in praise!  
The aged Anna, chaste and venerable, prophesying in sacred manner, openly con-
fessed the Lord in the temple, and she magnified the Theotokos, proclaiming her to 
all present.  
Canon of the saint 
Irmos: With never ceasing praises we magnify thee, * the Mother of God Most 
High, * who art higher than the all-pure hosts, * and who beyond 
comprehension knew not wedlock, * yet hath truly given birth to God.  
As a most merciful healer, O holy Theodosius, thou dost not only mercifully heed 
the afflicted that call upon thee, but dost obey their continual petitions, and according 
to their faith thou dost show thyself to be a ready physician for the sick, having mercy 
on and comforting all and pouring forth most abundantly thy compassion upon all.  
Truly marvelous and beyond all telling are thy wonders, O Theodosius our father; 
for thou hast shown thyself to be the glory of the Church of Russia, a heavenly 
preacher of the Orthodox Faith and a steadfast witness to the Truth.  
O holy one of God, favorite of Christ, inexhaustible treasury of mercy: Look thou 
down upon my infirmities; heal my soul which is badly tempest-tossed by the 

--- PAGE 19 ---
passions; heal thou my body also which is encompassed by weaknesses, that in thee I 
may glorify the grace and tender compassion of Christ God Who is wondrous in His 
saints.  
Theotokion: To thee do I offer my sinful heart, O most merciful Mother. Before 
thee do I cast the weakness of my soul and my body. By thy prayers do thou help and 
have mercy on me!  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel: “Heaven with stars ...”:  
He that adorned heaven with stars hath revealed thee, O holy hierarch 
Theodosius, as a new and most radiant star adorning the heaven of the Church and 
driving away the darkness of the arrogance of the impious. Wherefore, enlighten thou 
our souls, which are darkened by sin, and guide us toward repentance by thy prayers, 
O venerable one.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast: 
The elder, brought into the temple by the Spirit, took the Master of the Law in his 
arms, crying: Do Thou now loose me from the bond of the flesh according to Thy 
word: for mine eyes have seen the revelation of the Gentiles, and the salvation of 
Israel!  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VI: 
O our all-blessed and God-bearing father Theodosius, disdaining the beauties of 
this world and its fleeting pleasures, thou didst love the monastic life and wast joined 
to the choir of the angels. Wherefore, in thy miracles thou dost wondrously shine 
forth upon the whole world as a most radiant beacon. Pray thou therefore for us who 
keep thy holy memory, for we are thy children and the sheep of thy rational flock. We 
call upon thee for aid, asking that through thee we might receive peace and great 
mercy. (Twice)  
O divinely wise and all-blessed Theodosius, thou didst subject all the pride of thy 
flesh to thy soul; cleansing thyself by fasting and secret struggles, thou wast shown to 
shine like gold tried in the crucible, becoming a dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit. 
Bringing good order to monastic habitations and magnificently adorning the churches 
of God, well didst thou tend thy rational sheep, leading them up to the heights of the 
virtues by thy teachings as by a ladder. Remember us that honor thine ever-sacred 
memory, and pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Thou didst shine upon us thy God-pleasing life, O most glorious Theodosius, 
instructing us with the virtue beloved of God; for in thyself didst thou manifest to all 
a rule of faith and a model of abstinence, and an inexhaustible treasury of love and 
humility. Wherefore, honoring thy holy memory, we glorify Christ Who hath crowned 
thee. Him do thou beseech for the salvation of our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
What shall we offer unto Thee, O Christ our God? How shall we worthily hymn 
Thy compassion which Thou dost pour forth most abundantly upon us, the 
unworthy? We are blessed, being children of Thine Orthodox Church, wherein, as in 

--- PAGE 20 ---
days of old, Thou dost even now show forth wondrous and most glorious miracles, 
glorifying Thy saints. And, lo! we now radiantly celebrate a new and most marvelous 
wonderworker, whom Thou hast been well-pleased to glorify! We glorify Thy name, 
O Lord our God. We bow down before the greatness of Thy goodness, and, falling 
prostrate, cry out to Thee: Through the prayers of the holy hierarch Theodosius, have 
mercy upon us! 
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VI:  
O Christ our God, Whose good pleasure it was to sit today in the arms of the 
elder, as in the chariot of the cherubim: in that Thou lovest mankind, deliver and save 
us who hymn Thee, calling us forth from the tyranny of the passions.  
Great Doxology & the Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE V of the feast’s canon, and 4 from 
ODE VI of the saint’s canon.  
The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was revealed of old to the prophet, 
and beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried aloud: Rejoice, O pure one, 
for like a throne, God the unwaning Light. Who reigneth with peace, is held by thee! 
(Twice)  
The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who 
kneweth not wedlock, said: O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant 
God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!  
Isaiah, purified by the burning ember brought by the seraphim, and the elder 
illumined by the O Mother of God, cried to her: thou hast given me Him Whom 
thou dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with 
peace.  
Being an exemplary monk from thy youth, thou didst lovingly found monastic 
habitations and there didst set everything in good order for the good of monastic life, 
ever guiding all to God with thy paternal instructions, O divinely wise Theodosius our 
father.  
Most beautifully fashioning of thy soul a temple for the Spirit of God by thy 
virtues, thou didst love the splendor of the house of God; and taking most diligent 
care therefore, thou didst erect yet new temples to the glory of God the Creator Who 
hath beautifully adorned the whole world with ineffable comeliness.  
With angelic joy didst thou rejoice, O holy hierarch of God, when thou didst 
behold thy children walking in the truth; and as a father that loveth his children thou 
didst pray for the salvation of all, embracing all with thy love and interceding for all, 
O holy hierarch Theodosius our father.  
Theotokion: Come, all ye faithful, let us fall down before the Mother of God, the 
fervent intercessor for our race; and in compunction of heart let us cry aloud: O 
Sovereign Lady, most holy Theotokos, shelter us beneath thy gracious protection and 
deliver us from all evil by thine intercessions.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection.  
 
 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
O holy hierarch Theodosius, most honored among hierarchs, * thou wast a beacon 
to thy flock; * then thou didst pass on to the mansions of heaven. * Pray thou at the 
throne of the King of glory, * that He deliver us from the evils which beset us * and 
save our souls, O holy one, ** by thine intercessions.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Glory ..., O holy hierarch Theodosius, * for Christ the Chief Shepherd thou didst 
labor, * nurturing thy rational sheep in the spiritual pasture; * and from Christ God 
didst thou receive the gift of healing * to cure spiritual and bodily infirmities * of all 
who with faith have recourse to thy healing relics. * Wherefore, pray thou now, O 
holy one, * that all who call upon thy name ** be saved from the assaults of the 
enemy, and that our souls find mercy.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I:  
Both now ..., O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth * and 
didst bless the hands of Symeon as was meet, * by anticipation Thou hast now saved 
even us, O Christ God. * But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, * 
and strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, ** O Thou Who alone lovest 
mankind.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (13:17-21)  
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they watch for 
your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with 
grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good 
conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to do 
this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, that brought 
again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the 
blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his 
will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to 
whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (6:17-23)  
At that time: (Jesus) came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the 
company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judea and 
Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to 
be healed of their diseases; and they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they 
were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out 
of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples and said, 
Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: 
for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, 
when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and 
shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice 
ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven. 
 
Communion Verse of the saint: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous 
be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings. 
