--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 3rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY AND RIGHTEOUS SYMEON THE GOD-
RECEIVER, AND THE HOLY ANNA THE PROPHETESS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the feast, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
The Creator of all and our Redeemer * is borne into the temple by the Virgin 
Mother; * wherefore, the elder, receiving Him, * cried aloud with joy: “Now lettest 
Thou Thy servant * depart in peace, O Good One, ** for Thou hast been well 
pleased”.  
Symeon, receiving in his arms from the Virgin * the Savior of all, Who was 
begotten before all ages, * cried aloud to the ends of the earth: * “Now lettest Thou 
Thy servant depart in peace, O Good One * for beholding Thee today ** I have seen 
the effulgence of Thy glory!”  
Symeon, bearing in his arms the Savior * Who for the salvation of mankind was 
born in the fullness of time, * cried aloud, rejoicing: * “I have beheld the light of the 
nations and the glory of Israel! * At Thy command lettest now Thy servant depart 
from among those here, ** as Thou didst say, in that Thou art God!”  
And 3 Stichera of the saint, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
As one righteous and perfect * and glorious in all things, O divinely inspired one, * 
taking up in thine arms * the one perfect God, incarnate, * Who came to justify the 
world; * thou didst cry out to Him, asking to be released from thy body saying: * 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, * for I have beheld Thee today, ** O 
Lover of mankind!”  
Young in spirit, * yet elderly of body, O Symeon, * the promise made to thee was 
fulfilled; that thou wouldst not see death * until thou beheld a young Babe * Who 
before time as the Creator and God of all, * would humble Himself by assuming 
flesh; * and beholding Him, thou didst ask crying aloud; * let me be loosed from the 
flesh, ** and joyously pass over to the mansions of God.  
The divinely inspired Anna * and the most noetically rich Symeon, * resplendent 
in prophecy, * manifest as blameless according to the law, * beholding the Bestower 
of the law * manifest among us as a Babe, * have now worshipped Him. * We now 
joyously celebrate their memory, ** glorifying as is meet, Jesus Who is the Lover of 
mankind.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: the composition of Germanus:  
The Ancient of days, having become a babe, is borne into the temple by the Virgin 
Mother, fulfilling the promise of His own law; and Symeon, receiving Him, said: 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word; for mine eyes 
have seen Thy salvation, O Holy One!”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Now let us celebrate the saving grace * of the ineffable manifestation of God; * 
for Christ God, having without change become a babe through the Virgin Maiden, * 
is borne by His Mother * into the temple of God the Father, ** and Symeon, 
receiving Him, embraceth Him in his arms.  
Verse: Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, * O Master, according to 
Thy word.  
Of old Thou wast seen by the prophets, * insofar as they were able to see Thee, O 
Jesus; * but now, O Word of God, Thou hast voluntarily revealed Thyself to the 
whole world, in the flesh, * through the Virgin Mary, O Christ, * and manifested Thy 
salvation unto all the descendants of Adam, ** in that Thou lovest mankind.  
Verse: A light to enlighten the Gentiles, * and the glory of Thy people Israel.  
O Christ Who of old laid down the law on Mount Sinai, * fulfilling now the 
provisions of the law given thereon, * desirest to be carried into the temple * in the 
arms of the Theotokos, * together with doves for sacrifice, ** and to be held there in 
the arms of Symeon.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of John, in Tone I:  
Today, He Who gave the law to Moses on Sinai hath submitted to the commands 
of the law, having become like us for our sake, in that He is full of loving-kindness. 
Our pure God, now a holy Infant, having opened the womb of the pure one, is 
offered to Himself, as God, freeing us from the curse of the law, and enlightening our 
souls. 
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection. (Thrice) 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone was sealed ...”: 
Having become a babe for my sake, Thou wast borne into the temple, O Life of 
all, having of old engraved the law on stone tablets on Mount Sinai, Thou hast placed 
Thyself under the law, that Thou mightest set all free from ancient servitude to the 
law. Glory to Thy compassion, O Savior! Glory to Thy Kingdom! Glory to Thy 
dispensation, O only Lover of mankind!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
 Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
O Savior, Creator, Master and Bestower of the law, in fulfillment of the law, Thou 
wast borne into the temple in the flesh; and by Thy good pleasure carried in the arms 
of Symeon, Thou Who art awesome to all and sustainest all creation, revealing Thy 
desire to shed light upon all of us, O Thou Who alone art compassionate.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia, including its Irmos; and that of the saint, with 6 
Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, in Tone III  
Irmos: The Sun once passed over dry land * in the midst of the deep. * For the 
water on both sides became firm as a wall * while the people traversed the sea 
on foot, * chanting in a manner pleasing to God: * Let us sing unto the Lord; * 
for gloriously hath he been glorified. 
Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun Who is borne aloft upon a light 
cloud is brought to the temple as a babe in the arms of the unblemished one. 
Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously 
hath He been glorified!  
Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, 
hasten straightway to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: 
Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For 
Christ the Fashioner, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, 
is borne by the Virgin Mother as a babe to God the Father, He Who was before all 
the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Canon of the saint, the acrostic whereof is:  
“Accept thou a hymn, O Symeon the God-receiver, Joseph”, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O righteous Symeon, abiding in joy in the mansions of the righteous of the just 
Lord; pray thou, O most blessed one, that those who celebrate thy divine repose may 
be justified.  
As an observer of the law, O most sacred one, thou didst behold the Babe Whom 
the law proclaimed; and having died in accordance with the law of nature, O God-
receiver, thou didst pass on, rejoicing, to life immortal.  
Thou didst behold Him Who holdest the ends of the universe in His arms borne 
in the arms of the Virgin; and taking Him into thine honored embrace, thou, O most 
noetically rich one, wast shown to be greater than Moses.  
Theotokion: He Who is full hath emptied Himself; He Who is pre-eternal hath 
begun to be; the Logos becometh flesh; the Fashioner is formed; the Infinite One 
confineth Himself to space, becoming incarnate in thy womb, O thou who art full of 
the grace of God.  
ODE III  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Lord, the firm foundation of those who put their trust in Thee, * do 
Thou establish the Church, * which Thou hast purchased * with thy precious 
blood. 
He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the first-
born Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam.  
God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-formed man, who 
through deception had become childish of mind.  
Without undergoing change, the Creator became a Babe, rendering our nature 
divine, the product of earth to which it returneth again.  
Canon of the saint  
Irmos: Likened to a barren woman * the Church from among the nations hath 
given birth, * and the assembly abundant in children, hath grown weak. * Let 
us cry out to our wondrous God: * Holy art Thou, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Elevated by sacred activities, O divinely eloquent one, thou wast like a lofty, 
radiant tower of the all-holy Spirit, manifestly made steadfast. Wherefore, we praise 
thee.  
O Symeon, thou didst behold the Lord of the law, Who opened the Virgin’s 
womb, become a mortal babe, granting deliverance unto all.  
He Who fashioned mankind with His own hands is held in thine arms, in the flesh, 
manifestly sanctifying thee; and letting thee depart to the life to come as thou didst 
request, O blessed one.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, Symeon, beholding Thee Who had assumed 
flesh from thy blood in a manner past understanding, rejoiced and blessed thee, the 
noetic tongs which held the divine Ember.  
Kontakion of righteous Symeon, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Today the elder asked to be loosed * from the bonds of this life of corruption, * 
having receiving in his arms ** Christ, the Creator and Lord.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
Rejoicing, the sacred Symeon took in his arms, Thee Who had assumed flesh from 
the Virgin, O Christ, crying aloud: Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Master! 
And like Anna, the blameless and glorious prophetess, who offered Thee confession 
and hymnody, we cry out to Thee, O Bestower of life: Glory to Thee Who hast thus 
been well pleased!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Thy virtue, hath covered the heavens, O Christ, * for having come forth 
from the Ark of Thy sanctification, * from Thine undefiled Mother, * Thou 
hast appeared in the temple of Thy glory * as an infant borne in arms, * filling 
all with Thy praise. 
Rejoicing, the Theotokos cried aloud: O Symeon, initiate of ineffable mysteries, 
take in thine arms Christ, the Word Who hath become a babe, of Whom thou wast 
informed of old by the Holy Spirit, and cry out to Him: All things are filled with Thy 
praise!  
O Symeon, rejoicing take up Christ, the little Child, on Whom thou hast set thy 
hope, the Consolation of the Israel of God, the Creator and Master of the law, Who 
fulfilleth the tenets of the law; and cry aloud to Him: All things are filled with Thy 
praise!  
Beholding the beginningless Word borne as a babe in the flesh by the Virgin as on 
the throne of the cherubim, the Author of all, Symeon marveled and cried aloud to 
Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the saint  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Though thou didst grow elderly in age, yet thou didst remain ever young in faith, 
desiring to behold the newborn babe, the most Perfect One Who renewest the world 
which hath grown old through the attacks of the ancient enemy.  
Together let us bless the blessed Symeon, as one who wast deemed worthy to 
behold our blessed God wrapped in flesh, that He might render blessed those who 
before were wretched.  
Recognizing Thee as the Bestower of the law, Who, in a manner outside the laws 
of nature had assumed flesh, Symeon cried aloud: O Thou Who alone art Lord, let 
me now retire to life incorruptible!  
Theotokion: He Who bearest all things in His hand, Who is borne in the arms of 
the Ever-virgin, hath made her, in that she hath given birth to Him, higher than the 
cherubim and the seraphim. Her do we hymn and reverently call blessed.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * borne 
aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have foreseen God 
made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the King of peace.’ 
The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was revealed of old to the prophet, 
and beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried aloud: Rejoice, O pure one, 
for like a throne, God the unwaning Light. Who reigneth with peace, is held by thee!  
The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who 
kneweth not wedlock, said: O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant 
God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!  
Isaiah, purified by the burning ember brought by the seraphim, and the elder 
illumined by the O Mother of God, cried to her: thou hast given me Him Whom 
thou dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with 
peace.  
Canon of the saint  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
With purity of mind serving God Almighty like an angel, O blessed one, of old 
thou didst cleanse the people of Israel with bloody sacrifices, clearly prefiguring the 
blood of the Savior.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
With godly deeds didst thou render thyself an all-holy temple for God, O divinely 
inspired one, and upon beholding in the holy temple God as a babe in the flesh, thou 
wast released to the divine habitations.  
Noetically joining chorus today, let us all hymn Symeon the God-receiver, and 
with him the chaste Anna, who were prophets of God and who beheld Him Who for 
our sake became a Child.  
Theotokion: He Who is unchangeable in nature, being borne by thee manifested 
Himself as man, without burning thy womb, O thou who art more holy than the 
cherubim, and by thy birthgiving hath joined to Himself those thrust aside by 
corruption, O Mother of God.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The Elder, having seen with his eyes the salvation * that was to come 
unto the peoples from God, * cried aloud unto Thee: * ‘O Christ, Thou art my 
God.’ 
In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the 
disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful.  
Clearly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, in Thy 
tender compassion Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of the earth-born.  
Now lettest him that worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of 
the Virgin, God become a Child, depart in peace.  
Canon of the saint  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
Beholding the Lord as thou wast promised, thou didst cry out O Symeon: Now 
lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Savior, to proclaim Thy divine incarnation to all in 
Hades!  
Thou wast adorned and wast more splendid than Moses, taking in thine arms Him 
Who is beauteous in comeliness, Who for our sake becameth a babe like us, O elder 
Symeon.  
Those confined there, beholding thee full of divine waters and descended into the 
lower regions of Hades, O Symeon, were filled with divine dew.  
Theotokion: The thoroughly evil one ever seeketh to ensnare me; but rescue me 
from his traps, O Lady, and preserve me whole within the divine shelter of thy wings.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I:  
O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth * and didst bless the 
hands of Symeon as was meet, * by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O 
Christ God. * But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, * and 
strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, ** O Thou Who alone lovest 
mankind.  
Ikos: Let us make haste to the Theotokos, desiring to behold her Son borne unto 
Symeon. Looking upon Him from heaven, the bodiless hosts in amazement proclaim: 
“We behold things wondrous, most glorious, unapproachable and ineffable: for He 
Who created Adam is borne as an infant; He Whom naught can contain is held in the 
elder’s arms; He Who is in the infinite bosom of His Father is willingly constrained in 
the flesh, but not in His divinity, He Who alone is the Lover of mankind.”  
ODE VII 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Thou who in the midst of the fire * bedewed the children as they 
discoursed on things divine, * and Who didst take up Thy dwelling in the pure 
Virgin: * O Word of God Thee do we reverently praise chanting: * O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
I go to announce glad tidings unto Adam and Eve who dwell in Hades, cried 
Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
God, the Redeemer of the race of mortals shall go even unto Hades; He shall grant 
forgiveness to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the 
God of our fathers!  
And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt 
one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of 
our fathers!  
Canon of the saint  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
As one truly righteous and blameless in the law, O blessed one, thou didst serve 
the Lord Almighty in accordance with the law. Wherefore, thou dost chant: O all-
hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The joy of the sorrowful, the deliverance of Israel hath truly appeared as a babe in 
His own temple! Wherefore Symeon rejoicing cried aloud: Let me depart to the life to 
come!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
In the tender loving-kindness of Thy compassions, O Savior, let me, Thy servant 
depart, who have been worn out with the writing of the law and bowed down with 
old age; for I have seen Thee bearing flesh on earth! Thus cried aloud Symeon.  
Theotokion: He Who hath filled the most pure bosom of the Father Who begat 
Him, without forsaking it, sitteth in thy womb, O pure one, as a babe clearly 
preparing a sacred throne for those whose form He assumed, O most pure one.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the flame, * 
the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all ye works of 
the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
O people of Israel, beholding your glory, Emmanuel, the Babe born of the Virgin, 
join ye now in chorus in the presence of the Ark of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Behold, cried Symeon, this One Who is both God and Babe shall be a sign of 
contradiction. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
God the Word, being Life itself and having become a Babe, shall be the downfall 
of the disobedient, but the restoration of those who chant with faith: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon of the saint  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The all-praised widow Anna, resplendent with the grace of prophecy, glorified the 
supremely divine One Who had come to adorn the bride; the world which was bereft 
of divine glory; revealing to all present, the divine redemption that was to come.  
O blessed priest, thou didst offer up the sacrifices of the law, the lambs, for 
ineffable mercy, showing forth beforehand the blood of the Savior; and receiving 
Him in the flesh, O Symeon, thou wast revealed to be more glorious than Moses and 
all the prophets.  
Having beheld Him Whom thou didst desire, thou didst receive release from thy 
body, O divinely inspired one, and like a flittering bird thou didst pass over to the 
fathers, O glorious one, having lived to a ripe old age. Wherefore, with spiritual joy 
we celebrate thy most festive memory.  
Theotokion: The most divine Word found thee be like a lily, like a fragrant rose, 
like a divinely redolent scent, O most pure Bride of God; and making His abode 
within thy womb, He rendered fragrant, our nature which had been full of the stench 
of sin, O Mary Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE IX  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern a 
figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to God. 
* Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the beginningless 
Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not known a man. 
The ancients were wont to offer a pair of new-born doves and two young birds, 
but the godly elder and the chaste prophetess Anna serve in their stead, magnifying 
the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and is borne into 
the temple.  
Thou hast imparted unto me the joy of Thy salvation, cried Symeon. Accept Thou 
Thy servant, for I am weary of the shadow, as a mystic and sacred preacher of the 
new grace, magnifying Thee in praise!  
The aged Anna, chaste and venerable, prophesying in a sacred manner, openly 
confessed the Lord in the temple, and she magnified the Theotokos, proclaiming her 
to all present.  
Canon of the saint  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Precious indeed are thy hands which touched the divine limbs of Him Who 
toucheth the mountains and maketh them smoke, as David chanted, O God-receiver; 
yea, thou wast truly blessed, wherefore, we praise thee as is meet.  
Thy shrine poureth forth healings upon the faithful, and thy blessed memory doth 
outshine the sun, illumining the souls of all, and dispelling the noetic darkness, O 
most honored initiate of the mysteries.  
The chaste Anna the Prophetess, and the glorious elder Symeon illumine the 
whole earth with noetic radiance, like the sun and the moon; for their sake, O Lord 
Who lovest mankind, deliver us from the darkness of sin.  
Theotokion: When he saw thee revealed as the Mother of God, O Theotokos, the 
elder said prophetically: “Behold, thy Son is set for the rise and fall of many, O Lady, 
and for a sign which shall be spoken against.”  
Exapostilarion in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
The Word Who is immutable in Hypostasis hath united Himself to the flesh 
without seed, in thee O Birthgiver of God, becoming a babe; and bearing Him in 
thine arms, like the throne of the cherubim, thou hast now offered Him to God the 
Father; and the elder Symeon, rejoicing, hath received Him.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., that of the feast in Tone III: 
The elder, brought into the temple by the Spirit, took the Master of the Law in his 
arms, crying: Do Thou now loose me from the bond of the flesh according to Thy 
word: for mine eyes have seen the revelation of the Gentiles, and the salvation of 
Israel!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Take up in thine arms the Creator of all, O Symeon! O elder, take up Christ to 
Whom the Virgin Maiden hath given birth without seed, unto the joy of our race!  
Verse: Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, * according to 
Thy word.  
O ye people, assembling, let us hymn the one Benefactor, the Bestower of the law, 
the Creator and God of the law, before Whom the multitudes of angels tremble, unto 
the salvation of our souls.  
Verse: A light to enlighten the Gentile’s, * and the glory of Thy people Israel.  
Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, as Thou didst say; for I 
have beheld Thee, O Christ, the pre-eternal Light of revelation for the Gentiles and 
Israel, Who hast bound me in fleshly bonds.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
The sacred Virgin brought the Sacred One to the priest in the temple; and 
stretching forth his hands, Symeon received Him, rejoicing, and crying aloud: Now 
lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Lord and Master, according to Thy word.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE I of the canon of the feast, and 4 
from ODE VI of the canon of the saint.  
Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun Who is borne aloft upon a light 
cloud is brought to the temple as a babe in the arms of the unblemished one. 
Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously 
hath He been glorified! (Twice) 
Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, 
hasten straightway to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: 
Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For 
Christ the Fashioner, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, 
is borne by the Virgin Mother as a babe to God the Father, He Who was before all 
the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Beholding the Lord as thou wast promised, thou didst cry out O Symeon: Now 
lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Savior, to proclaim Thy divine incarnation to all in 
Hades!  
Thou wast adorned and wast more splendid than Moses, taking in thine arms Him 
Who is beauteous in comeliness, Who for our sake becameth a babe like us, O elder 
Symeon.  
Those confined there, beholding thee full of divine waters and descended into the 
lower regions of Hades, O Symeon, were filled with divine dew.  
Theotokion: The thoroughly evil one ever seeketh to ensnare me; but rescue me 
from his traps, O Lady, and preserve me whole within the divine shelter of thy wings.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection.  
Kontakion of righteous Symeon, in Tone IV:  
Today the elder asked to be loosed * from the bonds of this life of corruption, * 
having receiving in his arms ** Christ, the Creator and Lord.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I: 
O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth * and didst bless the 
hands of Symeon as was meet, * by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O 
Christ God. * But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, * and 
strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, ** O Thou Who alone lovest 
mankind.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: The Song of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Prokeimenon of the saint, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the 
Lord, * and shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 321 FROM THE MIDPOINT (HEB 9:11-14) 
Brethren: Christ being an high priest of good things to come, by a greater and 
more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building; 
Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered in once 
into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. For if the blood of 
bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the 
purifying of the flesh: How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the 
eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead 
works to serve the living God? 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O 
Master, according to Thy word.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and 
gladness for the upright of heart.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 8 (LK 2:25-38) 
Behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and the same 
man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Ghost 
was upon him. And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not 
see death, before he had seen the Lord’s Christ. And he came by the Spirit into the 
temple: and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the 
custom of the law, Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said, 
Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: For mine 
eyes have seen thy salvation, Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people; 
A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. And Joseph and his 
mother marveled at those things which were spoken of him. And Simeon blessed 
them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising 
again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall be spoken against; (Yea, a sword 
shall pierce through Thine own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts may be 
revealed. And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe 
of Aser: she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from her 

--- PAGE 14 ---
virginity; And she was a widow of about fourscore and four years, which departed not 
from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day. And she 
coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spake of him to all 
them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. 
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
