--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
FEAST OF THE MEETING OF OUR LORD, GOD & SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST WITH 
SYMEON  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
The uncircumscribable and transcendent Word, * Who is borne aloft with glory * 
by the heavenly thrones, * doth Symeon receive in his arms, crying: * ‘Now let me 
depart according to Thy word, O Savior, ** Thou salvation and delight of the 
faithful!’ (Twice)  
Beholding Thee as a babe, the wondrous Symeon cried aloud: * I am afraid, and 
fear holding Thee the pre-eternal Word, * begotten of the Father, * in mine arms, O 
Master; * but since Thou seekest Thy servant in peace, ** so now let me depart, in 
that Thou art lovingly compassionate.  
Now let the gates of heaven be opened! * The Word of God, Who was born of 
the Father without seed, * hath been born of the Virgin, * voluntarily assuming 
human flesh, * to restore our nature, in that He is good, ** and to set it at the right 
hand of the Father.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Andrew of Crete, in Tone IV: 
Today the sacred Mother, who is more exalted than the holy temple, hath entered 
into the holy temple, revealing to the world the Lawgiver and Creator of the law. And 
the elder Symeon, receiving Him in his arms, cried out, rejoicing: “Now lettest Thou 
Thy servant depart, for I have seen Thee, the Savior of our souls!”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Today the Savior is brought * as a babe * into the temple of the Lord, * and the 
elder Symeon receiveth Him ** in his aged arms.  
Verse: Now lettest Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, * according to Thy 
word.  
Christ Who appeared as a burning ember * to the divine Isaiah * is now given to 
the elder * by the hands of the Theotokos, ** as with tongs.  
Verse: A Light to enlighten the gentiles, * and the glory of Thy people Israel.  
Holding the Master * in his arms * with fear and joy, * Symeon asked to be 
released from life, ** hymning the Theotokos.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody: 
“Receive, O Symeon, * the Lord of glory * as thou wast told by the Holy Spirit. * 
For, lo! He is come!” ** the all-pure One cried out.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Troparion, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection.  
Little Litany, and Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” we chant 8 Stichera, the composition of Patriarch 
Germanus, in Tone I: 
Tell us, O Symeon: Whom dost thou bear into the temple in thine arms, rejoicing? 
To Whom dost thou cry aloud: “Now have I been freed, for I have beheld my 
Savior!”? “He Who is born of the Virgin! God the Word, Who from God assumed 
flesh for our sake, thus saving mankind! Him let us worship!” (Thrice)  
Receive, O Symeon, Him Whom Moses beheld in the gloom on Sinai giving the 
law, and Who hath become a babe, now submitting to the law. He Who speaketh 
through the law; He, of Whom the prophets spoke, and Who for our sake assumed 
flesh, thus saving mankind. Him let us worship! (Thrice)  
Come let us greet Christ with divine hymns, and let us receive Him Whom 
Symeon perceived as our salvation. He Whom David proclaimed beforehand; He, of 
Whom the prophets spoke, and Who for our sake assumed flesh, thus saving 
mankind. Him let us worship! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VI: 
Let the gates of heaven be opened today; for the beginningless Word of the 
Father, receiving a beginning under time, without abandoning His divinity, is 
voluntarily borne by His Virgin Mother into the temple of the law as a babe forty 
days old. And Symeon taking Him in his arms, cried aloud: “Let Thy servant depart, 
O Master, for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation! O Lord Who hast come into the 
world to save the human race, glory be to Thee!”  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM EXODUS  
And the Lord spake to Moses in that day that He brought out the children of 
Israel from the land of Egypt, saying: “Sanctify to Me every firstborn, first-produced, 
opening every womb among the children of Israel.” And Moses went, and gathered 
all the people together, and said: “Remember this day in which ye came forth out of 
the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, for with a strong hand the Lord 
brought you forth from thence. And preserve ye His law. And it shall come to pass 
when the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, as He 
promised to thy fathers, and thou shalt set apart every firstborn opening the womb, 
the males to the Lord. And if thy son should ask thee hereafter, saying: What is this? 
then thou shalt say to him: With a strong hand the Lord brought us out of Egypt, out 
of the house of bondage. And when Pharaoh hardened his heart so as not to send us 
away, he slew every firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man and the 
firstborn of beast. Therefore do I sacrifice to the Lord every offspring that openeth 
the womb, the males to the Lord, and every firstborn of my sons I will redeem. And 
it shall be for a sign unto thy hand, and immovable before thine eyes. For thus said 

--- PAGE 4 ---
the Lord God Almighty: The firstborn of thy sons thou shalt give to Me. And 
whosoever shall have borne a male child, on the eighth day she shall circumcise the 
flesh of his foreskin. And for thirty-three days she shall not enter the sanctuary, unto 
the priest, until the days of her purification be fulfilled. And thereafter she shall bring 
a lamb of a year old without blemish for a whole-burnt offering, and a young pigeon 
or turtle-dove to the door of the tabernacle of witness, to the priest. And if she 
cannot afford a lamb, then shall she take two turtle-doves or two young pigeons, and 
the priest shall pray for him. For these are given to Me for a present out of the midst 
of the children of Israel: I have taken them, and have sanctified them to Myself 
instead of the firstborn of the Egyptians, in the day in which I smote every firstborn 
in the land of Egypt, whether of man or beast, said God Most High, the Holy One of 
Israel.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
And it came to pass in the year in which King Uzziah died, that I saw the Lord 
sitting on a high and exalted throne, and the house was full of His glory. And 
seraphim stood round about Him: each one had six wings: and with two they covered 
their face, and with two they covered their feet, and with two they flew. And one 
cried to the other, and they said: “Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts! The whole 
earth is full of His glory!” And the lintel shook at the voice they uttered, and the 
house was filled with smoke. And I said: “Woe is me! for I am pricked to the heart; 
for being a man, and having unclean lips, I dwell in the midst of a people having 
unclean lips; and I have seen with mine eyes the King, the Lord of hosts!” And there 
was sent to me one of the seraphim, and he had in his hand an ember, which he had 
taken off the altar with the tongs: and he touched my mouth, and said: “Behold, this 
hath touched thy lips, and will take away thine iniquities, and will purge off thy sins.” 
And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying: “Whom should I send, and who will go to 
this people?” And I said: “Behold, I am here, send me!” And He said: “Go, and say to 
this people: Ye shall hear indeed, but ye shall not understand; and ye shall see indeed, 
but ye shall not perceive. For the heart of this people hath become gross, and their 
ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed; lest they should see with their 
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and be converted, and 
I should heal them.” And I said: “How long, O Lord?” And He said: “Until the cities 
be deserted by reason of their not being inhabited, and the houses by reason of there 
being no men, and the land shall be left desolate. And after this God shall remove the 
men far off, and they that are left upon the land shall be multiplied.”  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH 
 Behold, the Lord sitteth on a light cloud, and shall come to Egypt: and the idols 
of Egypt shall be moved at His presence, and their heart shall faint within them. And 
their spirit shall be troubled within them; and I will frustrate their counsel. And I will 
deliver Egypt into the hands of men, of cruel lords: for the Lord and Master, the 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Holy One of Sabaoth, saith these things. And the Egyptians shall drink water that is 
by the sea, but the river shall fail, and be dried up. These things saith the Lord: 
“Where are now thy wise men? And let them declare to thee, and say: What hath the 
Lord of hosts purposed upon Egypt?” But in that day the Egyptians shall be in fear 
and trembling, because of the hand of the Lord of Sabaoth, which He shall bring 
upon them. In that day there shall be an altar to the Lord in the land of the Egyptians, 
and a pillar to the Lord by its border. And it shall be for a sign to the Lord forever in 
the land of Egypt: for they shall presently cry to the Lord, and the Lord shall send 
them a Man who shall save them. The Lord shall be known to the Egyptians, and the 
Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day; and they shall offer sacrifices, and shall 
vow vows to the Lord.  
At Litiya, these Stichera, in Tone I:  
The composition of Anatolius: The Ancient of days, Who of old gave the law to 
Moses on Sinai, is seen today as a babe, and though the Creator of the law, yet under 
the law and fulfilling the law, borne now into the temple and given to the elder. 
Whereupon the righteous Symeon, receiving Him, and seeing the fulfillment of the 
promise, cried out with joy: “Mine eyes have seen the mystery hidden from before all 
ages, which hath been revealed in these latter days: the Light illumining the darkness 
of the unbelieving nations, giving glory to the newly-chosen Israel. Wherefore, release 
Thy servant from the bonds of this flesh unto a life wondrous and everlasting, 
granting the world great mercy!”  
The composition of John the Monk: Today, He Who gave the law to Moses on 
Sinai hath submitted to the commands of the law, having become like us for our sake, 
in that He is full of loving-kindness. Our pure God, now a holy Infant, having 
opened the womb of the pure one, is offered to Himself, as God, freeing our souls 
from the curse of the law and enlightening them.  
In Tone II: The composition of Andrew Pyrrhus: Him before Whom the 
ministers on high pray with trembling, is now taken into the arms Symeon, who, 
beholding God as a heavenly man, and proclaiming that God hath united Himself to 
mankind, cried out with joy upon being separated from this life saying: “O Lord Who 
hast revealed the never-waning light to those in darkness, glory be to Thee!”  
The composition of Germanus: Today, Symeon hath received in his arms the Lord 
of glory, Whom Moses beheld before in the darkness, and Who gave him the tablets 
on Mount Sinai. He Who is the Creator of the law, and Who spake through the 
prophets, of Whom David proclaimed, filling all things with awe, He Who is greatly 
and abundantly merciful.  
The sacred Virgin brought the Sacred One to the high priest in the temple, and 
Symeon, stretching forth his hands, received Him, rejoicing, and cried aloud: “Now 
lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Lord, according to Thy word!”  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Today the Creator of heaven and earth is borne by the holy elder Symeon in his 
arms; and through the Holy Spirit he said: “Now have I been set free, for I have 
beheld my Savior!”  
The composition of Anatolius: Today the elder Symeon entereth the temple, 
rejoicing in spirit, to receive in his arms the Fulfiller of the law, Who gave the law 
unto Moses. For Moses having been granted to behold God in the divine darkness, 
and in a quiet gentle voice, covered his face, and denounced the faithless hearts of the 
Jews; Whereas Symeon bore the pre-eternal incarnate Word of the Father, revealing 
to the nations the Light, the Cross and the Resurrection, and Anna, revealed to be a 
prophetess, proclaimed the Savior and Redeemer of Israel. To Christ our God let us 
cry out: For the sake of the Theotokos, have mercy on us!  
Glory ..., the composition of Andrew of Crete, in Tone V:  
Examine ye the Scriptures, as Christ our God said in the Gospels, for therein we 
find Him born, wrapped in swaddling bands, laid in a manger, fed with milk, 
undergoing circumcision, and carried by Symeon, not in semblance or disguise, but in 
truth appearing to the world. To Him do we cry aloud: O pre-eternal God, glory be to 
Thee!  
Both now ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone V: 
The Ancient of days, having become a babe, is borne into the temple by the Virgin 
Mother, fulfilling the promise of His own law; and Symeon, receiving Him, said: 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word; for mine eyes 
have seen Thy salvation, O Holy One!”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone VII:  
Adorn thy bridal-chamber, O Sion, and receive Christ the King. And greet Mary, 
the portal of heaven; for she is the throne of the cherubim, bearing the King of glory. 
The Virgin is a cloud of the Light bearing in her arms the Son Who existed before the 
day-star, and Symeon, taking Him in his arms, announced to the people that He is the 
Master of life and death, the Savior of the world.  
Verse: Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, * according to 
Thy word.  
Bearing into the temple Him Who shone forth from the Father before all ages, and 
Who in these latter times came forth from her virginal womb, the Mother who knew 
not wedlock brought to the elderly priest and righteous one, Him Who, though the 
Giver the law on Mount Sinai, hath submitted to the law; for Symeon had been 
promised that he would see Christ the Lord. And when Symeon received Him in his 
arms, he rejoiced, and cried aloud: “This Child is God, the Redeemer of our souls, 
Who with the Father is equally eternal!”  
Verse: A Light to enlighten the gentiles, * and the glory of Thy people Israel.  
Mary, the Theotokos who knew not wedlock, bearing in her arms Him Who is 
carried on the chariot of the cherubim and hymned in songs by the seraphim, Who 
assumed flesh from her, the Bestower of the law Who fulfilling the rite of the law, 

--- PAGE 7 ---
was given over to the hands of the elderly priest; and Symeon, bearing our Life, asked 
to be released from life, saying: “O Master, now let me announce unto Adam that I 
have seen the immutable Child, the pre-eternal God and Savior of the world!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Andrew of Crete, in Tone VIII:  
He Who is borne upon the cherubim and hymned by the seraphim, hath been 
borne into the temple of God today in accordance with the law, sitting in the arms of 
the elder as upon a throne, and as God doth receive the offerings from Joseph: a pair 
of turtledoves - the undefiled Church and the people newly-chosen from among the 
gentiles; and two young pigeons - the Old, and the beginning of the New. And 
Symeon, having finally received the fulfillment of the promise made to him, blessed 
the Virgin Mary, the Theotokos, foretelling in imagery the sufferings she would 
endure and asked from God deliverance, and cried aloud: “Lettest now Thy servant 
depart, O Master, as Thou didst tell me before; for I have seen Thee, the pre eternal 
Light, the Savior and Lord of the Christian people!”  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” and the Trisagion through 
Our Father ...And after the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the feast, in 
Tone I:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection. (Thrice)  
Then, the reading appointed for the day.  
But if a vigil is not served, after “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” the 
Troparion of the feast, once; and the dismissal. At Compline, after “It is truly 
meet ...,” we say the Kontakion of the feast. We chant nocturnes as usual, with 
its Kathisma. After the first Trisagion, instead of “Behold! the Bridegroom ...,” 
we say the Troparion of the feast; and after the second Trisagion, instead of 
“Remember, O Lord, in that Thou art good, ...,” we say the Kontakion of the 
feast, followed by “Lord, have mercy!” (twelve times), and the dismissal. We do 
not say the prayers “Remember, O Lord, those who have reposed in hope ....” 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, 
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection. (Thrice)  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Let the choir of the angels marvel at the wonder! And let us mortals lift up our 
voices in hymnody, beholding the ineffable condescension of God; for He Who alone 
is the Lover of mankind, and before Whom the hosts of heaven tremble, do the arms 
of the elder now embrace.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Let the choir of the angels ...”: 
He Who is with the Father seated upon the holy throne, hath come to earth born 
of the Virgin; He Who is unbounded by time, hath become a babe; and Symeon, 
receiving Him in his arms rejoicing, saith: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O 
Compassionate One, having gladdened me!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify Thee, O Christ, Bestower of life, 
and we honor Thy most pure Mother, by whom Thou hast now been borne 
into the temple of the Lord in accordance with the law.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: My heart hath poured forth a good word. I speak of my works to the king. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to thee, O God! (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Thou didst become a babe for my sake, O Ancient of days, and didst partake of 
purification, O most pure God, that I might be assured, it was flesh Thou didst 
assume from the Virgin. And Symeon, taught thereby, recognized Thee as God 
appearing in the flesh, and having kissed Thee, our Life, rejoicing he cried aloud: 
“Release me, for I have seen Thee, the Life of all!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation 
and generation.  
Verse: My heart hath poured forth a good word. I speak of my works to the 
King. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 8 (LK. 2: 25-32)  
At that time, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and the same 
man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Spirit 
was upon him. And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Spirit, that he should not 
see death, before he had seen the Lord’s Christ. And he came by the Spirit into the 
temple: and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the 
custom of the law, Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said, 
Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: For mine 
eyes have seen thy salvation, Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people; 
A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
Let the gates of heaven be opened today; for the beginningless Word of the 
Father, receiving a beginning under time, without abandoning His divinity, is 
voluntarily borne by His Virgin Mother into the temple of the law as a babe forty 
days old. And Symeon taking Him in his arms, cried aloud: “Let Thy servant depart, 
O Master, for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation! O Lord Who hast come into the 
world to save the human race, glory be to Thee!”  
Canon of the feast, its Irmoi chanted twice, with 12 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the Meeting, the acrostic whereof is: “Joyously the elder embraceth Christ”: 
the composition of Cosmas of Maiuma, in Tone III:  
Irmos: The Sun once passed over dry land * in the midst of the deep. * For the 
water on both sides became firm as a wall * while the people traversed the sea 
on foot, * chanting in a manner pleasing to God: * Let us sing unto the Lord; * 
for gloriously hath he been glorified. 
Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun Who is borne aloft upon a light 
cloud is brought to the temple as a babe in the arms of the unblemished one. 
Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously 
hath He been glorified!  
Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, 
hasten straightway to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: 
Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For 
Christ the Fashioner, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, 
is borne by the Virgin Mother as a babe to God the Father, He Who was before all 
the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Katavasia: The Sun once passed over dry land ... 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, the firm foundation of those who put their trust in Thee, * do 
Thou establish the Church, * which Thou hast purchased * with thy precious 
blood. 
He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the first-
born Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam.  
God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-formed man, who 
through deception had become childish of mind.  
Without undergoing change, the Creator became a Babe, rendering divine our na-
ture, the product of earth to which it returneth again.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Of old, on Mount Sinai, Moses beheld the back-parts of God, and in the midst of 
the darkness and whirlwind was deemed worthy to hear the still small voice of God; 
and now Symeon hath received in his arms God Who hath immutably taken flesh for 
our sake. And hastening to leave things here below for life everlasting; he crieth out: 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O Master!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thy virtue, hath covered the heavens, O Christ, * for having come forth 
from the Ark of Thy sanctification, * from Thine undefiled Mother, * Thou 
hast appeared in the temple of Thy glory * as an infant borne in arms, * filling 
all with Thy praise. 
Rejoicing, the Theotokos cried aloud: O Symeon, initiate of ineffable mysteries, 
take in thine arms Christ, the Word Who hath become a babe, of Whom thou wast 
informed of old by the Holy Spirit, and cry out to Him: All things are filled with Thy 
praise!  
O Symeon, rejoicing take up Christ, the little Child, on Whom thou hast set thy 
hope, the Consolation of the Israel of God, the Creator and Master of the law, Who 
fulfilleth the tenets of the law; and cry aloud to Him: All things are filled with Thy 
praise!  
Beholding the beginningless Word borne as a babe in the flesh by the Virgin as on 
the throne of the cherubim, the Author of all, Symeon marveled and cried aloud to 
Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!  
ODE V  
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * borne 
aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have foreseen God 
made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the King of peace.’ 

--- PAGE 11 ---
The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was revealed of old to the prophet, 
and beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried aloud: Rejoice, O pure one, 
for like a throne, God the unwaning Light. Who reigneth with peace, is held by thee!  
The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who 
kneweth not wedlock, said: O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant 
God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!  
Isaiah, purified by the burning ember brought by the seraphim, and the elder 
illumined by the Mother of God, cried to her: thou hast given me Him Whom thou 
dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with peace.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The Elder, having seen with his eyes the salvation * that was to come 
unto the peoples from God, * cried aloud unto Thee: * ‘O Christ, Thou art my 
God.’ 
In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the 
disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful.  
Clearly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, in Thy 
tender compassion Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of the earth-born.  
Now lettest him that worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of 
the Virgin, God become a Child, depart in peace.  
Kontakion, in Tone I:  
O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth * and didst bless the 
hands of Symeon as was meet, * by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O 
Christ God. * But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, * and 
strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, ** O Thou Who alone lovest 
mankind.  
Ikos: Let us make haste to the Theotokos, desiring to behold her Son borne unto 
Symeon. Looking upon Him from heaven, the bodiless hosts in amazement proclaim: 
“We behold things wondrous, most glorious, unapproachable and ineffable: for He 
Who created Adam is borne as an infant; He Whom naught can contain is held in the 
elder’s arms; He Who is in the infinite bosom of His Father is willingly constrained in 
the flesh, but not in His divinity, He Who alone is the Lover of mankind.”  
ODE VII  
Irmos: O Thou who in the midst of the fire * bedewed the children as they 
discoursed on things divine, * and Who didst take up Thy dwelling in the pure 
Virgin: * O Word of God Thee do we reverently praise chanting: * O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
I go to announce glad tidings unto Adam and Eve who dwell in Hades, cried 
Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
God, the Redeemer of the race of mortals shall go even unto Hades; He shall grant 
forgiveness to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the 
God of our fathers!  
And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt 
one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of 
our fathers!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the flame, * 
the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all ye works of 
the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
O people of Israel, beholding your glory, Emmanuel, the Babe born of the Virgin, 
join ye now in chorus in the presence of the Ark of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Behold, cried Symeon, this One Who is both God and Babe shall be a sign of 
contradiction. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
God the Word, being Life itself and having become a Babe, shall be the downfall 
of the disobedient, but the restoration of those who chant with faith: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Be it known that of the following refrains, the first is used before the Irmos and its repetition; 
then each Troparion of the canon receiveth four refrains, one for each time it is executed. When 
all fourteen refrains have been used with the Irmos and Troparia, both choirs come together and 
chant the first refrain before repeating the Irmos as Katavasia.  
Refrain: O Virgin Theotokos, thou hope of Christians, preserve and save those 
who trust in thee.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern a 
figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to God. 
* Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the beginningless 
Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not known a man. 
Refrain: “It is not the elder who holdeth Me, but rather I hold him; for he 
asketh Me to dismiss him.” (Twice) 
Refrain: How dost thou hold the Ember, O mystic tongs? How dost thou feed 
Him Who sustaineth all?  
Refrain: O daughter of Phanuel, come and stand with us, and give thanks to 
Christ the Savior, the Son of God!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
The ancients were wont to offer a pair of new-born doves and two young birds, 
but the godly elder and the chaste prophetess Anna serve in their stead, magnifying 
the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and is borne into 
the temple.  
Refrain: The chaste Anna proclaimeth awesome things, confessing Christ, the 
Creator of heaven and earth. (Twice) 
Refrain: Unapproachable to angels and men is what was wrought within thee, 
O pure Virgin Mary.  
Refrain: The pure dove, the unblemished ewe-lamb, beareth the Lamb and 
Shepherd into the temple.  
Thou hast imparted unto me the joy of Thy salvation, cried Symeon. Accept Thou 
Thy servant, for I am weary of the shadow, as a mystic and sacred preacher of the 
new grace, magnifying Thee in praise!  
Refrain: O Christ, Thou King of all, grant victory over all heresies to thy 
faithful hierarchs!  
Refrain: O Christ, Thou King of all, grant me fervent tears, that I may weep 
over my soul, which I have wickedly ruined!  
Instead of Glory ..., Let us piously praise the thrice-radiant Godhead in three 
Hypostases.  
Instead of Both now ..., O Virgin Mary, illumine my soul which hath been 
grievously darkened by the pleasures of life!  
The aged Anna, chaste and venerable, prophesying in sacred manner, openly con-
fessed the Lord in the temple, and she magnified the Theotokos, proclaiming her to 
all present.  
Refrain: O Virgin Theotokos, thou hope of Christians, preserve and save those 
who trust in thee.  
Katavasia: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, 
discern a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be 
sanctified to God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the 
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not known a 
man. 
Exapostilarion, in Tone III: 
The elder, brought into the temple by the Spirit, took the Master of the Law in his 
arms, crying: Do Thou now loose me from the bond of the flesh according to Thy 
word: for mine eyes have seen the revelation of the Gentiles, and the salvation of 
Israel! (Thrice) 

--- PAGE 14 ---
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast granted a sign ...”:  
He Who is the Lover of mankind, * fulfilling the law of the Scriptures, * is now 
borne into the temple; * and the elder Symeon * receiveth Him in his arms, crying: * 
“Lettest me now depart to Thy blessedness, * for today I have seen clad in mortal 
flesh * Him Who hath dominion over life ** and mastery over death!” (Twice)  
Thou didst show Thyself * to be the Light of revelation, * the Sun of 
righteousness * seated upon a light cloud, * fulfilling the shadow of the law, * and 
revealing the beginning of the new grace. * Wherefore, Symeon, seeing Thee, cried 
aloud: * “Set me free of corruption, ** for I have seen Thee today!”  
Without being separated * from the bosom of the Father in Thy divinity, * 
voluntarily incarnate, * Thou wast held in the embrace of the Ever-virgin, * and Thou 
Who holdest all things in Thy hands * wast given into the arms of Symeon the God-
receiver, * wherefore, he cried aloud with joy: * “ Lettest me Thy servant, now depart 
in peace, ** for I have seen Thee, O Master!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone VI:  
O Christ our God, Whose good pleasure it was to sit today in the arms of the 
elder, as in the chariot of the cherubim: in that Thou lovest mankind, deliver and save 
us who hymn Thee, calling us forth from the tyranny of the passions.  
Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE IV, of the 
festal canon.  
He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the first-
born Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam. (Twice)  
God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-formed man, who 
through deception had become childish of mind.  
Without undergoing change, the Creator became a Babe, rendering divine our na-
ture, the product of earth to which it returneth again.  
In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the 
disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful. (Twice) 
Clearly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, in Thy 
tender compassion Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of the earth-born.  
Now lettest him that worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of 
the Virgin, God become a Child, depart in peace.  
Entrance Hymn: The Lord hath made known His salvation, in the sight of the 
nations hath He revealed His righteousness.  
Then, the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I:  
O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth * and didst bless the 
hands of Symeon as was meet, * by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O 
Christ God. * But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, * and 
strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, ** O Thou Who alone lovest 
mankind.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: The Song of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 316 (HEB. 7: 7-17)  
Brethren: Without all contradiction the less is blessed of the better. And here men 
that die receive tithes; but there he receiveth them, of whom it is witnessed that he 
liveth. And as I may so say, Levi also, who receiveth tithes, paid tithes in Abraham, 

--- PAGE 16 ---
for he was yet in the loins of his father, when Melchisedek met him. If therefore 
perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for under it the people received the law), 
what further need was there that another priest should rise after the order of 
Melchisedek, and not be called after the order of Aaron? For the priesthood being 
changed, there is made. of necessity a change also of the law, for he of whom these 
things are spoken pertaineth to another tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the 
altar. For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah; of which tribe Moses spake 
nothing concerning priesthood. And it is yet far more evident: for that after the 
similitude of Melchisedek there ariseth another priest, Who is made, not after the law 
of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an endless life. For he testifieth, 
Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek.  
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O 
Master, according to Thy word.  
Verse: A Light to enlighten the gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 7 (LK. 2: 22-40)  
At that time, the parents of the Child Jesus brought him to Jerusalem, to present 
him to the Lord; (As it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male that openeth the 
womb shall be called holy to the Lord;) And to offer a sacrifice according to that 
which is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons. 
And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and the same 
man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Spirit 
was upon him. And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Spirit, that he should not 
see death, before he had seen the Lord’s Christ. And he came by the Spirit into the 
temple: and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the 
custom of the law, Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said, 
Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: For mine 
eyes have seen thy salvation, Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people; 
A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. And Joseph and his 
mother marveled at those things which were spoken of him. And Simeon blessed 
them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising 
again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall be spoken against; (Yea, a sword 
shall pierce through Thine own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts may be 
revealed. And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe 
of Asser: she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from her 
virginity; And she was a widow of about fourscore and four years, which departed not 
from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day. And she 
coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spake of him to all 

--- PAGE 17 ---
them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. And when they had performed all 
things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own city 
Nazareth. And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the 
grace of God was upon him.  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Refrain and Irmos of ODE IX: 
Refrain: O Virgin Theotokos, thou hope of Christians, preserve and save those 
who trust in thee.  
Katavasia: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, 
discern a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be 
sanctified to God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the 
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not known a 
man. 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
