--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 7th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY 
 COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, PARTHENIUS, 
BISHOP OF LAMPSACUS.  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER LUKE OF HELLAS  
If this day fall outside the Great Fast, the service for the Afterfeast of the Meeting and of the 
saints. But if this day fall within the Great Fast, then only those of the saints. 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 for the holy hierarch, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
The namesake of virginity, * the beacon of Lampsacus, * the radiant morning-star 
of miracles, the great Parthenius * calleth us all together by his memorial, * that we 
who hymn Christ the Savior ** may keep spiritual festival.  
Bearing God within thyself from childhood, * with the fire of thy prayers, O most 
blessed and wise one, * thou didst burn up legions of the demons, * guiding the flock 
of Lampsacus; * for, casting down the temples of the idols, ** thou didst renew 
thyself for God.  
The fish which was cast forth, as a breathless thing * to which ye imparted life, 
proclaimed thy wonder, * as did the fruit of the barren field and vineyard * and the 
generous rain promised to those who wept. * Wondrous are thy works, O performer 
of sacred rites! ** Wherefore, pray thou that we be saved.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Following the Lord wholly from thy youth, * thou didst forsake thy parents, * 
passionate attachments and worldly love, O glorious one, * and didst live in the 
wilderness, * leading the life of fasters in humility; * which thou didst perfect, * 
lamenting in spirit, O venerable one, * making thyself a good merchant, * distributing 
thy possessions to the poor * and buying Christ, the precious Pearl; * and when thou 
didst obtain Him, thy desire, ** thou didst rest, O right glorious one.  
Beaten, reviled and afflicted * by thy parents, O father, * for the sake of Christ * 
Whom thou didst desire, O glorious one, * wounded with desire for Him * thou didst 
count as naught the beauties of this world * and didst love the separation from thy 
mother and thy wandering; * having been invested with the monastic habit, O most 
sacred one. * Yet, at thy mother’s entreaties, O venerable Luke, * God revealed thee, 
who didst not wish to be revealed, * for, as He is the Lover of mankind, ** He 
showed pity.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Ending thy sacred life, O most sacred one, * thou didst perform excellent * and 
most glorious miracles, O sacred one, * when God gave thee beforehand a divine 
token * of the reward of Thy godly labors; * and He shall give thee a never-fading 
wreath * and crowning glory * when He shall come as Judge. * Wherefore, entreat 
Him, * that He deliver from all affliction * those who ever hymn thee, ** O most 
wondrous Luke.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone VI:  
O Christ our God, Whose good pleasure it was to sit today in the arms of the 
elder, as in the chariot of the cherubim: in that Thou lovest mankind, deliver and save 
us who hymn Thee, calling us forth from the tyranny of the passions.  
But if this day fall within the Great Fast:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VI:  
From the sea-monster’s belly of wicked sin * do thou lead me up, O Sovereign 
Lady, * who contained the Infinite One in thy womb. * Deliver me * from the cruel 
waves of temptations, * and rescue me from the tempest of falls, * O Maiden, * 
drying up the abyss of mine iniquities, * and repelling the present hordes of the 
demons * by thy divine assistance, O pure one, * that I may unceasingly glorify thee, 
** the ever-blessed one.  
Or this Stavrotheotokion: A sword pierced thy heart, * O most pure Sovereign 
Lady, * as Symeon said, * when thou didst behold Him Who shone forth from thee 
ineffably, * condemned by the iniquitous * and lifted up upon the Cross, * tasting 
vinegar and gall, * His side pierced, * His hands and feet run through with nails; * 
and, lamenting, thou didst exclaim, crying out maternally: * “What is this new 
mystery, ** O my Child most sweet?”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Receive in thine arms, O Symeon, the Creator of all things! O elder, take up 
Christ, to Whom the Virgin Maiden hath given birth seedlessly, unto the joy of our 
race.  
Verse: Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, * O Master, according to 
Thy word.  
Assembling, O ye people, let us hymn God, the Creator of the law, before Whom 
the multitudes of angels tremble, the only Benefactor and Bestower of the law, for the 
salvation of our souls.  
Verse: A light to enlighten the gentiles, * and the glory of Thy people Israel.  
Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, O Master, as Thou didst say; for I 
have beheld Thee, the pre-eternal Light of revelation for the nations and Israel, O 
Christ, and of my bodily union.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VI: 
Let the portal of heaven be opened today, for the beginningless Word of the 
Father, receiving a beginning in time without being separated from His divinity, of 
His own will is borne as a forty-day old babe into the temple of the law by the Virgin; 
and the elder receiveth Him in his arms, crying: “Let Thy servant depart, O Master; 
for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation! O Lord Who hast come into the world to save 
the race of mankind, glory be to Thee!”  
Troparion of the saints, in Tone IV:  
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone I: 
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection. (Twice)  
Glory ..., that of the saints, in Tone IV:  
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Both now ..., that of the feast, again.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Thou didst become a babe for my sake, O Ancient of days, and didst partake of 
purification, O most pure God, that I might be assured, it was flesh Thou didst 
assume from the Virgin. And Symeon, taught thereby, recognized Thee as God 
appearing in the flesh, and having kissed Thee, our Life, rejoicing he cried aloud: 
“Release me, for I have seen Thee, the Life of all!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of the angels ...”:  
He Who is with the Father seated upon the holy throne, hath come to earth born 
of the Virgin; He Who is unbounded by time, hath become a babe; and Symeon, 
receiving Him in his arms rejoicing, saith: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart, O 
Compassionate One, having gladdened me!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and two canons for the 
saints, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The Sun once passed over dry land * in the midst of the deep. * For the 
water on both sides became firm as a wall * while the people traversed the sea 
on foot, * chanting in a manner pleasing to God: * Let us sing unto the Lord; * 
for gloriously hath he been glorified. 
Let the clouds pour forth rain, for Christ the Sun Who is borne aloft upon a light 
cloud is brought to the temple as a babe in the arms of the unblemished one. 
Wherefore, O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously 
hath He been glorified!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Be strong, ye hands of Symeon feeble with age; and ye weary legs of the elder, 
hasten straightway to meet Christ, joining chorus with the incorporeal ones, chanting: 
Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
O ye heavens stretched out in wisdom, be glad; and rejoice, O thou earth! For 
Christ the Fashioner, having come forth from the most blessed womb of His Mother, 
is borne by the Virgin Mother as a babe to God the Father, He Who was before all 
the ages, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
The radiant effulgence of miracles, emitting splendors, illumine us all with the 
grace of the virtues on the radiant festival of the wise hierarch.  
Thou didst lift up thy mind to the mountain of dispassion, O venerable 
Parthenius, and, entering the divine darkness of the Scriptures, thou wast shown to be 
full of uncreated light, O venerable and glorious one.  
Truly drawing the word of God as a sword, O holy hierarch Parthenius, thou didst 
wound the might of the enemy; wherefore, thou hast been granted trophies of victory 
over the demons.  
Theotokion: In paradise, O Virgin, envy begat the death of mankind; but the Son 
of God the Father, to Whom thou hast given birth, hath mightily destroyed it, 
granting immortality to our race.  
Canon of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory.  
Standing before the throne of thy Master, O Luke, beholder of God, grant me the 
words to hymn thy radiant and splendid life, lifting the darkness from my mind.  
The sacred one, loving Thee with all his might, steadfastly applied himself to 
asceticism, enduring tribulations, labors and suffering, whereby he hath found never-
ceasing sweetness.  
Making thy body steadfast through abstinence, O wise father Luke, by frequent 
vigils and all manner of afflictions thou didst stem the assaults of grievous passions.  
Theotokion: O Virgin who hast given birth to the Lord, and who bore in the flesh 
God Who is inseparable from the Father, yet became incarnate in His compassion for 
mortals: show me to be above the malice of the passions.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Lord, the firm foundation of those who put their trust in Thee, * do 
Thou establish the Church, * which Thou hast purchased * with thy precious 
blood. 
He that was first begotten of the Father before the ages hath appeared as the first-
born Babe of the undefiled Virgin, stretching forth His hand unto Adam.  
God the Word hath appeared as a babe, setting aright the first-formed man, who 
through deception had become childish of mind.  
Without undergoing change, the Creator became a Babe, rendering divine our na-
ture, the product of earth to which it returneth again.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Flourishing like a palm-tree on earth in the virtues, O venerable one, thou didst 
store up the fruits of immortality in the heavens.  
The grace dwelling within thee, O venerable one, revealed thee to be a temple of 
the God of all; wherefore, thou hast been glorified, O Parthenius.  
Invested by God with the most precious vesture of the hierarchy, O glorious one, 
thou wast shown to be a performer of sacred acts, worthy of His goodness.  
Theotokion: In a manner past understanding, O pure Lady, the middle-wall of our 
condemnation hath been destroyed by thy birthgiving, and we have been united with 
the divine Essence.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Furnishing thyself with wings by fervent love of the Savior, thou didst disdain the 
love of thy parents; wherefore, O blessed Luke, thou wast a stranger to all the sweet 
things of this world.  
Desiring to make thyself a temple for the Lord, thou didst make thine abode in the 
wilderness like Elijah of old, contending against the demons. Wherefore, thou didst 
obtain a blessed end.  
Thou didst show thyself to be a goodly servant, obedient to every commandment 
of God, observing them well and humbling thyself. Wherefore, thou hast won the 
heights of heaven.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother of God, earnestly entreat the Word, Who in a 
manner past all telling revealed Himself, to deliver me from all irrationality.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Thou didst receive the divine grace of miracles, * O sacred Parthenius of godly 
wisdom, God-bearing wonderworker, * cleansing the faithful of all passions and 
dispelling spirits of wickedness, O father. ** Wherefore, we hymn thee as a great 
initiate of the mysteries of the grace of God.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”:  
Filled with the divine Spirit, thou didst shine forth in works of piety, O sacred 
wonderworker Parthenius, turning men away from falsehood, and healing the 
sufferings of the sick. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Loving virtue from childhood, thou didst avoid all pleasures, O wise one, fervent 
in both fasting and abstinence; and considering thy mother’s desire to be as naught, 
thou didst secretly commit thyself to a life of a wanderer. But God revealed thee 
again to thy mother, who justly lamented being deprived of thee, O most excellent 
one. Dwelling now with her, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins to 
those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the shepherds’ piping ...”:  
Thou wast born on earth, O Thou Who art co-beginningless with the Father, and 
wast borne into the temple, O Unapproachable One. And, rejoicing, the elder 
received Thee in his arms, crying aloud: “Now lettest Thou depart him Whom Thou 
didst visit, according to Thy word, O Thou Whose good pleasure it is, as God, to 
save the human race.”  
But if this day fall within the Great Fast:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
The Master and Creator of all, * having received flesh from thy most pure womb, 
* hath shown thee to be an intercessor on behalf of mankind, * O all-immaculate one; 
* wherefore, we all flee to thee, * asking to be cleansed of our transgressions, O 
Sovereign Lady, * and to be delivered from everlasting torments * and all the 
oppression of the evil prince of this world. * Wherefore we cry unto thee: * Entreat 
thy Son and God, * that He grant remission of sins * unto those who with faith 
worship ** thy most holy birthgiving.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Thy virtue, hath covered the heavens, O Christ, * for having come forth 
from the Ark of Thy sanctification, * from Thine undefiled Mother, * Thou 
hast appeared in the temple of Thy glory * as an infant borne in arms, * filling 
all with Thy praise. 
Rejoicing, the Theotokos cried aloud: O Symeon, initiate of ineffable mysteries, 
take in thine arms Christ, the Word Who hath become a babe, of Whom thou wast 
informed of old by the Holy Spirit, and cry out to Him: All things are filled with Thy 
praise!  
O Symeon, rejoicing take up Christ, the little Child, on Whom thou hast set thy 
hope, the Consolation of the Israel of God, the Creator and Master of the law, Who 
fulfilleth the tenets of the law; and cry aloud to Him: All things are filled with Thy 
praise!  
Beholding the beginningless Word borne as a babe in the flesh by the Virgin as on 
the throne of the cherubim, the Author of all, Symeon marveled and cried aloud to 
Him: All things are filled with Thy praise!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
Delighting in the unspeakable mysteries of God, O thrice-blessed one, in a godly 
manner thou didst learn His secret things. Wherefore, thou hast poured forth rivers 
of understanding, O Parthenius.  
Wholly caught up in mind to heaven in a divine manner, O God-bearer, thou didst 
noetically behold ineffable Glory; wherefore, on earth thou wast shown to be an 
equal with the angels, O Parthenius.  
All creation rejoiceth with the angels, beholding the signs wrought by thee beyond 
understanding, O father; wherefore, it hymneth the Cause of them as the almighty 
God.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: In that the mysteries of thy new birthgiving are most glorious and 
ineffable, awesome and fearful, O pure Theotokos, mind and thought are vanquished 
therein, O most pure one.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Thou wast shown to be innocent, venerable, righteous, meek and chaste, O 
venerable father Luke; wherefore, thou hast been called blessed by the Creator and 
Master of all, O all-blessed one.  
Seeing thee passing through this life in a goodly manner, he who hateth thee was 
inflamed and raised up a multitude of temptations against thee; yet he was denounced 
by thy words as an empty wolf, gaping vainly.  
With uprightness of mind thou didst guide thy life toward that which is higher, O 
all-blessed father, desiring to behold the summit of all desires, which thou hast 
received as is meet.  
Theotokion: The Pure One found thee to be beautiful in comeliness beyond all 
others, O pure Virgin, and He made His abode within thy womb, and hath delivered 
me from the disfigurement of the passions and from darkness.  
ODE V  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * borne 
aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have foreseen God 
made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the King of peace.’ 
The divine elder, comprehending the glory that was revealed of old to the prophet, 
and beholding the Word held in His Mother’s arms, cried aloud: Rejoice, O pure one, 
for like a throne, God the unwaning Light. Who reigneth with peace, is held by thee!  
The elder, bowing low and divinely touching the feet of the Mother of God who 
kneweth not wedlock, said: O pure one, thou dost bear Fire! I fear to hold the infant 
God, the unwaning Light, Who reigneth with peace!  
Isaiah, purified by the burning ember brought by the seraphim, and the elder 
illumined by the O Mother of God, cried to her: thou hast given me Him Whom 
thou dost bear in thine arms as with tongs, the Light unwaning, Who reigneth with 
peace.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
O Parthenius, thou wast truly anointed with the oil of the Spirit to serve, as is 
meet, the Lord Who adorned thee with glory.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Plumbing the depths of the Scriptures, O most glorious one, and choosing Christ, 
the Pearl of great price, thou didst give Him to thy flock.  
As thou dost possess inexhaustible grace from God, O wise one, thou pourest 
forth most glorious miracles upon all, O wonderworker Parthenius.  
Theotokion: Let heaven sprinkle gladness and grace upon the earth; for now God 
hath given it gladness in the highest, the only Theotokos.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Receiving the reward of thy labors from Him Who giveth riches, O venerable 
father, thou wast revealed to all to be an abyss of miracles, dispelling the infirmities of 
those who make recourse to thee.  
Thou wast not shaken by the manifold assaults of the enemy, O father, nor wast 
thou frightened by his attacks, but thou didst stand unshaken, like a firm pillar, clad in 
the breast-plate of humility.  
Having completed well thy sacred life, O all-blessed one, and received the grace of 
healings from Almighty God, thou didst enlighten the blind and make whole the lame 
and paralyzed.  
Theotokion: O ye people, hymn her who hath ineffably given birth to the Word of 
God yet remained an incorrupt Virgin, even after giving birth, for she is the 
intercession of all and our salvation.  
ODE VI 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The Elder, having seen with his eyes the salvation * that was to come 
unto the peoples from God, * cried aloud unto Thee: * ‘O Christ, Thou art my 
God.’ 
In Sion wast Thou set as a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense for the 
disobedient, and the inviolate salvation of the faithful.  
Clearly bearing the lineaments of Him Who begot Thee before the ages, in Thy 
tender compassion Thou hast now been clothed in the weakness of the earth-born.  
Now lettest him that worshipped Thee as the Son of the Most High, the Son of 
the Virgin, God become a Child, depart in peace.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
With the sound of the Spirit, O most glorious one, thy God-bearing life trumpets 
forth to all the world thy gifts of wondrous miracles.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Thou didst sprinkle the water of adoption upon thy flock, washing away with thy 
teachings the stain of impiety and illumining them with the light of grace, O 
Parthenius.  
Theotokion: O Birthgiver of God, thou didst bring forth into the world the Fruit 
of the incorrupt Mind, Him Who hath been revealed to be the ever-living Mediator of 
incorruption for those who honor thee with faith and love.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Thine ancient power over us hath been destroyed, O false-minded one, and thy 
many wiles have disappeared, O wicked one; for, lo! a simple and innocent youth hath 
cast thee down.  
Thou gavest no slumber to thine eyes, nor rest to thine eye-lids, O venerable one, 
until thou didst cast down all the wiles of the deceiver who all day long raised up 
divers temptations against thee.  
Thou didst reach the end of thy chaste life, ever offering hospitality to strangers 
and giving alms richly and abundantly; wherefore, thou hast received incorruptible 
glory and delight.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth in the flesh to One of the Trinity, O most pure 
Birthgiver of God, in a manner beyond understanding and all telling; wherefore, I cry 
aloud: by thy supplications show me to be a dwelling-place of the divine Trinity.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I:  
O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth * and didst bless the 
hands of Symeon as was meet, * by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O 
Christ God. * But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, * and 
strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, ** O Thou Who alone lovest 
mankind.  
Ikos: Let us make haste to the Theotokos, desiring to behold her Son borne unto 
Symeon. Looking upon Him from heaven, the bodiless hosts in amazement proclaim: 
“We behold things wondrous, most glorious, unapproachable and ineffable: for He 
Who created Adam is borne as an infant; He Whom naught can contain is held in the 
elder’s arms; He Who is in the infinite bosom of His Father is willingly constrained in 
the flesh, but not in His divinity, He Who alone is the Lover of mankind.”  
ODE VII  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Thou who in the midst of the fire * bedewed the children as they 
discoursed on things divine, * and Who didst take up Thy dwelling in the pure 
Virgin: * O Word of God Thee do we reverently praise chanting: * O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
I go to announce glad tidings unto Adam and Eve who dwell in Hades, cried 
Symeon, joining chorus with the prophets, singing: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
God, the Redeemer of the race of mortals shall go even unto Hades; He shall grant 
forgiveness to all, sight to the blind, and even the mute shall chant: Blessed is the 
God of our fathers!  
And Symeon foretold to the Virgin: A sword shall pierce thy heart, O incorrupt 
one, beholding thy Son upon the Cross, to Whom we cry out: Blessed is the God of 
our fathers!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
The divine grace of the Spirit which dwelt within thee, O wise Parthenius, truly 
made thee a temple and church of glory, wherein the Father, the Son and the 
Comforter Himself abode.  
With divine grace thou didst burn up all the thorny delusion of ungodliness on 
earth, O venerable one, and didst sow divine teachings amongst thy flock producing 
the fruits of eternal life.  
Of old, with the lure of thy tongue, O Parthenius, thou didst draw thy flock out of 
the abyss of error and into life; and now, by thy supplications, O father, thou dost 
catch all manner of fish by grace.  
Theotokion: O Birthgiver of God, the angels beheld the corrupted nature of a race 
of dust strangely turned again to life and heavenly glory by thy birthgiving.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: In Babylon the Children feared not the fiery furnace; * but cast into the 
midst of the flames * they were bedewed and sang: * ‘O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou.’ 
The shrine of thy relics hath been revealed to be a well-spring of healings, O Luke, 
wherein everyone who hath recourse thereto is delivered from all manner of passions, 
blessing thee, O venerable one, and hymning thy Master.  
With most wondrous signs, O father, thou wast glorified by the Lord, Whom thou 
didst glorify first with the pangs of abstinence; for thou didst cry aloud: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
O venerable one, thou wast shown to be radiant in thy life, resplendent in miracles 
and steadfast in all good works; wherefore, thou hast received the reward of thy la-
bors, the kingdom of God.  
Theotokion: Save thy people and city, O all-immaculate Birthgiver of God, thou 
intercession for us who cry out to thee with unwavering faith: Blessed is the fruit of 
thy womb, O all-pure one!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
ODE VIII 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the flame, * 
the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all ye works of 
the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
O people of Israel, beholding your glory, Emmanuel, the Babe born of the Virgin, 
join ye now in chorus in the presence of the Ark of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Behold, cried Symeon, this One Who is both God and Babe shall be a sign of 
contradiction. O ye faithful, let us cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
God the Word, being Life itself and having become a Babe, shall be the downfall 
of the disobedient, but the restoration of those who chant with faith: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
With the staff of faith thou didst demolish the temples of the pagans, O wise and 
venerable one, raising up temples to God our Savior, wherein thou didst offer up 
pure sacrifices, chanting to Him: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thou didst offer thyself as a sacrifice of sweet savor, O wise Parthenius, and by 
the fire of abstinence didst send up a pure fragrance to the divine and 
unapproachable altar of God, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Possessing divine grace from God, O venerable father Parthenius, thou dost pour 
forth healings upon those who have recourse to thee, cleansing their infirmities and 
mightily driving off hordes of the demons, teaching them to ceaselessly hymn their 
Creator as God. 
 Theotokion: The Son and Word of God, Who is utterly unapproachable in His 
essence, made His abode within thee, O most pure one, and having clothed Himself 
in our image, in that He is compassionate, He showed Himself to be incarnate and 
dwelt amongst us. Wherefore, with great love we honor, hymn and praise thee.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Suffering affliction for the sake of the laws of their fathers, * the blessed 
Children in Babylon * scorned the foolish decree of the King. * Standing 
together in the midst of the flames, they remained unharmed, * and sang a 
song fitting for almighty God: * ‘O ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.’ 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Thou didst drive away all the harm of the passions, O blessed father Luke, 
cleansing lepers, strengthening the infirm, straightening bent limbs, healing the halt 
and the blind, and crying out: Hymn the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
Taking upon thyself many pangs and struggles, vigils and the exhaustion of the 
flesh, fasting, affliction and prostrations, and every other vexation of the flesh for the 
love of thy Creator, O venerable one, thou didst find the glory which is without pain, 
and, living with Him now, thou dost rejoice. Him do thou therefore entreat, that all of 
us who magnify thee with faith and love may be saved.  
Because of thy divers pangs and virtues, O venerable one, thou didst enter the 
kingdom of heaven, where thou dost now rejoice eternally, delighting ever in the 
beauty of thy Master; and with the angels thou dost chant the thrice-holy hymn: 
Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Without knowing a man, O pure one, thou hast given birth to Him 
Who was not separated from the bosom of the Father, yet ineffably became a man. 
Him do thou entreat, that He give me the strength utterly to cast down every attack 
of evil thoughts, and ever to do His divine will, that I may magnify thee.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern a 
figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to God. 
* Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the beginningless 
Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not known a man. 
The ancients were wont to offer a pair of new-born doves and two young birds, 
but the godly elder and the chaste prophetess Anna serve in their stead, magnifying 
the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was born of the Virgin and is borne into 
the temple.  
Thou hast imparted unto me the joy of Thy salvation, cried Symeon. Accept Thou 
Thy servant, for I am weary of the shadow, as a mystic and sacred preacher of the 
new grace, magnifying Thee in praise!  
The aged Anna, chaste and venerable, prophesying in sacred manner, openly con-
fessed the Lord in the temple, and she magnified the Theotokos, proclaiming her to 
all present.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Having truly been cleansed of the mire of the passions of the flesh, O thrice-
blessed one, thou hast wholly immersed thyself in the divine life, and immaterial 
delight, where, dancing, thou dost oversee us.  
Reaping the delight and beauty of miracles like noetic flowers during thy holy 
commemoration, O incorrupt God-bearer, we wear thy deeds like an ornately woven 
wreath.  
Thou didst transcend all things in this world, O God-bearing father Parthenius, 
and having joined chorus with the incorporeal choirs of heaven. Pray thou for us who 
with faith keep thy memory.  
Theotokion: I hymn thy grace, O Virgin, and magnify thy glory; for thou art truly 
the enlightenment and consolation of my soul, my ready help, salvation and aid.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Who among mortals is able to recount thy pangs and struggles, O father, for which 
thou hast received a meet reward from God? For thou, O venerable one, wast 
revealed to be a divine receptacle of the Spirit, venerable, upright, true, righteous and 
guileless.  
Dwelling now in the desired mansions, thou dost enjoy divine beauty, delighting in 
the flowers of God’s paradise, O all-blessed one, rejoicing, remember us before God.  
Triadicon: O only Tri-hypostatic Essence, thrice-radiant Being, indivisible Power, 
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, one Godhead: save those who magnify Thee as God in 
three Hypostases. 
 Theotokion: O all-hymned Virgin Theotokos, the mind of mortals is unable to 
fathom thy mystery; for without knowing a man before giving birth thou didst 
conceive, yet remained Virgin even after giving birth, and bore the Word Who is 
equally eternal with the Father.  
Exapostilarion of the feast:  
The elder, brought into the temple by the Spirit, took the Master of the Law in his 
arms, crying: Do Thou now loose me from the bond of the flesh according to Thy 
word: for mine eyes have seen the revelation of the Gentiles, and the salvation of 
Israel!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Bearing the Creator and Master * as a Babe * in her arms, * the pure and most 
pure Virgin ** entereth the temple.  
Verse: Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, * O Master, according to 
Thy word.  
Receive, O Symeon, * the Lord of glory * as thou wast told * by the Holy Spirit. ** 
For, lo! He is come!  
Verse: A Light of revelation to the gentiles, * and the glory of Thy people 
Israel.  
O good God, * mine eyes have now beheld * Thy promise! * O Lover of mankind, 
** make speed to release me, Thy servant!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
Rejoice, O thou who received * the Joy of the world, * Christ the Bestower of life, 
* causing the grief of our first mother ** to cease, O Virgin.  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ 
our God, the Sun of righteousness, * illumining those in darkness. * Be glad, also, O 
righteous elder * who hath received in thine arms the Redeemer of our souls, ** Who 
granteth us the resurrection.  
Troparion of the saints, in Tone IV:  
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Thou didst receive the divine grace of miracles, * O sacred Parthenius of godly 
wisdom, God-bearing wonderworker, * cleansing the faithful of all passions and 
dispelling spirits of wickedness, O father. ** Wherefore, we hymn thee as a great 
initiate of the mysteries of the grace of God.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone I:  
O Thou Who didst hallow the Virgin’s womb by Thy birth * and didst bless the 
hands of Symeon as was meet, * by anticipation Thou hast now saved even us, O 
Christ God. * But in the midst of battle grant peace to Thy community, * and 
strengthen the hierarchs whom Thou hast loved, ** O Thou Who alone lovest 
mankind.  
 
 
