--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR NICEPHORUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Submitting to the laws of Him * Who, for our sake, * assumed our flesh on earth 
and endured His honored Passion, * O divinely blessed one, * thou didst show love 
for thy neighbor, * which is the epitome of the law and the prophets. * Wherefore, 
thou didst receive a blessed end, * O Nicephorus, ** and standest now before the 
Wellspring of love.  
Having bended thy neck to God, * before Whom all knees do bend, * O 
wondrous martyr; * thy head wast severed and parted from thy comely body, * and 
with thy most honored mind * thou hast been united to Christ, the Head of all * And 
now drawing close to His light, * O Nicephorus, ** beseech enlightenment for us 
who praise thee.  
Thou hast sanctified the earth * with the streams of thy blood shed for Christ, * O 
martyr, * and by thy spirit thou hast gladdened * the spirits of the bodiless hosts, * 
enlightening the whole flock of the martyrs, O blessed one, * and now united with 
them as a valiant warrior * and an invincible martyr, ** pray thou to God on our 
behalf.  
Glory ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VI:  
O passion-bearer Nicephorus, thou hast clearly shown to all that he who loveth 
not his neighbor cannot love the Master; wherefore, in purity thou didst love thine 
own neighbor Sapricius. Hence, thou didst take wing to divine Desire, and lay down 
thy life in confession of Christ and the Faith. But Sapricius of ill repute, having 
conceived for thee an implacable hatred, showed himself a betrayer of Christ the 
Master. Standing now before Him, pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: A sword pierced thy heart, * O most pure Sovereign Lady, * as 
Symeon said, * when thou didst behold Him Who shone forth from thee ineffably, * 
condemned by the iniquitous * and lifted up upon the Cross, * tasting vinegar and 
gall, * His side pierced, * His hands and feet run through with nails; * and, lamenting, 
thou didst exclaim, crying out maternally: * “What is this new mystery, ** O my Child 
most sweet?” 
Troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Nicephorus O Lord, * received an imperishable 
crown from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the 
tyrants and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save 
Thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the martyr, the acrostic whereof is:  
“With songs I hymn Nicephorus, glorious among athletes”, the composition of 
Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
O Christ, Author of peace, as Thou art our Benefactor, by the supplications of 
Thy martyr bring the ship of my soul, which is cruelly tossed by the perils and billows 
of the raging sea of life, into a profound calm.  
With rational thought, O most wise one, thou didst piously subject the passion of 
anger to the mind of thy soul, and hastening to thy friend Sapricius, yearning to be 
reconciled with him, O wondrous one, thou didst submit to the laws of the Savior.  
Triadicon: Confessing the thrice-radiant effulgence of the One Godhead, which is 
equal in might and essence, co-enthroned and equal in nature, let us honor God in 
three Hypostases, professing the Word, the Father and the Spirit to be indivisible.  
Theotokion: In truth, even a heavenly intelligence is unable to comprehend thine 
unapproachable mystery, O all-praised one; for it was the good pleasure of Him Who 
is co-enthroned with the Father, to make His abode within thy womb and to become 
known in two natures.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Summoned forth, Nicephorus was shown to be a victor in his deeds; for dispelling 
the gloom of deception, and driving it far away, he cried aloud: There is none as holy 
as Thee, O only Lover of mankind!  
Believing in the Master Who was slain for thy sake, thou didst hasten of thine own 
will to death, desiring His voluntary mortality, strengthened as a victorious martyr by 
the power of God.  
Nicephorus, the favorite of Christ, hath clearly been shown to be a struggler on 
earth and a champion in the heavens, crying out with the incorporeal ranks: There is 
none as holy as Thee, O only Lover of mankind!  
Triadicon: Illumined through faith by the divinely inspired commandments, we all 
confess the one uncreated Godhead: the Word Who cameth forth from the great 
mind of God, and the Spirit Who likewise proceedeth from Him.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Theotokion: Having conceived in thy womb, without knowing wedlock, Him Who 
was begotten of the Father before all ages, O Virgin, for us thou hast given birth to 
God and man, in Whom each nature is perfect and undivided.  
Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of the angels ...”: 
Bound by the bond of love, O Nicephorus, * thou didst manifestly destroy the 
malice of hatred, * and beheaded by the sword, * as a divine martyr of the incarnate 
Savior, * thou dost entreat Him, ** on behalf of us who hymn thy glorious memory.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”: 
Thou didst dye thy purple robe in thine own blood, and invested therewith as an 
invincible warrior, and bearing the Cross as a scepter, thou didst hasten from earth to 
the heavens, O blessed Nicephorus, and standest before the King of all. Glory to 
Him Who gaveth thee strength! Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! Glory to Him 
Who, through thee, worketh healings for all!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Stretching forth thy divine arms, wherewith thou didst bear the Creator Who in 
His goodness hath become incarnate, O most pure virgin, beseech Him to deliver 
from temptations, sufferings and tribulations us who praise thee with love and cry 
aloud: Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! Glory to Him Who issued 
forth from thee! Glory to Him Who hath delivered us by thy birthgiving!  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O Christ, 
Thine immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the 
Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, wherewith Thou hast 
saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Deemed worthy of divine illumination, O blessed Nicephorus, thou didst live a 
godly life and now illumined splendidly with divine light, preserve those who keep thy 
memory and cry out with faith, O divinely wise one: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of 
mankind!  
Having joined the martyrs of Christ, thou shinest forth; for thou didst destroy the 
delusion of polytheism, thy head being severed, and with the torrents of thy blood 
didst drown the deception of idolatry, crying out to the Master: Glory to Thy power, 
O Lover of mankind!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sapricius, who kept not Thy laws, O Savior, hath been stripped of Thy divine 
grace; and, going over to Thine enemies, the wretched one hath been deprived of the 
glory of Thy martyrs. Wherefore, marveling at Thy just providence, we cry out to 
Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Triadicon: The beginningless Father, the Author of all, is Light. The Word is 
Light. The Holy Spirit is Light. The Three-Sunned Godhead, which shineth forth 
ineffably from the Father, as from a wellspring, from before all ages, is known in one 
Essence, Power and Glory.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, He Who within thee hath become wholly united to 
mankind doth renew all mankind, without leaving the bosom of the Father; for, 
deigning to dwell in thy womb, in the richness of His tender compassions, He volun-
tarily impoverished Himself, enriching the world with divinity.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why has the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
With the torrents of thy blood springing forth like the four principal divine virtues, 
thou hast watered the garden of the Church, O blessed Nicephorus; and from thence 
we draw forth divine gifts for our souls.  
The sower of malice captured the wretched one through remembrance of wrongs; 
but the Author of goodness and peace drew forth, in his place, the divinely wise 
martyr Nicephorus, who is adorned by the vision of the light of God.  
Emulating Thy voluntary suffering, O Savior, the divinely wise one hath been 
sanctified; for, sprinkled with drops which fall from Thy side, he offereth unto Thee 
the streams of his own blood, approaching Thee beheaded by the sword.  
Triadicon: Knowing Orthodoxy to be the foundation of salvation, we profess in 
three Hypostases the co-beginningless Father, Son and Holy Spirit: the one Godhead, 
one Essence, one Will, and one Activity.  
Theotokion: Noetically the assembly of the prophets learned of thy mysteries, for 
the Master showed thee to be the portal of heaven on earth; and, incarnate of thee, O 
Virgin, the Sun of righteousness hath shone forth upon those in darkness.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The abyss of my sins and the storm of my transgressions * disquieten 
me and thrust me down * into the depths of despondency; * but do Thou 
stretch forth Thy mighty arm, * unto me as Thou didst to Peter, * and save 
me, O my Guide.  
Heal thou the wounds of my heart, O divinely wise Nicephorus, and, dispelling the 
gloom of the passions, drive it away with the beams of the divine radiance which lieth 
within thee, entreating Christ the Redeemer, O blessed one.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Calmly traversing the tempest of the threefold waves of idolatry with the sail of the 
Cross and the winds of the Spirit, O invincible martyred passion-bearer Nicephorus, 
thou hast attained unto the calm haven of Christ.  
Thou didst suffer in martyrdom and truly become a victor, mightily destroying the 
machinations of the serpent; and having shared in the sufferings of the Master, O 
blessed one, thou hast now been glorified as is meet.  
Theotokion: The noetic hosts of the angels stand in awe, marveling as they behold 
Him, Who is with the Father and the Spirit from before all ages, born in the flesh, of 
thy womb, as a Babe, O most pure Birthgiver of God.  
Kontakion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Soaring aloft in the love of the Lord, O glorious one, * and taking His glorious 
Cross upon thy shoulder, * thou didst put to shame the wiles of the devil, * suffering 
even unto death, * and hast been shown to be a bearer of the trophy of truth, * a 
warrior and initiate of the mysteries ** of the grace of God.  
Ikos: Thou didst manifestly love the teaching of Paul and having planted it in thy 
breast, O glorious one, thou didst cry aloud: “Love doth not vaunt itself! The perfect 
Creator of mankind hath given it to us. For the sake of love He endured all: the nails 
and the Cross, vinegar and spittle; with a spear His holy side was pierced, and hath 
thereby poured forth upon us His divine blood and water.” And having desired Him, 
thou hast been shown to be a victor, a warrior by profession, and an initiate of the 
mysteries of the grace of God.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
For thee death was a departure from the things of this world, O blessed 
Nicephorus, and ascending into heaven and the things of heaven, thou hast joined 
chorus with the angels, and doth now chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Strengthened by the suffering of the Almighty, O divinely wise one, thou didst cast 
down to the ground high-mindedness and the brow of superiority as weakness, crying 
out to the Creator: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Running, Nicephorus finished the race of martyrdom, his heart enlarged through 
the activity of the divine Spirit; and now he fervently crieth out to Thee, O Master: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Triadicon: Knowing Thee, the Father, to be the first and beginningless Mind, Who 
begat the co-beginningless Word without suffering and outside of time, and Who 
brought forth the all-holy Spirit, we cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: Thou wast both Virgin and Mother, O pure Birthgiver of God, 
ineffably conceiving God in thy womb, Who was incarnate of thee and is known in 
two natures, having dwelt on earth as both God and man.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Signed with the grace of the Savior, when called thou didst set thyself apart for the 
contest, O martyr of Christ; and gaining victory over the adversary, thou wast 
adorned with crowns of victory, chanting in a godly manner: Ye children, bless; ye 
priests, hymn; ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Sanctified by water and the Spirit, O all-blessed Nicephorus, and stained with the 
blood of thy martyrdom, as a true martyr of Christ God thou hast acquired radiant 
splendor, wherein thou dost now cry aloud: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye 
people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Triadicon: With the incorporeal ranks ye children bless, ye priests hymn, and ye 
people supremely exalt throughout all ages, the one eternally-flowing Source of 
goodness: the unbegotten, beginningless and supremely perfect Godhead, the Creator 
and King of all,  
Theotokion: More holy than the heavenly ranks of angels wast thou, O all-hymned 
Theotokos; for, by thy virginal womb which kneweth not wedlock, thou hast given 
birth unto the Creator and Lord: God incarnate in one Hypostasis and two Natures, 
without commingling or change.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Clad, like a bridegroom, in garments woven from the blood of torments, O most 
blessed Nicephorus, thou didst depart to partake of the divine splendor of the 
Benefactor of all, Who adorned and embellished thee with His honored suffering on 
the Cross.  
Thou wast drawn by the comeliness of the Master, of which there is none more 
comely; and yearning to delight in His never-waning and wondrous splendor, aflame 
with the love of thy Lord, thou didst urge the tormenters to cut off thy head with the 
sword, O Nicephorus.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Having contended splendidly against deception and vanquished it as victorious, O 
glorious martyr of Christ, thou didst receive the gift of a Crown for thy head, and as a 
martyr having joined chorus with the choirs of the martyrs, thou dost stand before 
the throne of the King of all, O Nicephorus.  
Triadicon: Glorifying the Son, Who was divinely begotten of the unbegotten 
Father, and the holy Spirit, Who proceedeth from Him from before all ages, we 
honor the three Hypostases of the transcendent and reigning Trinity, united in a 
threefold Unity; and theologizing, we magnify God.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown, O Virgin Mother of God, to have given birth, 
in a manner transcending nature, to the supremely good Word, Whom the Father 
begat from before all ages, in that He is good. Him do we now also understand as 
transcending all flesh, though He wrapped Himself in the flesh.  
Exapostilarion in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heavens with the stars ...”: 
Thou wast shown to be a true namesake of victory, O Nicephorus, having 
vanquished the tyrants by thy love and thy torments. Wherefore, thou hast received 
from the Lord a crown of victory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III:  
By thy mighty protection, O pure one, * preserve all of us, thy servants unharmed, 
* by the attacks of enemies; ** for thee alone do we have as our refuge in times of 
need.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Nicephorus O Lord, * received an imperishable 
crown from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the 
tyrants and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save 
Thou our souls.  
Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone I:  
Bound by the bond of love, O Nicephorus, * thou didst manifestly destroy the 
malice of hatred, * and beheaded by the sword, * as a divine martyr of the incarnate 
Savior, * thou dost entreat Him, * on behalf of us who hymn thy glorious memory.  
Another Kontakion, in Tone III:  
Soaring aloft in the love of the Lord, O glorious one, * and taking His glorious 
Cross upon thy shoulder, * thou didst put to shame the wiles of the devil, * suffering 
even unto death, * and hast been shown to be a bearer of the trophy of truth, * a 
warrior and initiate of the mysteries ** of the grace of God.  
 
 
