--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 19th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE ARCHIPPUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs, O Lord ...”: 
With the light of his discourse, Archippus illumined the people delivering them 
from the darkness of unbelief; and having suffered and trampled down the enemy, he 
made haste to the never-waning Radiance, and rejoiceth now with the angels. 
Through his prayers, O Master, bestow great mercy upon all.  
Dragged along the ground, pierced through, and beset by all manner of other cruel 
tortures, O blessed one, thou didst not deny Christ, nor didst thou render worship to 
graven images. Wherefore, thou hast received a crown, and prayest that great mercy 
be granted to all.  
With the divine streams of thy blood thou didst sanctify the earth, O divinely wise 
martyr; by thy wounds thou hast wounded a multitude of evil demons, and, ever 
pouring forth healings, thou healest the most grievous of sufferings. Wherefore, in 
thy supplications, O blessed one, ask that we all receive great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Rescue me, O Sovereign lady, * from the hands of the man-slaying serpent, * who 
wickedly desireth to devour me utterly. * Crush thou his jaws, I pray thee, * and set at 
naught his wiles, ** that, delivered from his talons, I may magnify thine aid.  
Stavrotheotokion: ‘I cannot bear O my child, to behold Thee, * Who dost grant 
life and health unto all, hung upon the Tree; * for of old those who were lulled into 
the sleep of death * by the fruit of the transgression * have been awakened * and 
granted divine and salvific life and health by Thee’, * thus said the Virgin weeping, ** 
whom we magnify. 
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Archippus, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission 
of sins * unto our souls 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the wise and divinely eloquent Archippus”, 
the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Shining with the radiance of grace, the most wise Paul emitted thee like a beam of 
light, O blessed Archippus, dispelling the deepest darkness of polytheism by the 
Spirit.  
Thou wast made captive by the divine net of the words of the preacher Paul, and 
didst most gloriously drag mankind forth from the abyss of the malice of the enemy, 
and offering them the banquet of God, as noetic food.  
Clad in the raiment of divine grace, O glorious Archippus, in the vesture of 
incorruption, and the divine garment of salvation, thou didst clothe those stripped 
bare of the glory of God.  
Theotokion: Descrying from afar, with the eyes of prophecy, the dread mystery of 
thy divine birthgiving, which passeth understanding, O all-pure one, the divinely 
eloquent prophets described it with divers images.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
The divine Paul beareth witness to thee as a faithful servant of Christ, a sacred 
preacher and his fellow warrior, O blessed Archippus.  
Kindled noetically by the fire of the Comforter, thou didst burn up the bitter tinder 
of the madness of idolatry, O all-praised Archippus.  
With the lightning-flashes of the virtues thou hast illumined thy radiant life, O 
Archippus, enlightening those who piously honor thee.  
Theotokion: O all-pure one, thou wast most clearly shown to be a temple 
containing God, a pure habitation and a divine dwelling-place. 
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of angels ...”:  
As a disciple of Paul, thou didst enlighten the people, O God-bearer, teaching 
them to chant unto the Trinity; thou didst destroy the pernicious temples by grace; 
and having suffered patiently, thou didst receive crowns, rejoicing. O blessed 
Archippus, pray thou on our behalf.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O pure Virgin Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, who alone art the intercessor 
and protection of the faithful: from tribulations, sorrows and evil circumstances 
deliver those who place their trust in thee, O Maiden; and save our souls by thy divine 
prayers.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out, dead, upon the Cross, O Christ, 
Thine all-immaculate Mother cried out: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the 
Spirit art co-beginningless, what is this, Thine ineffable providence, whereby Thou 
hast saved the creation of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
The iniquitous tyrant subjected thee To scourgings, wounds and multifarious 
tortures, but thou didst proclaim divine things and manifestly denounce the ungodly, 
O Archippus.  
Traversing life well, O blessed one, thou wast deemed worthy to reach a truly 
blessed end; for, having most valiantly endured bodily pangs, thou wast martyred for 
Christ.  
Thou didst put an end to the grossness of ungodliness by the sweet salt of thy 
words, O fullness of the pious; and, rejoicing, thou didst cry aloud: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Habbakuk foresaw thee of old, O all-immaculate Maiden, as the 
mountain overshadowed, bearing the Word Who shieldeth all from the flame of 
transgression and the burning heat of sin.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
With the divine lightning-flashes of thine all-wise preaching thou hast enlightened 
those held fast by the night of unbelief, O divinely wise and all-blessed one.  
The divine river which proceeded from thy heart hath drowned the torrents of 
falsehood and given drink to the minds of the faithful, O most blessed one.  
Enlivened by goodly hope, thou didst endure the ripping away of thy four limbs, 
sanctifying the earth with thy blood, O thou who pleased God.  
Theotokion: The Lord chose thee alone out of all generations, O Theotokos, and 
became incarnate from thee, deifying mankind.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Mercilessly the false one lacerated thee with stripes, O divinely wise one, yet thou 
wast in no wise weakened by his deceptions, but rather, looked to the glory which 
Christ had bestowed upon thee, glorifying thee.  
Legions of the invisible foe didst thou wound with the wounds of thy flesh, O 
blessed Archippus; and denouncing the heart of the tyrant, thou didst rend it asunder 
with lacerations.  
They who worshipped stones with hardened hearts stoned thee, O blessed martyr, 
who confessed the Rock of life which crusheth the foundation of falsehood.  
Theotokion: Having put off mortality, Adam hath been clothed in life in paradise, 
O Virgin, having attained immortality through thy life-bearing birth giving, O all-holy 
Bride of God.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
The Church, possessing thee as a great star, O Archippus, * and illumined by the 
rays of thy miracles, crieth out to thee: ** Save those who with faith honor thy 
memory!  
 ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Attested to by thy divinely-wise words of God, and thy true understanding, O all-
blessed one, with the grace of wisdom, thou didst drive the darkness of ignorance 
from the souls of those who submitted to thine honored discourse.  
Evil people buried thee in the deepest of pits and mercilessly slew thee by stoning, 
O martyr, who cried aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
The earth revealed thy buried body, O martyr, pouring forth waters of healings 
upon the faithful; and heaven hath enrolled thy spirit among the souls of the martyrs, 
O blessed Archippus.  
Theotokion: The Lord Who hath clothed the earth with darkness and heaven with 
clouds, O Maiden, is of His own will clothed in mortal flesh through thy blood, 
clothing mankind in the vesture of immortal glory.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Praising thee with sacred hymns, O holy Archippus, Paul wrote of thee as his 
fellow warrior, the doer of godly deeds, who ministered to him and chanted with 
faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
With divine words was the right wondrous Apphia, who loved thee as a true son, 
anointed for the contest, O most wise one; and with her thou dwellest in the kingdom 
on high, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
To the mockery of children did they who were infantile of mind give thee over, O 
Archippus, who suffered most patiently, mercilessly pierced by them; and thou didst 
cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
 
Theotokion: Adam became mortal through eating alone, death coming upon him 
through the tree of knowledge, O pure one; but given life for thy sake, he hath again 
found his food in paradise, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
That thou mightest inherit everlasting glory, O martyr, thou didst disdain earthly 
glory which is fleeting and endureth not, and cleave unto Christ, adorned with His 
glory.  
Thy head was crowned with a wreath of victory and thou wast clothed in a robe of 
purple dyed in thy blood, O divinely wise Archippus; and, rejoicing, thou dost reign 
with Christ, O all-blessed one.  
As the disciple of the wise and divinely eloquent Paul, preeminent among the 
apostles, thou dost rejoice with him and as an heir to everlasting delight, O all-blessed 
one, thou art the adornment of the Colossians.  
The people have assembled on the splendid day of thy commemoration, to hymn 
the beneficent Savior and the pangs which thou didst valiantly endure in martyrdom, 
O Archippus, casting down the most nefarious one.  
Theotokion: Bearing Christ in thine arms, Who holdeth all in His palm, O most 
pure one, entreat Him, as thy Son, to deliver me from the hands of the enemy, and to 
embrace and save me in the abyss of His tender compassion.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Archippus, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission 
of sins * unto our souls 
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in tone IV:  
The Church, possessing thee as a great star, O Archippus, * and illumined by the 
rays of thy miracles, crieth out to thee: ** Save those who with faith honor thy 
memory!  
 
