--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 15th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE ONESIMUS 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Celebrating with hymns today * the sacred memory of the divine apostle 
Onesimus, the martyr for God, * who was adopted by God through grace * for the 
sake of thy faith, * and begotten by the faith of Paul, ** let us praise him.  
Naturally escaping the slavery of deception, * O wise one, * thou didst become a 
child of God * by grace, the Holy Spirit and faith in Christ, * joining the divine and 
all-praised disciples of Paul, ** O right profitable Onesimus.  
Becoming a disciple of the Word * thanks to the divine and most praised Paul, * 
the preacher and apostle, O thrice-blessed Onesimus, * thou dost thrice receive from 
Christ a twofold crown: * adorned as a priest, as a preacher, ** and as a spiritual 
athlete, O all-famed one.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
With the staff of thine aid, O pure Theotokos, * drive away bestial passions from 
my wretched soul, * and guide me * peacefully unto life, * and number me among the 
holy flock ** of thy chosen sheep.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb lifted up upon the Cross, * the 
immaculate Virgin cried aloud, weeping: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this 
new and most glorious sight? * How is it that Thou Who holdest all things in Thy 
hand ** hast been nailed to the Tree in the flesh?”  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Onesimus * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins ** unto our souls 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy apostle, the acrostic whereof is: “Deliver me who am a slave to the 
passions, O blessed one”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI:  
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory.  
Illumined with the divine and radiant grace of the Savior, O blessed Onesimus, 
illumine my darkened soul, entreating Christ God Who is the Lover of mankind.  
Enlightened by the radiant beams of Paul, O glorious and all-blessed one, thou 
didst easily escape the darkness of ignorance, uttering a hymn of thanksgiving unto 
Christ.  
Thou wast shown to be a divine and sacred minister, O most blessed one, and, 
shining radiantly with the divine Spirit, thou didst go about everywhere, proclaiming 
Christ piously, O blessed of God.  
Theotokion: Adorned with the beauty of the virtues, O pure Mother of God, thou 
didst ineffably conceive the true God Who hath illumined us with the divine virtues.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Thou didst put thy mouth to the fountain of divine waters, and, receiving a torrent 
of sweetness therefrom, O glorious one, thou hast washed the face of the honored 
Church.  
Through partaking of noetic effulgence thou wast revealed to be most radiant, 
splendidly illumining the hearts of the faithful with lamps of piety and with the 
luminous beams of thy preaching.  
By the bonds of Paul, thou wast released from the slavery of deception and hon-
ored with the freedom of grace; and becoming a son of God, thou wast shown to be 
an heir of God.  
Theotokion: By deception hath the serpent held me in thrall from of old, having 
made me captive through deceit; but, having been released from slavery to him by 
thee, O Mother of God, I bless thee with hymns.  
Sessional Hymn in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Having been truly released from temporal slavery, O Onesimus, thou didst 
become a profitable vessel and slave of Christ God, and through the divine Word, 
freed those enslaved by the enemy, making them citizens of heaven. With them we 
glorify thy sacred memory with faith.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
exceedingly glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee suspended upon the Cross, * O Word of 
God, * Thy most pure Mother exclaimed, lamenting maternally: * “What is this new 
and strange wonder, O my Son? * How is it that Thou, the Life of all, hast tasted 
death, * desiring to bring life to mortals, ** in so far as Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Desiring to save all from the yoke of slavery, O blessed and divinely revealed one, 
the Lord ordained thee to perform the sacred mysteries of His honored Gospel.  
Thou didst become a child of God through grace, proclaiming His only-begotten 
and ever-existing Word, Who hath most gloriously drawn nigh in the flesh unto those 
on earth.  
Thou didst live as a hierarch, O all-wise one, with discourse of judgment and the 
divine anointing of the priesthood, and by enduring cruelties, became a martyr of 
God,  
Theotokion: The Son Who by nature is beginningless and beyond time, hath of 
His own will received a beginning in time through the Virgin Maiden, intending to 
restore from corruption those who are subject to time.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Soaring over the snares of the enemy with keenness of mind and purity of soul, O 
blessed one, thou wast borne aloft to the mansions of heaven, receiving wings of 
divine knowledge.  
Thine apostle, O Good One, preached Thy coming in the flesh unto mankind, 
guiding the lost to true knowledge and illumining them with the radiance of faith.  
Thou wast shown to be a most magnificent temple, O blessed Onesimus, having 
within thee, like a lamp-stand, the effulgence of divine grace, being formed through 
the activity of the divine Spirit.  
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: By thy mediation and intercession, O Virgin, rent asunder the bonds 
of my sin; for thou art the hope of the despairing who have recourse with faith to thy 
divine protection.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Called from heaven, O all-blessed one, and shining like the sun with the radiance 
of grace, thou didst emit beams imbued with goodly power dispelling from afar the 
darkness of ignorance. (Twice)  
Thou didst splendidly denounce the corrupt and vile insolence of the iniquitous, O 
most honored hierarch of the Lord, truly proclaiming the divine teachings of piety.  
Theotokion: Guilty of sin and grievously wounded, wretch that I am, I flee to thee, 
O merciful Mother of God, beseeching thee to cleanse the sores of my transgressions.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
Thou didst shine forth upon the whole world * like a beam, O blessed one, * 
shining with the rays of the most radiant Paul, * that sun who hath illumined the 
world. ** Wherefore, we honor thee, O glorious Onesimus.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
O blessed Onesimus, through the purest hope thou didst receive a blessed end and 
imperishable immortality, rejoicing and chanting to Christ: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou. (Twice)  
By thy steadfast wisdom, O divinely wise Onesimus, thou didst trample underfoot 
the machinations of deception, casting them down by the means of piety, crying 
aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: As the all-immaculate Bride of God thou didst conceive the Word of 
God Who hath not been separated from the bosom of the Father, and Who was held 
in thine arms, O blessed Mother of God who knewest not wedlock.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Joining chorus with the angels, O blessed Onesimus, and adorned with the crown 
of martyrdom thou standest in splendor before the throne of the Master, Whom we 
supremely exalt throughout all ages.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Ministering to the apostle of God, O godly Onesimus, as a true preacher of Christ 
thou didst acquire the gift of performing ineffable miracles. Him do we supremely 
exalt throughout all ages.  
Enriched with the grace of healings from the abundant well-spring of the Savior, 
thou hast bestowed it upon all. And submitting ourselves to His divine 
commandments, O blessed one, we supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: Having learned that the wonder of thy birthgiving is divine beyond 
comprehension, O all-holy, pure, and most immaculate Mother of God, we 
supremely exalt Thee throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Thou wast shown to be a radiant beacon, shining with the splendid rays of the 
spirit and illumining the ends of the world with the light of the knowledge of God, O 
blessed Onesimus. Wherefore, we magnify thee with the choirs of the apostles.  
Adorned with a multitude of spiritual fruits, thou wast taken up, rejoicing, into the 
heavens, O divinely revealed one, and wast shown to be an honored apostle of Christ, 
a most wise hierarch, an invincible martyr, and a true preacher of things beyond 
understanding, O blessed of God.  
Standing before the Master, ever intercede for those who hymn thee and praise thy 
festival, O Onesimus, who art ever illumined, ever most radiant, and ever wondrously 
shining forth.  
Theotokion: Delivered by thy birthgiving from skin-clad mortality, the curse, 
corruption and death, the product of sin, O Mother of God who knewest not 
wedlock, I ever glorify thee with the armies of heaven.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Onesimus * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins ** unto our souls 
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
Thou didst shine forth upon the whole world * like a beam, O blessed one, * 
shining with the rays of the most radiant Paul, * that sun who hath illumined the 
world. ** Wherefore, we honor thee, O glorious Onesimus.  
 
