--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 11th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR BLAISE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
The summit of the virtues and foundation of the faithful, * the glory of hierarchs * 
and the boast of the martyrs * with splendor doth summon all the faithful to his holy 
memorial, * to chant unto him as a victor ** who glorified God on earth.  
Moved by a vision of Christ, * the Angel of Great Counsel, * when thou didst 
behold the council of the iniquitous, O wise martyr, * thou didst proceed straightway 
to the tribunal, * taking the trophies of victory in thy hand; ** and thou dwellest now 
in the heavens, O all-sanctified one.  
With the drops of thy blood, O martyr Blaise, * thou didst weave a beautiful robe 
for the Church, * embroidered by thy well anointed fingers * and dyed with thy 
manifold pangs; * and she is arrayed therein like a comely bride, ** hymning Christ 
the Bridegroom.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
As a good instructor of children and a teacher of piety, by the divine power of thy 
godly words thou didst lead the god-loving women to the struggle of martyrdom, 
thereby strengthening for Christ the weakness of their nature; and having finished 
well the course of sufferings with them, thou dost rejoice with splendor in the bridal 
chamber of heaven, adorned with a twofold crown of divine glory, and making 
entreaty with them, that peace and great mercy be granted to us.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of mankind, 
crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What is this, O my 
Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou 
hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** I 
marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  
After the Aposticha: Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Blossoming forth in the exercise of the divine virtues in accordance with thy name, 
O Blaise, thou didst flourish like a palm-tree in the courts of the Lord, as David said, 
and like a cedar didst thou increase through chastisements. Like a fruitful vine in the 
house of God, pruned during torment by the application of tortures, thou hast 

--- PAGE 2 ---
poured forth upon us a noetic wine from the fruit of thy struggles. Drinking thereof, 
our hearts are filled with divine gladness; and assembling together for the honored 
memorial of thy repose, we praise thee, calling thee blessed, and asking that, through 
thee, we may receive peace and great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure Virgin Mother, * beholding the most iniquitous 
people * who unjustly nailed Thee to the Tree, ** was wounded within, as Symeon 
foretold.  
Troparion of the Hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Blaise, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Together let us offer harmonious praise unto Christ, celebrating the glorious 
memory of the wise Blaise, and chanting a hymn unto our God, in that He hath been 
glorified.  
The Christ-loving Blaise, seer of things afar off, as a hierarch, martyr and 
shepherd, which he hath revealed himself to be by his deeds, summoneth us to eat 
the divine banquet he hath set before us.  
Thou didst purify thy life with the virtues and wast revealed to be a vessel fit to 
receive the divine myrrh of an honorable ministry, O wise one; embroidering thy 
vesture with the blood of martyrdom.  
Theotokion: By thy birth giving, O pure and most holy Theotokos, the whole race 
of mankind hath risen from our first father’s fall and manifestly been delivered from 
the curse of our first mother.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
With the knowledge of God, thou wast anointed to serve Christ as a priest, and 
taught by the Spirit, thou didst sanctify thyself with thy blood.  
Truly, in fulfillment of thine own works, thou didst become a martyr and teacher, 
O Blaise, by thy doctrine.  
Thou wast a model of piety for the Church of Christ, making thy sacred vesture 
bright with the blood of thy sufferings.  
Theotokion: Having given birth on earth to the abundantly rich God, O pure one, 
thou hast led humanity from the fall, up to heaven.  
Kontakion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
O God-bearing Blaise, divine offshoot, unfading blossom, much-suffering branch 
of the vine of Christ: fill those who honor thy memory with thy gladness, praying 
unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
As a precious scion of piety, by the power of the Spirit thou wast shown to be an 
uprooter of ungodliness, O all-famed Blaise; for thou didst denounce the falsehood 
of idolatry before the tribunal, and boldly preached the worship of the Trinity. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Wherefore, having given thyself over to the iniquitous, O passion-bearer, thou didst 
slay the serpent, the author of evil, wherefore for this cause we cry out to thee: 
Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with love 
honor thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
O undefiled, blameless and all-immaculate Sovereign Lady, thou cloud of the 
noetic Sun and golden candle-stand of the light of God: with the radiance of 
dispassion illumine my soul, which hath grown dim through the blindness of the 
passions, I pray; with torrents of compunction enlighten my polluted heart, and with 
tears of repentance cleanse me of the mire of my evil deeds, that with love I may cry 
out to thee: O Ever-virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me 
forgiveness of my transgressions; for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
Made steadfast with the staff of truth, like Moses thou didst cast down the deceits 
of the serpent, O Blaise favored of Christ, denouncing the tyrant and instructing a 
new people.  
The affinity of thy corrections with God showed thee to be a benefactor of both 
reason-endowed and dumb creatures, O blessed one; wherefore, thou hast received 
gifts of healing.  
In the vale wherein sickness was rife, O father, thou didst rightly choke the thorns 
of iniquity for thy flock in Christ. 
Theotokion: Having given birth to the Tree of life, O all-hymned one, thou wast 
shown to be like a garden of paradise planted within the Church; and eating thereof, 
we have come to know Christ our God.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Extending the bounds of thy flock on the pasture of God, O holy hierarch, in a 
divinely wise manner thou didst drive falsehood out of all the earth.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
With thy teachings thou didst confirm thy flock in the Faith, O wise hierarch; for, 
lo! thou didst trample underfoot the deception of the woman.  
Made steadfast by the love of Christ, the women came to emulate thy struggles, O 
father, and were slaughtered in their zeal for Christ.  
Theotokion: The visitation of death is truly slain by thy birthgiving, O Sovereign 
Lady; for darkness is seen to be destroyed by the Light.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
With the beauty of the divers wounds of thy body thou didst adorn the comeliness 
of thy vesture, O hierarch; and wast crowned with twofold grace.  
In that the women who suffered with thee hastened with faith in Christ, they died 
with zeal, O father Blaise. Preserve thou also those who keep thy memory with love.  
Aflame with zeal for Christ, and having cast off all flattering deception, with their 
blood the martyrs burned up the infliction of torments.  
Theotokion: Thou art my strength and my song, O Birthgiver of God; for on thee 
have I set my hope, and through thee I have been exalted against mine enemies.  
Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “As first-fruits ...”: 
With the anointing of the priesthood and the blood of martyrdom * wast thou 
adorned, O glorious Blaise; * and joining chorus, thou shinest in the highest, watching 
over those who come to thy temple ** and therein unceasingly cry out to thee: 
Preserve us all!  
Ikos: O brethren, assembling with haste let us come to the temple of the 
Hieromartyr, that we may raise a song unto him today and delight in grace; for he 
saveth souls and bodies from manifold sufferings, as a martyr, as a venerable saint, as 
a faithful hierarch and a champion for those who cry out to him with a pure soul: 
Preserve us all!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Like David we cry out to thee with love, O father Blaise: as an emulator of the 
Lord, for while thy footsteps, like the Lord’s, were not known, thy path was revealed 
to be upon the waters.  
Delighting in the grace of the Savior, the martyrs truly replaced torment with joy; 
and their blood, in a manner transcending the nature of man, was wondrously 
transformed into milk.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Beholding their mothers’ boldness for martyrdom, the children, delighting in the 
grace of Christ and His majesty, hastened, rejoicing, to the Master.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O sanctified and divine habitation of the Most High; for 
through thee, O Theotokos, hath joy been given to those who cry: Blessed art thou 
among women, O all-immaculate Sovereign Lady! be thou also, in thy good gifts, a 
help unto us.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Having stretched forth thy hands before the face of the Lord in the activity of thy 
priesthood, O father, thou didst offer Christ thy blood and prayers. Wherefore, 
having drained the cup of salvation, O wise one, thou didst cry aloud: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord! (Twice)  
Piously emulating the widow, with faith and divine joy we keep thy memory, O 
Blaise; and as thou didst keep the promise given her, be thou also, in thy good gifts, a 
help unto us as thou wast to her.  
Theotokion: The nature of mankind, which before was condemned by the fall into 
transgression, hath through thy birthgiving truly found blessing, and joyfully chants: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Preparing an inheritance in the sweetness of paradise and the kingdom therein, O 
wise and holy hierarch Blaise, thou didst hasten to the slaughter, rejoicing in the Lord.  
With the sword of the Spirit, O blessed one, thou didst cut down the pride of the 
ungodly who rose up in vain against thy flock; but adorned thy sheep with thy blood.  
O wise and holy hierarch Blaise, with the women who suffered with thee, and their 
godly children, pray that those who praise thee may receive a crown; for from the 
beginning we have hymned thee.  
Theotokion: In giving birth, as before and after birthgiving, thou wast shown to be 
a Virgin, transcending the laws of nature, O Sovereign Lady, wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Exapostilarion in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”:  
Thou wast a holy hierarch and martyr, a man bereft of guile, O Blaise, and thou 
didst bear the wounds of the sufferings of Christ, Who hath given thee the grace to 
heal all diseases.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III:  
Thee did Daniel describe beforehand * as the unquarried mountain * from which 
the precious Stone was cut * Which grindeth to dust the temples of the idols, ** O 
Mary, Birthgiver of God.  
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Blaise, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the hieromartyr, in Tone VIII: 
With the anointing of the priesthood and the blood of martyrdom * wast thou 
adorned, O glorious Blaise; * and joining chorus, thou shinest in the highest, watching 
over those who come to thy temple ** and therein unceasingly cry out to thee: 
Preserve us all!  
