--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, ALEXIS, 
METROPOLITAN OF MOSCOW  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O blessed and holy hierarch Alexis, * accepting the voice of the Word, * thou didst 
disdain the things of the body, * forsaking the pleasures and properties of life, * and, 
traversing the noetic sea * by the teaching of piety * and supra-natural thundering, * 
thou didst serve Christ, ** O thou who art blessed of God. (Twice)  
O most wise wonder-worker Alexis, * thou didst please God by thy monastic life, 
* for God chose thee beforehand, from thy youth, O father, * to be a shepherd for 
His reason-endowed sheep and a great teacher. * Thou hast been shown to be an 
instructor of priests * and a supremely radiant star for the whole land of Russia, * 
illumining with miracles all who with faith fall down before the shrine of thy relics. * 
Wherefore, we pray: Ask thou for thy flock forgiveness of sins, ** O father blessed of 
God.  
O venerable father, holy hierarch Alexis, * by thine appearance in a dream thou 
didst restore the paralytic to health, * strengthening his arms and legs, * saying unto 
the afflicted one: * “If thou dost not quickly give up the hidden treasure, * thou shalt 
not rise from thy bed.” * And he, arriving at thine honored shrine * with repentance 
and tears, received healing, ** O father blessed of God.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
O ye assemblies of Russia, come ye to the honored memorial of Alexis the 
wonder-worker, to the divine temple, wherein lieth his precious shrine, which hath 
within it the grace of healings, his priceless body; and let us cry aloud to him: O great 
and holy hierarch Alexis the wonderworker, thou art the boast of the land of Russia, 
thou art its defense, thou art an inexhaustible treasury of the gifts of the Spirit, and 
ever-flowing fountain of healings; wherefore, chanting, we say: Rejoice, pillar and 
ground of the Church! Rejoice, O thou who standest before the throne of Christ with 
the first hierarchs! Rejoice, most radiant beacon illumining the faithful with miracles! 
Wherefore, O our honored and holy hierarch, pray to Christ, the God of all, that our 
souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion from the Oktoechos.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
O God-bearing holy hierarch Alexis, * from earliest infancy * thou wast shown to 
be * a sanctified vessel ** and the abode of the most holy Spirit.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Rejoice, O blessed Alexis, * thou boast of hierarchs, * glory of priests, * model for 
monastics, ** confirmation of the Church!  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Hearken to the entreaty of thy children, * O holy hierarch father Alexis, * and 
disdain not their tears, * but fulfill the heartfelt petitions ** of those who love thee  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Rejoice, O joyous Virgin * who for the world hast given birth to Joy: * Christ the 
Bestower of life, * and hast taken away the grief ** of our first mother!  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Hastening to thy precious shrine, O holy hierarch Alexis, divinely wise wonder-
worker, * assembling with love, we celebrate with splendor the memory of thee * who 
art co-enthroned with the apostles, * the supremely good physician, the right pleasing 
servant; * and we rejoice with songs and hymns, glorifying Christ Who hath given 
thee such grace to heal ** and bestowed upon thy city so great a bulwark.  
Another Troparion, in Tone IV:  
Celebrating the memory of the most blessed and holy hierarch Alexis, * the careful 
preserver of the dogmas of the apostles, * the shepherd and teacher of the Church of 
Russia, * let us glorify with fitting hymnody Christ our God * Who hath given us His 
favored one * as an abundant well-spring pouring forth healings, ** the boast and 
confirmation of the city of Moscow.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 4 in Tone V: 
 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Rejoice, O great and most honorable hierarch, most blessed Alexis, adorner of the 
Church, precious ornament of the holy hierarchs, who helpest Orthodox Christians 
by thy supplications, O great confirmation of the land of Russia, our honored teacher, 
help of the helpless, joyous consolation of the grieving, fervent advocate for all who 
sorrow, who drivest away the darkness of ignorance: thou hast hastened to Christ at 
the calm havens, and, standing among the choir of the incorporeal ones, thou 
delightest in the beauteous comeliness of the Master, and hast moved the hearts of 
the pious to hymnody. Pray thou to Christ, that He grant unto our souls peace and 
great mercy.  
Rejoice, O beacon of the whole metropolitan see of Russia! For thou hast 
blossomed forth splendidly in virtue, like a fruitful olive-tree in the house of God, 
and, producing divers fruits, thou dost distribute them in abundance among thy flock, 
and amid the pastures of the Spirit thou givest drink to them with the down-pouring 
of thy prayers and freely pourest forth healings upon those who with faith have 
recourse to the shrine of thy relics, O holy hierarch Alexis. Thou hast prepared thyself 
as a bright lamp, and, making thine abode in the mansions of heaven, thou hast 
received crowns as the reward of thy labors; for thou gavest no sleep to thine eyes, 
nor slumber to thine eyelids, until thou didst sleep the common sleep of all. O 
venerable hierarch, pray to Christ, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.  
Rejoice and be glad, O all-sacred Alexis, gracious preacher, steadfast intellect, 
grapes of the vine of life sprung forth in holiness, exuding wipe which gladdeneth the 
hearts of the faithful with mellifluous teachings, O head of hallowed anointing, our 
honored teacher: Come thou and visit us, who are oppressed by sinful passions; cast 
down the audacity of the heathen; drive away the adversary; calm civil strife, and ease 
all pain and illness, praying to Christ, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.  
Rejoice, O most glorious city of Moscow! Adorn thyself and be glad, possessing 
such an inexhaustible well-spring of grace, the most blessed and wondrous great 
hierarch Alexis, who was adorned with the wisdom of the Holy Spirit and from his 
youth, through fasting and prayer, and because of his virtuous life, became the vessel 
of the Holy Spirit, anointed with the oil of the priesthood, and received the gift of 
healing from Christ God, the King of all, and even after his repose restored to health 
the boy whose mother brought him, barely alive, to his precious shrine. And he now 
poureth forth healing in abundance upon those who approach him with faith, and 
prayeth to Christ, that He grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
And 4 Stichera in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “With what wreaths of praise ...”: 
With what beauties of song shall we hymn the holy hierarch: the gentle mouth of 
Christ, the splendid proclaimer of His Gospel, the guardian of the Church, the helper 
of the Russian land, the champion of all Orthodox Christians? By his supplications 
may Christ, Who hath great mercy, cast down the pride of the enemy. (Twice)  
With what vigilant lips shall we praise the holy hierarch Alexis, the wonder-worker, 
the adorner of the Church of Christ, who loved the preeminent Peter and became the 
heir of Paul, who emulated the ways of the Baptist, the co-ruler of Russia, who 
emitteth rays of miracles in abundance and freely granteth healing unto all who 
approach him with faith and celebrate his memorial with splendor, the great helper 
and teacher of the Russian land, the wondrous and miraculous Alexis, the ally of all 
Orthodox Christians? For his sake Christ, Who hath great mercy, hath cast down our 
enemies.  
With what eloquent words shall we hymn Alexis, the holy hierarch wondrous in 
miracles, who dwelleth with the incorporeal beings, who was sanctified from earliest 
infancy, the immovable pillar of the Church, the joy of the land of Russia, the model 
of righteousness, the helper of the oppressed, the physician of the sick who exacteth 
no fee? For his sake Christ, Who hath great mercy, hath bestowed unity upon the 
Churches.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Assembling, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, with songs of praise let us 
hymn the adornment of hierarchs and ornament of the fathers, the well-spring of 
miracles, the great helper of the Russian land, saying: Rejoice, O Alexis, thou steadfast 
intelligence imbued with the grace of truth! For, having become a receptacle of the 
most holy Spirit, thou hast received the gift of miracles. And now, standing before the 
throne of Christ with the first hierarchs, pray thou for thy servants.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons. 
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace, but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 

--- PAGE 6 ---
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple 
mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul 
pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This 
the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His 
grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these of the saint, in Tone VIII:  
O venerable father, holy hierarch Alexis, though other lands and cities may keep 
silence, yet all who have been enlightened by thee, and we with them, hearing of and 
seeing the multitude of thy miracles, cry aloud in hymns of praise and say: Through 
the grace of the most holy Spirit thou didst become an emulator of the apostles of 
Christ, illumining the whole world; wherefore, accounts of thy wonders reached the 
tsar like a ray of light, shining upon those afar off as though they were near. By thy 
supplications free us from tribulations and the cruel ones who assail us.  
Who is able to recount the labors of thy boldness, O venerable father? And who is 
not amazed, hearing of thy boundless humility, patience and love for thy children? 
For thou wast in nowise at a loss when thou didst hear the demand of the iniquitous 
ruler, who said: “Send unto me the one who imparteth health to the sick and sight to 
the blind, who enableth the lame to walk, and expelleth demons! Yea, send him unto 
me, that he may pray to his God and heal my queen, driving out the demon and 
bringing light to her eyes.” O the demand which transcended human understanding! 
O the wonder! Who will not be amazed, O brethren? Who will not praise this mighty 
warrior? For not only did he not hesitate, but giving strength to those with him, he 
said: “Wait a little while, and be not sorrowful, but place your hope on God and His 
most pure Mother, and ye shall behold the glory of God!”  
O Alexis, holy hierarch of Christ, thou good disciple of Christ the good Teacher, 
thou didst emulate Christ the good Shepherd, laying down thy life for the sheep, didst 
change the rage of the ruler, which was like the lion’s roar, into the meekness of a 
lamb, didst heal his queen and transform the sorrow of thy flock into joy, didst bring 
about peace for the Church and gladden the great prince. Wherefore, we beseech 
thee: Pray for us to Christ, the Master Who is the Lover of mankind, that He save our 
souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
When thou didst return from the ruler, bearing peace for the Church, O father, the 
hierarchs and assemblies of the clergy and people greeted thee with joy and in 
thanksgiving called thee their liberator: bearing gifts, with joy they paid homage to 
thee as one victorious; and the Great Prince Demetrius cried out to thee, weeping: “O 
master, what shall we render unto thee for thy labor, whereby thou hast brought us 
peace?” Wherefore, O holy hierarch Alexis, pray thou earnestly to Christ our God, 
that thy city be saved from siege.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
The Archangel Gabriel was sent from heaven to announce the conception to the 
Virgin; and, arriving in Nazareth, he thought to himself, marveling at the miracle: 
“How can He Who in the highest is unapproachable be born of the Virgin? How can 
He who hath heaven for His throne and the earth for His footstool be contained in 
the Virgin’s womb? How can He, upon Whom the six-winged seraphim and many-
eyed cherubim dare not gaze, deign to become incarnate of her by His word alone? 
Yet this is the true Word of God. Why, therefore, do I stand here and not say unto 
the Virgin: ‘Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee! Rejoice, O 
pure Virgin! Rejoice, O unwedded bride! Rejoice, O mother of Life! Blessed is the 
Fruit of thy womb!’?”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
O Alexis, thou hast shown thyself to be * the habitation of the Holy Spirit * and 
dwelling-place of grace. * And, assembling now for thy memorial, ** we hymn thee.  
Verse: The saints shall boast in glory, * and they shall rejoice upon their beds.  
Thou art the boast of hierarchs, * the adornment of priests, * a model for monks; 
* and we cry aloud to thee, O holy hierarch Alexis: ** Rejoice, thou confirmation of 
the Church!  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Accept now, O father, * the hymnody of thy children * who celebrate with faith, * 
and grant unto those who love thee ** those petitions which are for their profit.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O good servant, faithful husbandman of the vineyard of Christ, thou didst endure 
the heat of the day, didst increase the talant given thee, and didst not envy those who 
came after thee. Wherefore, the gates of heaven have been opened unto thee. Enter 
into the joy of thy Lord, and pray for us, O holy Alexis.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, O all-pure 
one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign Lady, ** 
the intercession, protection and salvation for our souls! 
At the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the saint, in Tone VIII: 
Hastening to thy precious shrine, O holy hierarch Alexis, divinely wise wonder-
worker, * assembling with love, we celebrate with splendor the memory of thee * who 
art co-enthroned with the apostles, * the good physician, the right pleasing servant; * 
and we rejoice with songs and hymns, glorifying Christ Who hath given thee such 
grace to heal ** and bestowed upon thy city so great a bulwark. (Twice) 
And, “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...,” (Once)  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Celebrating the memory of the most blessed and holy hierarch Alexis, * the careful 
preserver of the dogmas of the apostles, * the shepherd and teacher of the Church of 
Russia, * let us glorify with fitting hymnody Christ our God * Who hath given us His 
favored one * as an abundant well-spring pouring forth healings, ** the boast and 
confirmation of the city of Moscow. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
The radiant day hath dawned: the memorial of Archbishop Alexis the wonder-
worker! Come ye, and assembling, let us celebrate with splendor; let us form choirs 
and honor him with praises; and let us say: Rejoice, O honored luminary of the 
Russian land, for thou pourest forth miracles, and imparting healings, prayest on 
behalf of our souls. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
That Thou mightest restore Thine image, * which had been corrupted by the 
passions, O Savior, * hiding Thyself from the celestial beings, * Thou didst assume 
flesh from the Virgin. * To her we cry aloud together: ** Rejoice, O thou who art full 
of grace! The Lord is with thee!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Come, let us hold festival with splendor, O ye who celebrate the memory of the 
hierarch and wonder-worker Alexis; for he hath passed from earth to the immaterial 
mansions, where he beholdeth ineffable beauty, as a converser with the angelic 
armies. Wherefore, joining chorus with the apostles and martyrs, O our venerable 
father Alexis, earnestly beseech Christ the Master on behalf of those who honor thy 
memory with faith. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Thou art the invincible rampart of us Christians, * O Virgin Theotokos; * for, 
fleeing to thee, we remain unharmed. * And though we sin again, we have thee as our 
advocate. * Wherefore, in thanksgiving we cry aloud to thee: * Rejoice, O thou who 
art full of grace! ** The Lord is with thee! 
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Alexis, and 
we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God on our behalf.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
The metropolitan cathedra of Russia now proclaimeth thy wonders, O father, and 
all lands and countries thy miracles, whereby thou deliverest all from sorrowful 
afflictions, O Alexis blessed of God, thou feeder of widows and father of orphans, 
most excellent helper of the troubled, comfort of those who weep, shepherd and 
guide of all the lost. O venerable Alexis, by thy supplications deliver us also from 
misfortunes, and pray to Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those 
who with faith and love honor thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Rejoice, thou who through the Angel * didst receive the joy of the world! * 
Rejoice, thou that hast given birth unto thy Creator and Lord! ** Rejoice, thou that 
wast deemed worthy to be the Mother of God!  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 36 (IN. 10: 9-16)  
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 
know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I 
the Father; and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep have I, which are 
not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one Shepherd.”  
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Inexhaustible is the grace of the holy hierarch Alexis, which he received from 
Christ, the God of all. Wherefore, by the power of God his precious relics continually 
work miracles and deliver all who with faith call upon his name from incurable 
sickness. By his supplications, O Lord, grant victory to all Orthodox Christians over 
the enemy, and free us from the tribulations of soul and body which assail us, in that 
Thou lovest mankind.  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and two canons of the saint, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon I of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
On the chariot of Thy grace carry our thoughts aloft from those things which are 
below to that which is on high, O Lord, and grant that we may praise thy favored 
one, the holy hierarch Alexis, who chanteth hymns to thee our God.  
On the chariot of thy mediations carry aloft, from earthly things to that which is 
heavenly, our mind, which is weighed down by the sorrows of life; and instruct us 
how to praise thee worthily, O father Alexis, who chanted unto God a hymn of 
victory.  
By thy humility thou didst surpass the chariot of the pride of this world, and, 
taking up thy cross, didst follow Christ in goodness; and, arriving at the haven of life 
on high, thou chantest unto God a hymn of victory.  
On the chariot of the virtues thou didst ascend to heaven, as Elijah did on the 
chariot of fire. Wherefore, entreat God, that He send down like a mantle the grace of 
the Spirit, which teacheth us to chant unto God a hymn of victory.  
Theotokion: O fiery chariot who bore within thy womb the incarnate Word of 
God, beseech Him earnestly, that thy servants be saved who have recourse unto thee 
and chant to God a hymn of victory.  
Canon II, the composition of Hieromonk Epiphanius, a theologian who lived in the 
saint’s monastery, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: O ye people, let us chant unto Christ our God, * Who hath wrought 
wondrous miracles in the midst of the Red Sea, * for of old Israel all-armed 
traversed on foot * the impassable path through it, * while Pharaoh, the 
worker of evil, * drowned in its depths.  
O divinely wise Alexis, thou golden lamp of the Church illumined in godly manner 
by the divinely radiant beams of the light of the three Hypostases, we entreat thee: 
With the radiant beams of thy supplications enlighten the minds of those who praise 
thee, that they may offer thee fitting laudation.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
O thrice blessed Alexis, thou earthly angel who dost emulate Christ, godly minded 
converser with the angels of heaven, divinely crowned vanquisher of the angels of 
hell, who wast deemed worthy to behold God incarnate, the Angel of great Counsel, 
we beseech thee: By thy God-inspired entreaties deliver us from the assaults of the 
soul-destroying hosts of Hades.  
Drowning in the midst of a tempest of the bitter waters of soul-destroying 
transgressions, we flee unto thee, as to the right wondrous calming of the raging sea, 
and cry aloud: O holy Alexis, by thy God-pleasing prayers still thou the tumultuous 
sea of our passions.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Birthgiver of God, thou radiant cloud who hast caused the 
Rain of heaven, the incarnate Word of God, to fall upon us: With the divinely flowing 
water of thy compassion quench thou the fiery flame of our harmful passions.  
ODE III 
Canon I  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
The Lord of the vault of heaven and all creation, knowing from of old that thou 
wouldst be a good pastor, O father Alexis, entrusted to thee His reason-endowed 
flock, in that He alone is the Lover of mankind.  
Loving the Creator of the vault of heaven, and having made thyself light by 
fasting, thou didst pass over the sea of the passions; and having ascended to the 
summit of dispassion by the virtues, thou didst behold God, Who alone is the Lover 
of mankind.  
Having ascended to the heights of the vault of heaven by knowledge of God, thou 
didst there noetically behold ineffable things, and didst receive the gift of working 
miracles from God Who is the Lover of mankind.  
Theotokion: To thee, O most pure one, did Gabriel announce that the Creator of 
the vault of heaven would be born of thee, crying: Rejoice, O Virgin! The Lord, Who 
alone is the Lover of mankind, is with thee!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Let not the vainglorious sage praise himself, * but let him consider this: 
* There is none as holy as our God, * Who exalteth our horn, * granting might 
unto our rulers.  
We entreat thee, the divinely wise helmsman. who, with the heavenly steering of 
the Word of God didst pilot the ship of the Church of Russia straight to the right 
calm harbor of life everlasting; and we bless thee, saying: O most honored Alexis, 
guide thou our souls to the right fair stillness of repentance.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
O thou who profitably kept the soul-saving commandment of the omnipotent 
Creator and by thy prayer stilled the stormy waves of the raging sea, by thy wondrous 
intercession calm thou the raging storm of our tribulations.  
O right wondrous Alexis, thou river of God flowing with gold, who with the 
heavenly waters of the teaching of the Gospel abundantly watered the garden of the 
Church of Russia: with the stream of spiritual joy flowing from heaven give drink to 
our afflicted souls.  
Theotokion: Theologizing in the divinely created firmament of the Church of the 
apostles, we flee to thee, the radiant heaven of the never-waning Sun, crying: O all-
hymned Virgin, with thy heavenly aid help us who call thee blessed, that we may 
come to dwell in the mansions of heaven.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
In a God-pleasing manner, with the divinely inspired shepherd’s staff of correction 
thou didst, as a good pastor, guide to the straight path of salvation the reason-
endowed flock of Christ, which had grazed on the fragrant pasturage of the Word of 
God; and thou wast deemed worthy to receive the incorrupt reward of life everlasting 
from Christ God, the Chief Shepherd, in the heavenly Sion. Him do thou beseech, O 
right wondrous Alexis, that we, thy rational sheep, may be preserved from the 
ravening invisible wolves.  
Glory ..., Another Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Thy sacred head was anointed by the divine Spirit, O hierarch Alexis, and grace 
descended abundantly upon thee, and remained like myrrh upon thy head, running 
down as upon the beard of Aaron, descending like the dew of Hermon, bedewing 
with drops of thy benefactions those who have recourse to thy relics and cry out 
earnestly unto thee: O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness 
of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory as is meet.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Secretly pondering in his mind that which was commanded, * the incorporeal one 
presented himself without delay * in the house of Joseph, * and said unto her who 
knew not wedlock: * “He Who bowed the heavens down by His descent * shall be 
immutably contained wholly within thy womb! * And beholding Him assuming the 
guise of a servant in thy womb, * I am afraid to cry to thee: ** Rejoice, thou Bride 
unwedded!”  
ODE IV 
Canon I  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 

--- PAGE 13 ---
“Thou art my strength, O Lord! Thou art my power!”, thou didst cry, O father 
Alexis. And thou didst receive the gift of healing bodily infirmities and dispelling evil 
spirits from those who cry out to Christ: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Thou art the beacon of the land of Russia and the impregnable rampart of the city 
of Moscow, the vanquisher of their enemies, and an ally in battle for all Orthodox 
Christians who cry out to Christ: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Thou didst theologize concerning the uncreated Unity which existeth in three 
Hypostases, uncommingled and indivisible, O father Alexis, teaching thy flock to cry 
out unceasingly: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Theotokion: Thou art truly my strength and salvation, O Theotokos, and on thee 
have I set my hope. Save me, O pure Virgin, and strengthen me, that I may cry out to 
Him Who was born of thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Taught beforehand by a voice goodly and eloquent, * Habbakuk 
beheld the incarnation of the Word and cried aloud: * I have heard the sound 
of the counsel of God! * For God shall immutably converse with mankind, * 
descending from on high into the Virgin’s womb, * delivering the world from 
the primal curse!  
O right wondrous Alexis, thou divinely wise fisherman who with godly success 
didst catch an incalculable multitude of fish with the divinely fashioned net of the 
direction of thy wise humility, with the divinely wrought hook of thine intercession 
draw us forth from the deep abyss of manifold evils.  
O right wondrous Alexis, thou healer who exacteth no fee, who with the heavenly 
salve of the word of God didst treat the soul-corrupting sores of the people’s falls 
into sin, and didst cure their maddening wounds with the divinely prepared poultice 
of thy meek correction, we beseech thee: Heal thou the stripes of our sins, which 
harm our souls.  
O most honored Alexis, thou right fruitful tree of the garden planted by God, who 
hast produced the fragrant fruits of right laudable corrections and lifted up to heaven 
the fruit-laden branches of thine entreaties which are hearkened to by God, we 
implore thee: With the godly growth of the leaves of thy protection shelter us from 
the harmful heat of cruel misfortunes.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Birthgiver of God, thou golden ray of the never-waning 
Light, to thee do we flee, crying aloud: With the luminous radiance of thy defense 
dispel the dark cloud of our sorrows.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Wherefore have the adversary arrayed themselves against us who have thee as a 
mighty champion? O father Alexis, cast down their audacity, and by thy supplication 
show forth all Orthodox Christians as fearsome to them.  
Wherefore are we despondent, weighed down with a multitude of sorrows, while 
we have as the consoler of our sorrows the holy hierarch Alexis, who delivereth us 
from our misfortunes and tribulations, from enemies visible and invisible?  
Wherefore do bodily infirmities assail us and misfortunes surround us who have 
thee, O father Alexis, as a physician amid our ailments and a comforter amid 
sorrows? Therefore, rescue us from them by thy supplications.  
Theotokion: Wherefore do the billows of the passions bestorm me, O all-
immaculate Virgin who hast given birth to Christ the Helmsman? Beseech Him, that 
He rescue me therefrom and guide my steps to the ways of His commandments, I 
pray.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Enlighten the murky gloom of my soul, * which is darkened by the 
passions assailing me by night, * that I may rise early unto Thee Who alone art 
lovingly compassionate, * and cut asunder the bonds of my debts, * that, illu-
mined by Thy co-eternal Spirit, * I may find the incorrupt way of 
righteousness, * in Thy commandments.  
O all-blessed Alexis, thou good shepherd who in God-pleasing manner fed the 
reason-endowed flock of Christ on the fragrant verdure of the teaching of the Gospel 
and didst guide them divinely to the straight path of the life of the emulation of 
Christ, we entreat thee: By thy supplications guide us to the straight path of the 
commandments of God.  
O divinely wise father Alexis, thou vessel of the Holy Spirit fashioned by God, in 
godly splendor gilded with the pure gold of the love of God, who abundantly 
enrichest thy children with the purified silver of the word of God, we beseech thee: 
By thy supplications grant us the heavenly riches of the grace of God.  
O sacred leader Alexis, divinely wise mind, member of the godly choir of the 
heavenly intelligences, illumined in a godly manner with the divinely radiant rays of 
the light of the three Hypostases: with the heavenly beams of thy divinely revealed 
wisdom enlighten our darkened souls from on high.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Virgin, thou divinely planted vine who hast put 
forth the divinely planted Cluster, the incarnate Word of God, we entreat thee: With 
the fragrant wine of the grace of God give drink to our thirsty souls.  
ODE VI 
Canon I  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Cleanse us of our many sins, O Savior, and by the supplications of Thy holy 
hierarch Alexis drive away our illnesses, and grant peace and unity to Thy Churches.  
Cleanse our hearts and thoughts by thy mediations, O father, and, accepting the 
prayers directed to thee by us, ask of Christ that He show us great mercy.  
Having cleansed thy heart and sharpened the pen of thy tongue with the Spirit, O 
father Alexis, by thy teachings thou didst inscribe the word of divine knowledge upon 
the hearts of the faithful.  
Theotokion: The Archangel Gabriel, perceiving thee to be purified by the Spirit, O 
all-immaculate one, cried out to thee: “Rejoice, O Virgin Mary, thou restoration of 
the fallen and the annulment of the curse!”  
Canon II  
Irmos: Thou hast hearkened to the sound of my cry * from the belly of Hades, 
* and hast brought me up from the corruption * of the tempest of 
transgressions, O good Savior, * and as of old Thou didst lead Jonah up from 
corruption, O Lord, * go before me, I pray Thee, and save me.  
O all-blessed Alexis, thou golden star of Russia who hast splendidly illumined the 
divinely fashioned firmament of the Church of God with the bright beams of thine 
apostolic corrections and with godly success hast dispelled the gloomy darkness of 
the assaults of the barbarians: dispel the dark cloud of the assaults of the enemy.  
O God-bearing Alexis, thou noetic temple of God, who with divine zeal erected 
material temples of God to the majestic glory of the immaterial God, we beseech 
thee: By thy God-pleasing entreaties fashion our hearts into temples of God fit for 
His dwelling.  
O most wondrous Alexis, thou right fruitful root of a heavenly tree, who uprooted 
the pernicious thorns of prideful pretension and with godly success didst plant the 
goodly saplings of humble-minded contemplation of God: Plant thou in our hearts 
the divinely growing root of God-pleasing humility.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, who hast given birth to the incarnate Word of 
God, the almighty Stiller of the waves of the sea: By the celestial calming of thine aid 
still thou the most tempestuous tumult of our sorrows.  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Kontakion, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”:  
O all ye people, hymning with faith the new wonder-worker Alexis, * the godly 
and all-honorable hierarch of Christ, * let us bless him with love, as a great pastor, a 
most wise minister and teacher of the land of Russia. * And hastening today to his 
memorial, let us joyfully chant a hymn to the God-bearer: * As thou hast boldness 
before God, deliver us from multifarious evil circumstances, ** that we may cry to 
thee: Rejoice, O confirmation of our city!  
Ikos: Beholding the miracles of the wondrous and honorable wonder-worker, who 
granteth healing to all who with all their soul have recourse unto him with faith, who 
invisibly visiteth the people of Christ and illumineth the Russian land, joyously 
assembling before the shrine of his relics with all our soul, beholding and hearing of 
the multitude of his miracles and the inexhaustible well-spring of his healings, and 
with all our soul offering the fruits of the virtues like sweet-smelling incense, with 
pure heart and enlightened minds, rejoicing let us cry unto him, saying: Rejoice, O 
honored father, our teacher, for thou hast received the reward of thy labors, and 
dwellest in the highest, entreating God Who is the Lover of mankind on our behalf, 
thou hast received the gift of working miracles, and art the father and teacher of the 
land of Russia, the excellent boast of hierarchs, and the mighty ally of all Orthodox 
Christians. Rejoice, O holy hierarch Alexis, thou confirmation of our city!  
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Emulating the children from Judea, thou didst utterly consume the fiery passions, 
O blessed Alexis, ever chanting unto Christ: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst emulate the children from Judea; for, illumined by the grace of the 
Spirit which abode in thee, thou didst chant unto Christ: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
We emulate the children from Judea, beholding thy relics pouring forth miracles, 
and afire with love for Christ, we cry: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: The children from Judea prefigured thy birth giving, O all-pure 
Virgin; for the fire in the furnace did not consume them, who chanted: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon II  
Irmos: The Assyrian flame, portraying Thee, O Lord, * saved the three 
children, * just as the divine spark * did not consume the Virgin Maiden at 
Thy divine nativity. * O all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 17 ---
O hierarch Alexis, thou physician who exactest no fee, we earnestly beseech thee, 
as one who freely received the gift of healing from the heavenly Physician, and thus 
hast freely healed the harmful wounds of those who have recourse unto thee: With 
the heavenly treatment of thine entreaties heal thou the grievous infirmities of our 
souls and bodies.  
O all-praised Alexis, thou divinely woven robe of Orthodox piety, adorned in 
godly manner with the priceless pearls of the greatest of virtues: entreat God Who 
arrayeth Himself in light, that our souls may be clad in the splendid robe of life 
everlasting.  
O holy Alexis, tireless laborer in the garden established by God, who hast planted 
the fragrant blooms of right wondrous corrections, and hast rooted the divinely 
growing myrrh of ascetic temperance in thy God-loving heart: Pour forth the 
heavenly grace of thy defense upon the hearts of us who love thee.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Virgin, thou radiant moon illumined by the divinely 
effulgent Sun of righteousness, and revealed in a manner beyond the comprehension 
of the heavenly intelligences: With the bright radiance of thy grace enlighten our 
darkened hearts.  
ODE VIII 
Canon I  
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Thou didst teach thy flock to praise the King of heaven, crying: Hymn Christ and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Entreat the King of heaven on behalf of us, thy children, who joyously hymn and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Standing before the King of heaven, look down upon thy flock, who hymn and 
supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou hast given birth to the King of heaven, Whom the 
angels hymn and supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Emulating the children * who entered the flame at the command of the 
iniquitous tyrant, * let us cry aloud in praise, with never silent lips: * O Good 
One, Who dost wholly transcend nature, * illumine those who hymn Thee with 
Thy noetic light!  
O all-blessed Alexis, thou divinely wise healer of infirmities of body and soul, who 
supernaturally healed the bodily blindness of the barbarian queen with the heavenly 
cure of thy God-pleasing prayer, we entreat thee: Heal thou the spiritual blindness of 
our pernicious transgressions.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
O most honored Alexis, thou adornment of the Church, all-sanctified head, 
unshakable pillar of piety, foundation of the Faith established by God, inexhaustible 
abyss of divine wonders; with the gold-bearing waters of thine entreaties quench thou 
the ruinous fire of our griefs.  
Having in a God-pleasing manner burned up the pernicious weeds of sinful falls 
with the divine fire of the love of God, and reverently approached the immaterial and 
supra-natural fire of the life-creating Trinity with the godly tread of faith, O venerable 
father Alexis, from the fire of Gehenna deliver the souls of thy children, who call thee 
blessed.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned Virgin Theotokos, who truly hast given birth, in a 
manner past the all telling of mortals, to everlasting Life, the incarnate Word of God, 
we beseech thee: Deliver us, thy servants, from everlasting death.  
ODE IX 
Canon I  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Thou hast truly been shown forth to the world as a light radiant with the virtues, 
and didst become an excellent shepherd for thy flock, magnifying Christ.  
O father, we truly know thee to be a great wonder-worker who pourest forth many 
miracles upon those who have recourse unto thee with faith and magnify Christ.  
Kings and hierarchs, and all the people truly celebrate the memorial of the holy 
hierarch Alexis with splendor, magnifying Christ God.  
Theotokion: Thou art truly the salvation of Christians; for thou hast given birth to 
Christ, Who saveth us who magnify thee as the pure Virgin.  
Canon II  
Irmos: In thee, O Theotokos, * hath our belittling come to an end; * for, 
having received the invisible Word within thy womb, * thou hast given birth to 
Him as both God and man, * upon Whom the cherubim dare not gaze. * 
Wherefore, we magnify thee, O most pure Virgin.  
O most honored Alexis, first enthroned hierarch who with godly splendor adorned 
thy divinely established cathedra with the right comely beauty of hierarchal 
corrections: Entreat God Who sitteth upon the heavenly thrones, that we who bless 
thee may be deemed worthy to stand before the throne of God in the kingdom of 
heaven.  
Eagerly hastening to thy wonder-working relics, O right wondrous Alexis, thou 
well-spring of miracles, we beseech thee: With the divinely flowing stream of thy 
divine wonders quench the burning crucible of our tribulations and sorrows.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
With sovereign peace defend all Orthodox Christians from every misfortune, O 
all-blessed Alexis, chief hierarch, thou divinely wrought shield of Orthodoxy; and 
from on high grant help to our pious bishops, for the good estate of the Churches of 
God.  
Theotokion: O all-holy Virgin, thou bush unconsumed, which Moses the God-
beholder saw on Sinai, who hast given birth to the incarnate Word of God: with the 
heavenly fire of the love of God melt thou our frozen hearts.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III:  
The grace of the Holy Spirit dwelling within thee showed thee forth as a hierarch; 
and Christ entrusted His flock to thee, to nurture them on the pastures of the Spirit; 
and for His sake thou didst strive to instruct the people, and now dwellest, rejoicing, 
in the heavens. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III:  
Having thee as our hope after God, * O most pure Theotokos, we beseech thee: * 
That, by thine entreaties to Him Who was born of thee ** we may be preserved 
unharmed until the end.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you ...”: 
What shall we call thee, O holy hierarch Alexis? * Star shining upon the earth, * 
most honored adornment of the world, * enlightening it with the rays of the precepts 
* of the right Faith, * and driving away the darkness of heresy. * Pray thou, O 
venerable one, * that those who celebrate thy memory with faith ** may be delivered 
from corruption and misfortunes. (Twice)  
What shall we call thee, * O venerable and holy hierarch Alexis? * River pouring 
forth healings in abundance * upon all who approach thee with faith; * well-spring 
gushing forth mellifluous teachings, * spreading out to all the ends of the earth * and 
enlightening the faithful. * Pray thou, O venerable one, ** that our souls be saved. 
What now shall we call thee, O holy hierarch Alexis, * thou all-wondrous worker 
of miracles? * Wise physician who chargeth no fee, * who healeth every affliction of 
soul and body * and art the peer of the incorporeal ones. * Pray thou, O venerable 
one, ** that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O man of God, faithful servant and minister of the Lord, man of divine desires, 
chosen vessel, pillar and foundation of the Church, heir of Christ: Cease thou never 
to cry out for us to the Lord.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VI:  
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: * Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, ** that He 
have mercy upon our souls.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I, and 4 from ODE 
VI of Canon II.  
The Lord of the vault of heaven and all creation, knowing from of old that thou 
wouldst be a good pastor, O father Alexis, entrusted to thee His reason-endowed 
flock, in that He alone is the Lover of mankind. (Twice) 
Loving the Creator of the vault of heaven, and having made thyself light by 
fasting, thou didst pass over the sea of the passions; and having ascended to the 
summit of dispassion by the virtues, thou didst behold God, Who alone is the Lover 
of mankind.  
Having ascended to the heights of the vault of heaven by knowledge of God, thou 
didst there noetically behold ineffable things, and didst receive the gift of working 
miracles from God Who is the Lover of mankind.  
O all-blessed Alexis, thou golden star of Russia who hast splendidly illumined the 
divinely fashioned firmament of the Church of God with the bright beams of thine 
apostolic corrections and with godly success hast dispelled the gloomy darkness of 
the assaults of the barbarians: dispel the dark cloud of the assaults of the enemy.  
O God-bearing Alexis, thou noetic temple of God, who with divine zeal erected 
material temples of God to the majestic glory of the immaterial God, we beseech 
thee: By thy God-pleasing entreaties fashion our hearts into temples of God fit for 
His dwelling.  
O most wondrous Alexis, thou right fruitful root of a heavenly tree, who uprooted 
the pernicious thorns of prideful pretension and with godly success didst plant the 
goodly saplings of humble-minded contemplation of God: Plant thou in our hearts 
the divinely growing root of God-pleasing humility.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, who hast given birth to the incarnate Word of 
God, the almighty Stiller of the waves of the sea: By the celestial calming of thine aid 
still thou the most tempestuous tumult of our sorrows.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Hastening to thy precious shrine, O holy hierarch Alexis, divinely wise wonder-
worker, * assembling with love, we celebrate with splendor the memory of thee * who 
art co-enthroned with the apostles, * the supremely good physician, the right pleasing 
servant; * and we rejoice with songs and hymns, glorifying Christ Who hath given 
thee such grace to heal ** and bestowed upon thy city so great a bulwark.  
Another Troparion, in Tone IV:  
Celebrating the memory of the most blessed and holy hierarch Alexis, * the careful 
preserver of the dogmas of the apostles, * the shepherd and teacher of the Church of 
Russia, * let us glorify with fitting hymnody Christ our God * Who hath given us His 
favored one * as an abundant well-spring pouring forth healings, ** the boast and 
confirmation of the city of Moscow.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O all ye people, hymning with faith the new wonder-worker Alexis, * the godly 
and most honorable hierarch of Christ, * let us bless him with love, as a great pastor, 
a most wise minister and teacher of the land of Russia. * And hastening today to his 
memorial, let us joyfully chant a hymn to the God-bearer: * As thou hast boldness 
before God, deliver us from multifarious evil circumstances, ** that we may cry to 
thee: Rejoice, O confirmation of our city!  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 335 (HEB. 13: 17-21)  
Brethren: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they 
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and 
not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work 
to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (LK. 6: 17-23) 
 At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a 
great multitude of people out of all Judaea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of 
Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they 
that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude 
sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He 
lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the 
kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye 
that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when 
they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your 
name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, 
behold, your reward is great in heaven.”  
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
