--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 18th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY 
 COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS LEO, POPE OF ROME  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you ...”: 
What shall we name thee, O divinely inspired one? * Head of the Orthodox 
Church of Christ? * Eye of piety, * possessed of spiritual understanding * to see 
clearly the hearts of men, * and pouring forth the word of life upon all the ends of the 
earth? * Divinely inscribed scroll * of the right Faith? ** Pray thou that our souls be 
saved.  
What now shall we call thee, O wondrous one? * Preacher of the Truth, * firm 
foundation? * Senior among the honored supreme council? * Excellent rule of 
doctrines, * possessing the rule of correction? * The one who cut down the division 
of Nestorius * and the confusion of Eutyches ** with divinely wrought revelations?  
What now shall we call thee, O marvelous one? * Prince and ruler, * splendidly 
exercising spiritual mastery * over the passions of the body? * Vessel of divine mercy, 
* habitation of perfect love? * Loving pastor * awaiting the repentance of sinners? ** 
Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Whom hast thou emulated, O wretched soul, * who in no wise dost rouse thyself 
to repentance * nor fearest the fire * which awaiteth the wicked? * Arise, and cry 
aloud, * calling upon her who alone is quick to help: * O Virgin Mother, * entreat thy 
Son and our God, ** to deliver me from the snares of the deceiver!  
Stavrotheotokion: The ewe-lamb, as she beheld the Lamb * stretched out of His 
own will upon the Tree of the Cross, * cried out maternally, * in pain with her 
weeping: * O my Son, what is this strange sight? * O Longsuffering One, how is it 
that Thou art slain, * Who, as Lord, bestoweth life upon all, * granting resurrection to 
mortals? ** I glorify Thy great condescension, O my God!  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O most wise Leo, instructor in Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, * beacon 
for the whole world, divinely inspired adornment of hierarchs: * by thy teachings thou 
hast illumined all. ** O harp of the Spirit, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon, the acrostic whereof is: “I weave hymns to the divinely wise Leo”, the 
composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
Anointed with the oil of the priesthood, O all-blessed and most noetically rich 
hierarch, didst adorn it with divers virtues.  
Like a ripe cluster of grapes thou didst pour forth understanding, O father; 
offering the joyous cup of thy wisdom unto all, O thrice-blessed one.  
Thou wast heir to the throne of the preeminent Peter, possessing his character and 
zeal for the Faith, O divinely wise one.  
Theotokion: In giving birth to the Savior, O pure Mother of God, thou didst free 
the first-formed man, who had been condemned for transgressing the law of God.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Thou didst carefully set up the pillar of the Orthodoxy of the Church of Christ, O 
divinely wise Leo; and wielding it, the Church destroyeth the ungodly hosts and 
assemblies of the heretics.  
Replete with the divine grace of heaven, O father, thou didst set forth the dogmas 
of the Church, contending against all the blasphemies of the heretics, O Leo, most 
noetically rich champion of piety.  
Illumined with a most radiant light, thou didst utter discourse on the ineffable and 
divine incarnation, setting forth the twofold Essence and twofold activity of the 
incarnate God.  
Theotokion: Like a bride thou wast adorned with the comeliness of virginity, O 
joyous Virgin Mother who knewest not wedlock; for thou hast far surpassed every 
creature, in that thou hast given birth to the Word, the Cause of all.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”:  
Like a lion of righteousness, thou didst cause audacity to cease, confirming 
Orthodoxy by thy deeds, as was thy hope. And proclaiming the doctrines of Truth 
thou dist denounce the hidden works of deception. O venerable father, entreat Christ 
God, that He grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence, * when taking flesh in thy 
womb, * He remained God though He had became a man; * and even after thy 
birthgiving, preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, * as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. * Him do thou earnestly beseech, ** that He grant us great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
O most blessed one, thou didst truly reveal thyself to be a lion, driving off the 
vexing foxes and terrifying the thoughts of the impious with thy kingly roaring.  
Seeking the hidden Truth, with the exposition of thy dogmas thou didst lay bare 
the traces of heresies abominable to God, O most honorable initiate of the sacred 
mysteries.  
Rising like dawn in the West, O thrice-blessed and divinely wise one, thou didst 
send forth a scroll of pious dogmas like rays emanating from the Church, illumining 
and enlightening our souls.  
Theotokion: Mortify the uprisings of my passions, O good Virgin Birthgiver of 
God, and quell the tumult of my transgressions, destroying the tempest of sin by thy 
quietude.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Thou wast a preacher of the twofold activity of Christ the Savior; for thou, O 
divinely wise and blessed hierarch, didst say that He operated in each of the Natures 
He had, in a single unified participation. (Twice)  
Acknowledging that the Word is equal in might to Him Who begat Him, O thrice-
blessed one, thou didst confess that He became incarnate, and proclaim in excellent 
manner that the traits of His flesh operate both without commingling and immutably.  
Theotokion: The mystery known to God alone before time began, that the Master 
and Lord of all would become a man and unite Himself to the flesh without change, 
was made manifest through thee, O Virgin, in whom He came to be.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Thou wast the successor to the honorable Peter, enriched by his authority and 
having acquired his fervent zeal, writing a divinely inspired scroll, rejecting the vexing 
heretical commands, and bringing together, without commingling, the union of 
Christ’s Natures.  
O God-pleasing servant of the ineffable mysteries, in a supra-natural manner thou 
didst preach Christ the Lord, the only Son, begotten of the Father before time, Who 
for our sake was born of the Virgin and revealed Himself to be consubstantial with 
the Father.  
Theotokion: We, the faithful, confessing thee to be the mediatress of our salvation, 
O all-pure one, cry out: Rejoice, O pure one! Rejoice, O Virgin Bride! Rejoice, 
overshadowed mountain of God, for thou hast poured forth everlasting joy upon the 
world!  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Seated upon the throne of the priesthood, O glorious one, * and having shut the 
mouths of the noetic lions, * with the divinely inspired dogmas of the adored Trinity 
* thou didst shed upon thy flock the light of the knowledge of God. * Wherefore, 
thou hast been glorified as a divine initiate ** of the mysteries of the grace of God.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Thou gavest no sleep to thine eyelids until thou didst uproot the delusion of the 
mindless Eutyches, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the 
ages!  
Confessing Christ to be one Hypostasis in two Natures, with a twofold activity and 
will, thou dost now chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Entangled in the bonds of my transgressions, I have recourse unto 
thee now, O Mother of God. In the tender compassion of thy mercy, deliver me, who 
cry out: Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, O most pure one!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Bright as the sun, O divinely eloquent one, thou didst manifestly shine forth from 
the West the most glorious wonder, teaching all to worship the one Christ in two 
Essences - indivisible, immutable, and uncommingled; thereby causing the confusion 
and commingling of Eutyches to wither away, and cutting down the division of 
Nestorius.  
Moved by God, thou didst show thyself to be like a second Moses to the people of 
God, and didst set forth the doctrines of piety as upon divinely inscribed tablets, 
crying out to the Council of the honored teachers: Ye children, bless; ye priests hymn; 
ye people supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
Thou didst acknowledge the only-begotten and co-beginningless Word of the 
Father, Who, incorporeal from before the beginning, became incarnate, though 
timeless - entered time, and though the infinite Creator - became circumscribed by 
the flesh; and thou teachest, crying out: Ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: God, Who illumined the sky with the beauties of the stars, the sun 
and the moon, wrapped Himself in the robe of the flesh He fashioned from thy 
blood, O most pure one, showing thee to be another animate heaven. Ye children, 
bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: All are awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * for the 
Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man in the 
Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure Theotokos. 
Thou shinest forth now, adorned with a crown of majesty, O initiate of the 
mysteries of Christ, and as a faithful hierarch thou hast truly clad thyself in 
righteousness. As thou joinest chorus in the sweetness of paradise, O wondrous one, 
pray thou earnestly to the Master on behalf of thy flock.  
As a true patriarch, shining with faith and grace, thou hast now made thine abode, 
as is meet, where the chief seats and thrones and ranks of the patriarchs are, O all-
blessed father Leo. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed throughout the ages.  
Having departed the storm of life, thou didst pass on to Christ, O most excellent 
Leo, finding rest in the place of verdure, where the torrents of sweetness, light never-
waning, ineffable gladness and abiding joy are.  
Theotokion: Full life do I reap, untainted by the tree of knowledge; for thou, O all-
immaculate one, revealing the paths of life, hast blossomed forth Christ, the Tree of 
life. Wherefore, we, the faithful, magnify thee as the Theotokos, O all-pure one.  
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Exapostilarion, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”: 
The glory of hierarchs, defender of the faithful and pillar of the virtues hast thou 
been shown to be, O divinely wise father. Wherefore, be thou ever mindful of those 
who hymn thee with love.  
Theotokion: All the sinful have thee as intercessor, O most holy Virgin. By thy 
maternal supplications render thy Son easily reconciled with us.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O most wise Leo, instructor in Orthodoxy, teacher of piety and purity, * beacon 
for the whole world, divinely inspired adornment of hierarchs: * by thy teachings thou 
hast illumined all. ** O harp of the Spirit, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Seated upon the throne of the priesthood, O glorious one, * and having shut the 
mouths of the noetic lions, * with the divinely inspired dogmas of the adored Trinity 
* thou didst shed upon thy flock the light of the knowledge of God. * Wherefore, 
thou hast been glorified as a divine initiate ** of the mysteries of the grace of God.  
 
 
