--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 14th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER AUXENTIUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Showing forth an increase of asceticism, * thou didst receive from God an 
outpouring of spiritual gifts, * to heal infirmities and dispel demons, * O all-blessed 
Auxentius, * faithful to the calling of Christ, * and full of divine grace, * and the 
power of the Spirit, * thou wast manifestly guided thereby, ** attaining to the calm 
haven.  
Having cleansed thyself in mind, * thou wast enriched with the grace of healings 
and miracles; * for having shaken off the weakness of the passions * and the darkness 
and threefold waves of the flesh, * thou didst fashion for thyself radiant noetic armor. 
* Wherefore, having shone forth * among the ranks of monastics, * do thou entreat 
Him Who is the Lover of mankind ** on behalf of those who praise thee.  
Thou didst increase the talant entrusted to thee, * O most wise one; * and having 
richly worked the soil of thy soul * and sown it with tears, * thou dost now reap in 
joy, O father, * truly harvesting an abundance of joy and consolation. * Wherefore, as 
one who hath boldness before the Master, * entreat Him on behalf of those who 
hymn thee, ** O God-bearing Auxentius.  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII:  
The pure wisdom of the Holy Spirit which dwelt within thy heart showed thee to 
be a dread persecutor of the spirits of wickedness, O all-blessed and venerable father 
Auxentius, and not only one awesome, but also a healer of hidden ailments. 
Wherefore, having acquired boldness before God Who is the Lover of mankind, by 
thine unceasing supplication free us from the passions of soul and body.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: The ewe-lamb, as she beheld the Lamb * stretched out of His 
own will * upon the Tree of the Cross, * cried out maternally, in pain with her 
weeping: * O my Son, what is this strange sight? * O Longsuffering One, how is it 
that Thou art slain, * Who, as Lord, bestoweth life upon all, * granting resurrection to 
mortals? ** I glorify Thy great condescension, O my God!  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
A desert dweller, an angel in the flesh and a wonder-worker * wast thou revealed to 
be, O our God-bearing father Auxentius. * Receiving heavenly gifts through fasting, 
vigils and prayers, * thou healest the infirm and the souls of those who with faith 
have recourse unto thee. * Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! * Glory to 
Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him Who through thee worketh healings 
for all!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “With wisdom I hymn the godly 
Auxentius”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Having increased thy love for God and forsaken worldly love, O God-bearing 
father Auxentius, thou wast shown to be a vessel containing the gifts of the Spirit.  
Thou didst submit to the easy yoke of the Lord in thy desires, O father Auxentius, 
and watering the ground with thy tears thou didst renew the earth, O right wondrous 
one.  
Having withdrawn from the tumult of life and diligently united thy soul and mind 
to God, O all-blessed one, with mighty ascetic feats thou didst live on earth like one 
of the bodiless ones.  
Theotokion: Through thee, O Sovereign Lady, the unapproachable descent of 
Christ as God and man hath now been seen, for He was born of thee as God and 
man, O pure one, restoring my nature.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Strengthened by the power of the Cross, thou didst set at naught the assaults of 
the demons and destroy their snares, vanquishing their onslaught through asceticism.  
Emulating the life of the angels, O father Auxentius, thou didst diligently pass 
through a life which was pure in prayer and mighty in vigils.  
Perceiving pleasure to be deadly poison aimed at men’s souls, O God-bearing and 
venerable Auxentius, by abstinence thou didst mortify its movements.  
Theotokion: He Who in the beginning formed me, a man, out of dust, formed 
Himself in thy womb for my sake, O all-immaculate one, setting aright our ancient 
fall.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having abandoned all earthly things, while in the world of the body thou wast in 
spirit a converser with the angels; for, mortifying the passions of the body, thou didst 
show thyself to be a favorite of the Trinity, O blessed one. Wherefore, thou healest 
the sufferings of the infirm and with grace dost expel evil spirits by thy word alone. O 
God-bearing father Auxentius, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of 
transgressions unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
O undefiled, blameless and all-immaculate Sovereign Lady, thou cloud of the 
noetic Sun and golden candle-stand of the light of God: with the radiance of 
dispassion illumine my soul, which hath grown dim through the blindness of the 
passions, I pray; with torrents of compunction enlighten my polluted heart, and with 
tears of repentance cleanse me of the mire of my evil deeds, that with love I may cry 
out to thee: O Ever-virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me 
forgiveness of my transgressions; for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
Through the cooperation and grace of the Holy Spirit thou wast revealed to be a 
victor over the spirits of wickedness, O father Auxentius, crying out: glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
Having with prayer made thyself steadfast against the torrents of iniquity, O all-
blessed one, thou didst flee turmoil; and as is meet thou didst drink of the torrent of 
sweetness, O all-blessed one.  
Causing thy faith and love for God to grow, O God-bearer, thou didst mount to 
the lofty heights of belonging to God, crying aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Manifestly knowing thee to be her who gave birth to God the Word 
in the flesh, all of us, the faithful, truly call thee the Theotokos, giving thee a title 
appropriate to the nature of those things.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
With keen intellect and purity of soul thou didst pass unharmed over the 
stumbling-blocks in thy path, O father.  
Through grace, O Auxentius, thy life was radiant, thy faith Orthodox, thine 
abstinence wondrous and thy discourse temperate.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
With evenness of thought thou didst pass through life, O father, traversing 
transitory things and ever cleaving to those things which are eternal. 
Theotokion: Possessed of a mind full of right doctrines, with love we all bless thee 
and call thee the Theotokos, O most pure one.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Thy life, O blessed one, showed thee to be a child of the light and the day, who 
truly walked nobly and had the Word of life as a beacon amid the world. (Twice)  
Having set thy life as an instruction in dying and understood most excellently the 
limitations of wisdom, O father, thou didst offer thyself to the hypostatic Wisdom.  
Theotokion: We know thee to be the temple and bridal-chamber of God, the jar 
and lamp-stand, and the tablet which hath inscribed thereon the Word Who, in His 
tender compassion, became incarnate.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “In prayers ...”:  
Delighting in abstinence * and restraining the desires of the flesh, * O divinely wise 
and sacred father Auxentius, * thou wast revealed to shine forth with faith, ** and 
didst blossom like a plant in the midst of paradise.  
Ikos: Who now will recount thy feats or the pangs which thou didst receive on 
earth, O father? Following the laws of the Lord for godly delight, and serving His 
commands, thou hast been shown to us as a new Job in thy struggles. To the world 
thou didst appear as a sojourner, and to all the earth as a stranger. With faith thou 
didst blossom forth in fasting and teach vigilance and purity, O sacred father 
Auxentius.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
In that thou wast wounded by the divine love of the Master, O father, thou didst 
direct towards Him all the unremitting love of thy heart, crying aloud: Blessed art 
Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord! (Twice)  
Illumined with the radiance of the Savior, O all-wise one, thou didst sternly rebuke 
the prince of darkness and cast down the prince of this world, crying aloud: Blessed 
art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Desiring to restore to a higher plane human nature which of old had 
become corrupt, God the Creator made His abode within thy womb, O only most 
pure and all-hymned one.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
Turning wholly to God, thou didst shake off a ready inclination toward the 
passions and didst receive the ability to work miracles, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord! (Twice)  
Thou didst show thyself to be dreadful to the demons, having acquired Christ as 
thy helper Whom, taking up thy cross, thou didst follow, chanting: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: The archangel, appearing, holdeth forth in speech and announceth 
the ineffable conception of thine Offspring, Who saveth the world, O most pure one. 
All ye works, bless and hymn the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
By thy baptism thou didst promise thyself to the whole Godhead, O father; and 
didst maintain the dignity of the image of God in purity, and with gladness make 
thine abode in thrice-radiant splendor.  
Thou dost now behold the light of the Godhead, not in indistinct images or in a 
reflection, O all-wise father, but face to face, being ineffably deemed worthy of the 
radiance of the vision of God.  
In that thou hast great boldness before the King of all, O father, pray that we who 
now celebrate thy memory be delivered from every evil circumstance, that we may all 
call thee blessed.  
Theotokion: Loose thou the bonds of my transgressions, O Virgin Theotokos who 
hast given birth to the Well-spring of compassion, and fill us with consolation, O 
thou who alone art blessed of God, that we may magnify thee as is meet.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Thou didst turn away from earthly happiness as from defilement, and, having 
caused thy flesh to wither through fasting, thou didst restore the strength of thy soul, 
O venerable one, and wast made rich with heavenly glory. Wherefore, O glorious one, 
cease not to pray to the Lord for us all.  
Theotokion, in the same melody: The transcendent Word noetically and perfectly 
united Himself hypostatically to flesh and soul, and issued forth from thee, O most 
pure one: One comprised of two natures without commingling, deifying that which 
He received. Wherefore, He glorifieth thee as the true Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
A desert dweller, an angel in the flesh and a wonder-worker * wast thou revealed 
to be, O our God-bearing father Auxentius. * Receiving heavenly gifts through 
fasting, vigils and prayers, * thou healest the infirm and the souls of those who with 
faith have recourse unto thee. * Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! * Glory 
to Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him Who through thee worketh 
healings for all!  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Delighting in abstinence * and restraining the desires of the flesh, * O divinely wise 
and sacred father Auxentius, * thou wast revealed to shine forth with faith, ** and 
didst blossom like a plant in the midst of paradise.  
 
