--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 16th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR PAMPHILUS & THOSE WITH HIM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Let Pamphilus and Seleucius, * together with Valens and Paul, * Porphyrius, 
Theodulus and Julian, * and the company of the five Egyptians * be melodiously 
hymned with faith ** as a twelve stringed harp.  
Exalted splendidly in the Faith of Christ by divine glory, * O glorious Pamphilus, * 
thou wast shown to be the goodly adornment of Caesarea, * being therein a most 
beloved hierarch, in accordance with thy name, * a most honored struggler ** and a 
faithful martyr.  
O mighty Pamphilus, * thou didst assemble a company of valiant strugglers, twelve 
in number, * who revealed themselves to be a godly army. * And vanquishing the 
enemy together, * ye were taken to the Lord in divers ways, ** reposing amid your 
martyrdom.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
With the staff of thine aid, O pure Birthgiver of God, * drive away bestial passions 
from my wretched soul, * and guide me * peacefully unto life, * and number me 
among the holy flock ** of thy chosen sheep.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb lifted up upon the Cross, * the 
immaculate Virgin cried aloud, weeping: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this 
new and most glorious sight? * How is it that Thou Who holdest all things in Thy 
hand ** hast been nailed to the Tree in the flesh?”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “The assembly of the twelve martyrs 
do I hymn”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
The company of twelve, brought together by the power of the all-holy Spirit, 
mightily vanquished the ungodly and evil horde of the wicked, in that they were 
victorious.  
Wounded, the enemy was put to shame by the martyred strugglers; for the 
deceiver, though he bitterly emptied his quiver, was unable to bring down those most 
valiant in might.  
Adorned with wisdom, O martyrs of Christ, with divine understanding ye trampled 
underfoot the wrath of pagan arrogance, and the opponents of piety were unable to 
oppose it.  
Theotokion: Most piously rendering glory, we continually magnify thee, O all-
hymned Theotokos, as the cloud who hath shone forth upon us the Sun of 
righteousness, the only-begotten Son of the Father.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Thou didst shine forth piously in deed and word, and in the precious anointing of 
the priesthood, O divinely wise Pamphilus, martyr of Christ.  
Ye were like a most reverent harp, strung with your confession and sounding forth 
in hymnody, O assembled martyrs of Christ.  
Hastening to the understanding of your heavenly and honored calling, as victors ye 
received crowns from the Master.  
Theotokion: He Who dwelleth in the highest made His abode within thee, O most 
pure one, in a manner surpassing nature; for, having received flesh from thee, He 
robed Himself therein.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
The choir of the twelve divine martyrs, having truly arrayed themselves steadfastly 
against the tyrannical enemy, vanquished them with the weapons of faith; and vested 
by God with crowns, they have joined the choirs of the angels. With them they ever 
make entreaty, that those who bless them may be delivered from tribulations, sorrows 
and everlasting torments.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
Joseph marveled, beholding that which transcends nature, * and pondering thy 
seedless conception, O Theotokos, * he thought of the dew upon the fleece, * the 
bush unconsumed by the fire, * and the rod of Aaron which buddeth forth. * And 
bearing witness, thy betrothed and guardian * cried aloud to the priests saying: ** A 
Virgin giveth birth, and remaineth a Virgin even after birthgiving!  
Stavrotheotokion: The Virgin and ewe-lamb, beholding on the Cross the Lamb 
Who was born of her without seed, His side pierced by a spear, was wounded and 
with grief and cried aloud, exclaiming amid her pain: “What is this new mystery? How 
is it that Thou diest Who alone art Lord of life? Wherefore, arise, raising up our fallen 
forefather!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
The choir of Thy martyrs was shown to be adorned with the divine gifts of the 
apostles and prophets, O Master, being, through Thy providence, of the same 
number.  
Assembled from divers walks of life, like a perfect model of the Church, ye were 
granted to save those who cry out together: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Guided by the hand of the Master, Who of His own will endured death for their 
sake, the all-praised assembly of martyrs cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Taught of thee by divine words, O Theotokos, and beholding their 
fulfillment, delivered by thy birthgiving, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O all-immaculate 
Virgin!  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Unable to bear serving those on earth, O Pamphilus, by suffering thou didst adorn 
the divine life which thou hadst lived from thy childhood.  
Adorned with godly gray hairs and wisdom, Valens hastened to the Holy City and 
hath been crowned as a martyr.  
Possessed of the mind of Christ, as the namesake of Paul thou wast adorned with 
the crown of martyrdom, having suffered lawfully, O all-famed one.  
Theotokion: Thou didst set aright the stumbling of Eve, O pure Theotokos, 
having given birth to God the Word, Who hath set aright the fall of those who had 
been cast down.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Made steadfast by the hope of life eternal, and rejoicing, the valiant ones, who 
shared the names of Thy divine prophets, endured the dismemberment of their 
bodies, O Savior.  
By their death Samuel and Elijah, Daniel and the divine Jeremiah, and with them 
Isaiah of great renown, procured a higher life.  
Egypt, which of old was covered with the profound darkness of ignorance, now 
shineth forth radiant beacons unto God, enriched by the light of the knowledge of 
God.  
Theotokion: Daniel beheld thee, O all-immaculate one, as the mountain from 
which was hewn the Stone Who hath crushed all manner of falsehood, filling all the 
ends of the earth with divine knowledge.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Rejoicing in wisdom made manifest by heaven * when dreadful torments lay 
before them, * the valiant strugglers conversed amongst themselves, * sparing not 
their flesh. * Wherefore, they have inherited everlasting glory, * ever praying for us ** 
who praise their contest.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Looking to thy coming joy with radiant countenance and purity of mind, O all-
blessed martyr Porphyrius, mercilessly lacerated thou didst disdain thy torments.  
God Who saved the three youths in the furnace clearly accepted thee as a sacrifice 
of sweet savor when thou wast burned alive in the fire for His sake, O blessed 
struggler Porphyrius.  
Adorned with the strength of thy soul and body, O all-praised Seleucius, thou didst 
cast down all the might of the tyrant, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O my God and 
Lord!  
Theotokion: As Theotokos, thou hast given birth to Him Who is more comely 
than all creation, for thou wast truly the all-holy abode of God. Blessed art thou 
among women, O all-immaculate Sovereign Lady!  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Making thyself subject to the laws of the Christians, O all-wise Seleucius, thou 
didst reject all else. And thou wast a soldier and teacher of piety, taking care of 
orphans and widows, and crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Shining with noetic radiance, O glorious elder, martyr Theodulus, thou wast a true 
servant, emulating the Master. And, desiring His Cross, rejoicing, thou didst endure 
crucifixion, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Having shown thyself to be a temple of the divine Spirit, O Julian, with goodly 
demeanor wast thou adorned. And, full of reverence and splendor, full likewise of 
faith, thou wast wholly consumed by fire, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord!  
Theotokion: The Word Who in the beginning was begotten of the Father without 
mother, was born of thee without father in later times, O all-pure one. The 
Incorporeal One became incarnate, desiring, in His tender compassion, to save those 
who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Desiring to possess the life of heaven alone, O strugglers, with great wisdom ye 
spurned that which is transitory and corrupt; and now ye enjoy a higher and blessed 
sweetness.  
Standing before the well-spring of effulgence, O glorious martyrs, ye now dance 
with zeal amid the paradise of God; and drawing forth drink therefrom, ye are 
illumined with its splendors.  
O choir of twelve, mindful now of all who keep your most radiant memory with 
faith, entreat Christ the Master, that we may be deemed worthy to dwell with you.  
Theotokion: As Mother of the only Master, O Virgin Mary, thou hast surpassed all 
other creatures. Wherefore, all of us, the faithful, rejoicing, now magnify thee in 
gladness, O all-immaculate one.  
