--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 14th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY CYRIL, EQUAL OF THE APOSTLES  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 3 from the Triodion (if applicable), and 5 for 
the saints, in Tone II, else 8 for the saints – repeating as necessary. 
Spec. Mel.: “With what wreaths of praise ...”:  
With what wreaths of praise shall we crown the divinely wise teachers who 
illumined with the light of the Gospel the Slavic nations who sat in the darkness of 
ignorance and the shadow of death? By them have we been grafted onto the right 
fruitful root of Orthodoxy like a wild olive-tree, and have received from Christ God, 
peace and great mercy. 
With what hymns of praise shall we bless the divinely wise teachers: Methodius, 
the lover of the wilderness, who was enriched with the fruits of the Spirit during his 
solitary sojourn, and Cyril of golden eloquence, who through his love of philosophy 
acquired higher wisdom and put to shame the vain belief of the foolish Moslem 
sages? For their sake hath Christ our God granted us great mercy.  
With what beauties of hymnody shall we praise the divinely wise teachers: 
Methodius, who for love of Christ spurned all the beauties of the world and fought 
mightily for the King of heaven in the angelic habit, and Cyril, who from childhood 
chose wisdom as his companion and increased the talents given him by God unto His 
glory? Having come, through them, to know the one God, the ever-existing Trinity 
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit-,we have received great mercy from Christ 
God.  
With what spiritual hymns shall we magnify you, O most blessed teachers, who 
struggled as apostles for the salvation of the Slavic peoples and labored well in their 
enlightenment with the light of the knowledge of God, by whom the closed gates 
thereto have been opened to us when ye devised the Slavonic alphabet? Entering 
therein, we have come to understand the mystery of the proclamation of the Gospel 
of Christ, and receive from Christ God grace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, and with songs of praise let us hymn 
the peers of the apostles, the adornment of hierarchs, the enlighteners and fervent 
helpers of the Slavic peoples, saying: Rejoice, O Cyril, golden trumpet of theology, 
who didst explain the mystery of the Holy Trinity by comparing God to the sun, and 
thereby closed the blasphemous mouths of the Moslems! And rejoice with him, O 
Methodius, who struggled with him in oneness of mind, aiding him with prayers and 
signs! And now, O all-blessed fathers, never cease to pray to Christ God for us who 
magnify you with faith and love.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Triodion or the Oktoechos.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
THE 1ST GENERAL EPISTLE OF JOHN (3:21 - 4:6) 
Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, (then) have we confidence toward God. 
And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and 
do those things that are pleasing in his sight. And this is his commandment, That we 
should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave 
us commandment. And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he 
in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given 
us. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: 
because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit 
of God: Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: 
And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of 
God: and this is that (spirit) of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; 
and even now already is it in the world. Ye are of God, little children, and have 
overcome them: because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. They 
are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them. We 
are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. 
THE 1ST GENERAL EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN, (4, 11-16) 
Beloved: if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. No man hath seen 
God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected 
in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us 
of his Spirit. And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son (to be) the 
Savior of the world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God 
dwelleth in him, and he in God. And we have known and believed the love that God 
hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in 
him. 
THE 1ST GENERAL EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN, (4, 20-21 ; 5, 1-5) 
 Beloved: If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that 
loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not 
seen? And this commandment have we from him, That he who loveth God love his 
brother also. Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and every 
one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him. By this we 
know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep his 
commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: and 
his commandments are not grievous. For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the 
world: and this is the victory that overcometh the world, (even) our faith. Who is he 
that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Ye shone forth in the firmament of the Church like the stars of heaven in the 
radiance of your life, O teachers, ye peers of the apostles, and, ensnaring many 
nations for Christ in the net of your teachings, ye hastened to the unapproachable 
light, where, dwelling now with the angels, ye make supplication for us who celebrate 
your sacred memory in the Lord.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us magnify the teachers who were 
the peers of the apostles, the glory of the Slavs; for having been freed from the 
deception of the demons by them, we have received the light of the glad tidings of 
Christ and have come to know the pre-eternal Word Who hath delivered us from the 
darkness of sin.  
Verse: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom * and his tongue shall 
speak of judgment.  
O divinely wise Cyril and God-loving Methodius, apostles and first teachers of the 
Slavs, helpers of the faithful and lovers of piety, melodious instruments of the Holy 
Spirit, who now have great boldness before Christ, the Chief Shepherd: pray for us 
who celebrate your honored memory, that He may lead our life up from corruption, 
in that He is greatly merciful.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Rejoice, O sacred twain who have illumined us with the light of the knowledge of 
God: Cyril, thou life-bearing well-spring of spiritual wisdom, who gavest drink to the 
Slavic peoples who were perishing of thirst, and Methodius, the pure abode of prayer. 
Pray ye earnestly to Christ, before Whom ye stand in glory, that, with you, we also 
may magnify and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Both now ..., Doxasticon & Theotokion from the Triodion or Oktoechos.  
At the blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the saints, in Tone IV:  
In that ye share the ways of the apostles, * O divinely wise Cyril and Methodius, * 
ye teachers of the Slavic lands, * entreat the Master of all, * that He confirm all Slavic 
nations in Orthodoxy and oneness of mind, ** granting peace to the world and saving 
our souls. (Twice) 
And, “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...,” (Once)  
If it be the fast, or a vigil is not served, The Troparion followed by: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion & Theotokion from the Triodion or the Oktoechos.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion from the Triodion (Twice);  
Glory ..., that of the saints, in Tone IV:  
In that ye share the ways of the apostles, * O divinely wise Cyril and Methodius, * 
ye teachers of the Slavic lands, * entreat the Master of all, * that He confirm all Slavic 
nations in Orthodoxy and oneness of mind, ** granting peace to the world and saving 
our souls.  
Both now ..., that from the Triodion.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Standing now in unapproachable light before the life-creating Trinity, Whom the 
angelic hosts unceasingly glorify, and Whom ye proclaimed among the nations, pray 
ye earnestly, O Cyril and Methodius, that He deliver from eternal damnation and 
grant forgiveness of transgressions to those who honor your memory with love. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Triodion, or the Oktoechos. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Let the generations of the Slavs rejoice today, celebrating the sacred memory of 
the divinely wise teachers with splendor; for through them the divine liturgy and all 
the services of the Church begin to be celebrated for us in our native tongue, and 
thereby hath an inexhaustible well of water poured forth unto eternal life been given 
us, drinking from which we never cease to magnify you, O Cyril and Methodius. 
Rejoicing in the glory of the saints, pray ye earnestly. that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Triodion, or the Oktoechos.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify you, O holy Methodius and 
Cyril. ye peers of the apostles. who illumined all the Slavic lands with your 
teachings and led them to Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the 
work of His hands. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Come, with praises let us honor aloud our enlighteners, for with the manna of 
their divinely wise teaching they fed the Slavic peoples who were perishing out of 
hunger for the word of God, and illumined them, as with the rays of the sun, by 
translating the Gospel of the son of thunder into their native tongue. And, having 
received effulgence therefrom, we cry out in thanksgiving: Rejoice, O ever-glorious 
Cyril and Methodius! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Triodion, or the Oktoechos. 
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * 
and Thy righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Let every breath praise the Lord!  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN, § 35 (JN. 10: 1-9)  
The Lord said to those of the Jews that came to Him: Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, 
the same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd 
of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth 
his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own 
sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And 
a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of 
strangers. This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things 
they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves 
and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by me if any man enter 
in, he shall be saved, and go in and out, and find pasture.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, and with songs of praise let us hymn 
the peers of the apostles, the adornment of hierarchs, the enlighteners and fervent 
helpers of the Slavic peoples, saying: Rejoice, O Cyril, golden trumpet of theology, 
who didst explain the mystery of the Holy Trinity by comparing God to the sun, and 
thereby closed the blasphemous mouths of the Moslems! And rejoice with him, O 
Methodius, who struggled with him in oneness of mind, aiding him with prayers and 
signs! And now, O all-blessed fathers, never cease to pray to Christ God for us who 
magnify you with faith and love.  
Canon from the Triodion, or the Paraklisis from the Oktoechos; with 6 Troparia, 
including the Irmos; and that of the saints, with 6 Troparia, in Tone III 
ODE I  
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, * 
divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and supremely 
glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
At a loss how to traverse the waters of life’s tumult, O venerable Methodius, thou 
didst abandon all the beauties of this world and, fighting the invisible foe in the 
angelic habit, thou didst serve the one God, joyously singing: to Him alone let us 
chant, for He hath been glorified!  
Thou wast shown to be a chosen vessel from thine infancy, O blessed Cyril, in 
nowise desiring to receive milk from a stranger’s breasts, thereby showing that thy 

--- PAGE 6 ---
mind would not be deceived by a strange doctrine, but would be illumined by the 
teaching of the holy Orthodox Church, and that thou thyself wouldst become the 
teacher and enlightener of many.  
Bedewed by the waters of your teachings, even to this day the Slavic lands bring 
forth fruit right pleasing unto Christ the Master; wherefore, the Holy Church doth 
bless you, crying aloud: Deliver us from tribulations, for ye have been glorified!  
Theotokion: The waters of sin have entered in unto my soul, O Sovereign Lady, 
and I am sunk in the mire of the passions. To thee do I flee, O all-immaculate one: 
calm the turmoil of my impure thoughts and grant me peace of mind.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
O venerable Methodius, hearing with the ear of thy heart: “He who would come 
after Me, let him take up his cross and follow after Me”, thou didst follow Christ, 
shouldering the cross of the monastic life. Him do thou entreat, that in His love He 
establish me, who am cold.  
He Who of old showed Jacob, in a dream, a ladder which extended up into the 
heavens, O holy Cyril, when thou wast a boy also in a wondrous dream betrothed 
thee to a maiden more lovely than all others, Sophia by name. And, behold! the 
wisdom which sitteth at His throne hath established thee in the love of the Most 
High.  
He Who hath brought all things out of nonexistence, O right wondrous fathers, 
sanctified you for Himself as chosen vessels from your mother’s womb, that ye might 
bring His name before the nations. Wherefore, celebrating your honored memory, we 
entreat you, O Cyril and Methodius, to establish your wavering mind in the 
confession of the right Faith.  
Theotokion: O pure one, who hast granted peace to the world and given birth to 
the Origin of tranquility, still the waves of my passions and establish me upon the 
rock of dispassion.  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Triodion, or: 
Sessional Hymn of the saints, in Tone IV:  
Thou didst liken the holy consubstantial Trinity to the sun, O divinely inspired 
Cyril, declaring that the visible, created sun in the sky is an image of the Holy Trinity, 
saying: “The solar disc is an image of God the Father, Who hath neither beginning 
nor end; and as a ray of light issueth forth from the solar disc, illumining the earth, so 
is the Son, the Effulgence of the Father, begotten of God the Father; and the warmth 
which giveth life to the whole world, and with the ray is poured forth from the same 
disc, is an image of the Holy Spirit, Who proceedeth from the same Father.” Heeding 
thy wondrous teaching, we also worship the one God in Trinity, blessing thy memory, 
O right wondrous one. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Triodion, or the Oktoechos.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast in love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with thanksgiving 
we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
Thou didst set the keeping of the commandments as thy corner-stone, O 
venerable Methodius, and building the house of thy soul thereon thou didst make it a 
habitation of the Holy Spirit. And I, who am the abode of sin, fall down before thee, 
O all-blessed one: cleanse me with the dew of thy prayers, that I may cry out in 
thanksgiving: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
“Grant that I may understand what is pleasing unto Thee, O Master!”, thou didst 
cry out, O blessed Cyril, when thou wast given over to study with the young emperor; 
wherefore, in addition to outward philosophy, thou didst receive the wisdom of the 
Spirit and the fear of God from on high, regarding earthly wisdom as naught, and 
crying: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Thou didst set love for thy Creator like a seal upon thy heart, O all-blessed Cyril; 
wherefore, thou didst reject an earthly betrothal and the glory of this world, and, 
escaping like a bird from the hunters’ snares, thou didst attain unto the calm haven of 
monastics and wast clothed in the robe of joy, chanting with Methodius: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Setting mine iniquities and injustices before me, I see that they have 
multiplied more than the sands of the sea. To thee do I flee, O all-immaculate one: 
heal the sores of my soul, that in thanksgiving I may cry out to Him Who was born of 
thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
ODE V  
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * borne 
aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have foreseen God 
made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the King of peace.’ 
Thou didst flower like a fragrant lily in the wilderness, O venerable Methodius, 
adorning thy soul with prayer, vigils and fasting; and, having lived angelically upon the 
earth, with the angels thou dost now contemplate in splendor the never-waning Light 
Who reigneth with peace. 
Praying in the wilderness to Him Who is borne up by the angels of glory, O Cyril, 
thou wast prevailed upon to return to the Imperial City and adorned with priestly 
rank, that thou mightest show the way of salvation to mankind, illumining them with 
the light of doctrine and offering up the un-bloody sacrifice to the never-waning 
Light Who reigneth with peace, for all.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou wast shown to be an inexhaustible well of wisdom, O God-bearing Cyril, 
when thou wast sent by the emperor to dispute with the Saracens, who blaspheme the 
most holy Trinity; and they were unable to drown in the turgid waters of their false 
religion thee who art illumined from on high by the never-waning Light.  
Theotokion: How can I fail to fear the dread felling, since I am a barren tree, 
wretch that I am? Make haste quickly to her who is full of grace, O my soul; for if she 
will not help thee, thou wilt never behold the never-waning Light Who reigneth with 
peace!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit 
perisheth. * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like 
Peter save me, * O my Helmsman. 
“Our God is like the deep of the sea, unfathomable by the mind and indescribable 
in words,” thou didst say to the Moslems who disputed with thee, O most wise Cyril; 
and some who attempt to sail across this deep in the leaky boats of their own intellect 
are drowned, falling into errors and heresies, while others are buffeted by 
incomprehension and doubt, knowing not how to chant: O Helmsman, save us, as 
Thou didst Peter!  
Sunk deep in the abyss of their false understandings, the Moslems secretly offered 
thee deadly poison. But He Who said: “If ye drink anything deadly, it will not harm 
you”, preserved thee whole and returned thee with honor to the Imperial City. And, 
fittingly blessed by the emperor and patriarch, thou wast supremely exalted, crying: 
“O Helmsman, Thou hast saved me as Thou didst Peter!”  
The Holy Spirit once said to the disciples: “Separate for Me Barnabas and Saul for 
the task to which I have called them,” the enlightenment of the nations who are 
perishing in the abyss of ignorance of God; and He likewise commanded that ye be 
sent to the lands of the Slavs, O venerable fathers. And, illumined by the light of your 
teaching, people who sat in darkness and the shadow of death have cried out: “O 
Helmsman, Thou hast saved us as Thou didst Peter!”  
Theotokion: The uttermost abyss of sins hath encompassed me, and, beset with 
trembling and terrified of utter drowning, I offer thee entreaty, O most immaculate 
one: Have mercy upon my passion-plagued soul! Stretch forth thy hands, in that thou 
art good, and as Thy Son saved Peter, so do thou save me, O thou who dost steer my 
soul.  
Kontakion of the saints, in Tone III:  
Let us honor our two sacred enlighteners, * who have poured forth upon us a 
spring of divine knowledge * through their translation of the divine Scriptures. * 
Drawing forth abundantly therefrom to this very day, * we bless you, O Cyril and 
Methodius, * who stand before the throne of the Most High ** and fervently pray for 
our souls.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Ikos: Come, ye faithful, let us praise our God-bearing fathers Methodius and Cyril, 
the preachers of piety who shone forth in virtue, the true pillars and foundation of 
the Church, the divine trumpets of Christian dogmas; for having driven the darkness 
of unbelief away from us and burned up the impieties of heresy with the fire of the 
Spirit, by their translation of the Scriptures they transformed the Slavic race from wild 
olive-trees into a fruitful grove, through divine baptism they have brought them into 
the Christian Faith, and filled the whole world with a multitude of miracles; 
wherefore, they stand, crowned, before God Almighty. And we cry out to them: O 
divine fathers, peers of the apostles, entreat Christ, that He grant all the Slavic 
peoples, steadfastness in Orthodoxy and oneness of mind, and that He bring peace to 
the world, and save our souls.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Of old the three children did not worship the golden image, * of the 
Persian idol, * but chanted in the midst of the furnace: * O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Abiding alone in solitude before, O Methodius, thou didst make thy soul like a 
divinely planted garden; but later, undertaking the apostolic preaching with the 
divinely wise Cyril, thou didst labor in the lands of the Slavs, where, unburnt by the 
fire of impiety like the youths in the furnace, ye chanted: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst best the Jews and Saracens in argument, O most wise Cyril, and didst 
enlighten the land of the Khazars with holy baptism, freeing a multitude of captives, 
and didst transform brackish water in an arid wilderness into potable water; and, 
saved by thee, the people chanted: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
O venerable fathers, ye were vessels chosen to bear the name of the Lord before 
the nations; wherefore, the Slavic peoples desired to be illumined by the light of your 
doctrine. And ye deemed it better to exchange the sweetness of solitude for apostolic 
labor, that ye might win a great many for Christ; and together with them ye chant: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: I am a vessel full of the passions, O most holy Virgin Theotokos, and 
fear ultimate death and the threat of the fire. But do thou save me who am perishing, 
O most pure one, and gird my spirit about with strength, that, bursting the bonds of 
sin, I may chant in thanksgiving: Blessed art thou who gayest birth to Him Who hath 
delivered the captives!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The flame of material fire withered * through the immaterial flame 
brought about by the god-seeing children, * wherefore they chanted: * Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Continually illumined by the immaterial fire of grace, thou didst receive the rank of 
priest, O blessed Cyril; and with the aid of the Holy Spirit, thou didst devise an 
alphabet for the Slavs, that the people, enlightened by the translation of divinely 
inspired books into their native speech, might chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord!  
O all-praised fathers, ye first thundered out the chief heading of our Faith, the un-
earthly words of the son of thunder: “In the beginning was the Word-, and then the 
melodious Psalter, wherewith the Holy Church crieth out in gladness: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord!  
Ye have enriched us with an immaterial treasure, O right wondrous fathers, for 
thanks to you, the divine liturgy began to be celebrated in the Slavonic tongue; and 
partaking of this grace to this day, we bless you, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works 
of the Lord!  
Theotokion: The fire of temptations and evil perils surround me. To thee do I flee, 
O Virgin Theotokos, disdain not the supplications of thy servant, O pure one, but 
deliver me from the cruel ones who beset me, that, uttering blessing, I may bless thee 
and supremely exalt thy name throughout the ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: We magnify thee, the unburnt bush, * the holy Virgin, * and the 
Mother of the Light, * the Theotokos, the hope of us all.  
Who can praise thee fittingly, O all-glorious Methodius? O Cyril who can reckon 
the labors thou didst undertake, like unto an apostle, for the salvation of an erring 
people? We who have been taught by you to glorify God Most High in our native 
tongue magnify you in oneness of mind.  
When thou hadst completed thy work and finished the race, O blessed Cyril, thou 
didst receive word of thy repose from on high, and, accepting it joyfully, thou didst 
chant: “My spirit was glad because of those who said unto me, Let us go into the 
courts of the Lord!” And yearning for the heavens, thou wast borne aloft in soul, 
where with the hosts of heaven thou dost continually magnify the consubstantial 
Trinity.  
Receiving the episcopacy of the Church of Moravia, O venerable Methodius, in 
proclaiming the Holy Faith thou didst undertake many labors and struggles, and didst 
endure many tribulations and persecutions; and, rejoicing now in the highest with the 
holy Cyril, pray for us, that we may continually magnify you as our helpers and 
mediators.  
Theotokion: O thou who art more exalted than the angels and more honorable 
than the cherubim, we pray thee: through the intercession of the holy Cyril and 
Methodius have pity on our lowliness, lead us up from the depths of sin, and deliver 
us from everlasting damnation, that with them we may magnify thee, the Theotokos 
and Mother of the Light, and our hope. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Exapostilarion of the saints:  
Celebrating your memory with splendor, O holy teachers, we entreat you most 
earnestly: establish on the rock of the confession of Christ the nations which ye 
enriched with the treasure of the glad tidings, and preserve our life in peace.  
Glory..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion from the Triodion, or the Oktoechos. 
On the Praises, 6 Stichera: 3 from the Triodion, and 3 for the saints. 
Or if outside the fast, 4 for the saints, repeating as necessary: 
In Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
O divinely wise Cyril and Methodius, following in the steps of the apostles, with 
oneness of mind ye labored to search out the lost; and like fleet-winged eagles ye 
soared above the Slavic lands, and, having illumined them with the light of the 
knowledge of God, ye brought them to Jesus Who is the Lover of mankind, the 
Savior of our souls.  
O God-bearing fathers, husbandmen of the vineyard of Christ, planters of piety: 
after diligent search ye found the Slavic peoples like a lost coin; and, rejoicing with the 
angels, Jesus Who is the Lover of mankind, the Savior of our souls, hath taken it into 
the treasury of everlasting life.  
O champions of the Holy Trinity, guides of the lost, who bested the blasphemy of 
Islam and put to shame the impiety of the Jews: the Church which ye acquired 
through your God-pleasing labors and your sweat, do ye strive to preserve unharmed 
by the assaults of the enemy and well-pleasing to Jesus Who is the Lover of mankind, 
the Savior of our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O ye people, piously celebrating the memory of our enlighteners, let us cry out in 
thanksgiving: Rejoice, supremely radiant beacons who have illumined the Slavic lands 
with the light of the knowledge of God! Rejoice, ye good shepherds, who have 
gathered together the reason endowed sheep who were scattered amid the groves of 
unbelief, and have brought them to Christ, the Chief Shepherd. Magnifying Him, we 
call you blessed.  
Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Triodion, or the Oktoechos. Great Doxology. 
Litanies. Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the appointed ODE of the canon from 
the Triodion, or the Oktoechos; and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the 
saints.  
“Our God is like the deep of the sea, unfathomable by the mind and indescribable 
in words,” thou didst say to the Moslems who disputed with thee, O most wise Cyril; 
and some who attempt to sail across this deep in the leaky boats of their own intellect 
are drowned, falling into errors and heresies, while others are buffeted by 
incomprehension and doubt, knowing not how to chant: O Helmsman, save us, as 
Thou didst Peter!  
Sunk deep in the abyss of their false understandings, the Moslems secretly offered 
thee deadly poison. But He Who said: “If ye drink anything deadly, it will not harm 
you”, preserved thee whole and returned thee with honor to the Imperial City. And, 
fittingly blessed by the emperor and patriarch, thou wast supremely exalted, crying: 
“O Helmsman, Thou hast saved me as Thou didst Peter!”  
The Holy Spirit once said to the disciples: “Separate for Me Barnabas and Saul for 
the task to which I have called them,” the enlightenment of the nations who are 
perishing in the abyss of ignorance of God; and He likewise commanded that ye be 
sent to the lands of the Slavs, O venerable fathers. And, illumined by the light of your 
teaching, people who sat in darkness and the shadow of death have cried out: “O 
Helmsman, Thou hast saved us as Thou didst Peter!”  
Theotokion: The uttermost abyss of sins hath encompassed me, and, beset with 
trembling and terrified of utter drowning, I offer thee entreaty, O most immaculate 
one: Have mercy upon my passion-plagued soul! Stretch forth thy hands, in that thou 
art good, and as Thy Son saved Peter, so do thou save me, O thou who dost steer my 
soul.  
Troparion of the saints, in Tone IV:  
In that ye share the ways of the apostles, * O divinely wise Cyril and Methodius, * 
ye teachers of the Slavic lands, * entreat the Master of all, * that He confirm all Slavic 
nations in Orthodoxy and oneness of mind, ** granting peace to the world and saving 
our souls.  
Kontakion of the saints, in Tone III:  
Let us honor our two sacred enlighteners, * who have poured forth upon us a 
spring of divine knowledge * through their translation of the divine Scriptures. * 
Drawing forth abundantly therefrom to this very day, * we bless you, O Cyril and 
Methodius, * who stand before the throne of the Most High ** and fervently pray for 
our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, §318 (7: 26-8: 2)  
Brethren: Such a high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; who needeth not daily, as those high 
priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: for this he 
did once, when he offered up himself. For the law maketh men high priests which 
have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, 
who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the 
sum: We have such a high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the 
Majesty in the heavens; a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which 
the Lord pitched, and not man.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation 
for Himself.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §1l (5: 14-19)  
The Lord said to His disciples: Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a 
hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a 
candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine 
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come 
to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot 
or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever 
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he 
shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach 
them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
 
