--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 13th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER MARTINIAN  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Come ye, and with hymns let us crown * the struggler of Christ, * the Lamb of the 
Orthodox, * as with lilies of the field * and the full-grown godly blossoms of paradise; 
* for he hath been revealed to the world * as the comeliness of purity, * the sacrifice 
of faith, and the glory of abstinence. ** Wherefore, he hath received an immutable 
crown in the kingdom.  
Having the fire of the divine Spirit * within thy heart, * O Martinian blessed of 
God, * thou didst burn up the scheming of the impure woman * and wound the 
adversary with his own sword, * without injuring thyself, * truly putting the most vile 
one to shame * and making him an object ** of derision.  
Thou didst kindle a material fire * against the attacks of the enemy, O most 
blessed one, * having acquired the constant remembrance of the everlasting fire, * 
causing thereby the burning of the pleasures * to utterly wither away. * Setting thy 
feet upon a rock, O venerable one, * thou didst build a hut for thyself thereon; * and 
wandering about many lands, ** thou hast received a crown for thine endurance.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Rejoice, O honored and most wondrous boast of Palestine, for thou hast shone 
forth upon us like a supremely radiant sun! Burning up all the power of the enemy, 
thou didst consume thy members with fire, O blessed one; for in the mountains and 
the wastelands, and among the islands, he brought many a temptation to bear upon 
thee. In the desert, he set a woman before thee; and even on a rock in the midst of 
the sea, the tempter tested thee, O wise one. O thrice-blessed Martinian, cease thou 
never to entreat Christ on behalf of us who keep thy memory with faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the ripe Cluster, * Whom thou didst bear in 
thy womb without being tilled, * hanging upon the Tree, O pure one, * thou didst 
exclaim lamenting and crying aloud: * ‘I beseech Thee O my Child, * pour forth that 
sweetness * by which the drunkenness of the passions is taken away, * for my sake, O 
Benefactor, ** who didst bear Thee in Thy tender compassion! 
On the Aposticha: Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Arrayed in the vesture of purity and illumined with divine prayer, and having 
Christ, Who was born of the Virgin, dwelling within thee, thou wast not captivated by 
the woman’s beauty, nor didst thou consent to carnal pleasures; but entering with zeal 
into the fire, thy fellow-slave, and having the divine fire within thy heart, thou didst 

--- PAGE 2 ---
consume with a material and transitory fire, the fire of the passions and quench the 
flame of Gehenna. Wherefore, pray thee, O blessed Martinian, may we also be 
delivered from the all-devouring and everlasting fire.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure Virgin Mother was wounded within, * as Symeon 
foretold, * beholding the most iniquitous of people ** nailing Thee unjustly to the 
Tree.  
Troparion of the saint, in Tone VIII:  
With the torrents of thy tears thou didst quench the flame of temptations, O 
blessed one, * and taming the billows of the sea and the raging of wild beasts, thou 
didst cry aloud: ** Most glorious art Thou, O Almighty, Who hast saved me from fire 
and tempest!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
The Canon, in Tone II 
ODE I  
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Come ye, and together let us faithfully praise today with mystic hymns Martinian, 
the faster who fasted well and lawfully; for which cause he hath received from Christ 
a crown of victory.  
Kept unwavering by the fear of Christ, O father, like lightning thou didst dispel the 
terror of the foes; for thou wast fearful to them in thine endurance of abstinence, re-
maining unshaken by their illusions, O all-famed one.  
By the saving power of Christ didst thou pass easily through the demonic 
temptation inflicted upon thee by the visitation of the woman, O father; and, saving 
her, thou didst through her, wound the author of evil.  
Theotokion: Having conceived the Son of God in thy womb by the Holy Spirit 
and become pregnant without the aid of a man, O pure one, thou alone amongst 
women wast both Virgin and Mother; and with the blessing of the Father thou hast 
given birth unto Him without seed.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
By abstinence from flesh thou didst wash away the wickedness of abomination like 
mire, and by purity of mind didst discover the paths of the righteous, avoiding the 
smooth ways of sin, O venerable and wise one.  
Enlivening thy heart and setting it afire with the fear and love of the Lord, thou 
didst consume thy flesh willingly with material fire, O wise one, thereby illustrating 
for us the unquenchable fire of Gehenna, O venerable one.  
Wounding thy body with an all-devouring fire, thou didst show thyself to be a 
conqueror and victor, wounding the adversary by thy patience, washing away the 
defilement of evil thoughts, cleansing thyself in spirit and keeping thy flesh virginal.  
Theotokion: Thy conceiving kneweth no participation of a man, and thy divine 
birthgiving was ineffable; for God was born of thee in a manner transcending nature. 
O thy birthgiving! O thy purity! For through thee hath God appeared to me in the 
guise of a servant.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
By his great zeal Thy venerable one, O Lord Christ our God, showed forth 
struggles in his asceticism; for, possessed of Thy might, he overcame the demons and 
by his word cut down their feeble audacity. Wherefore, we entreat Thee: save Thou 
our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O most immaculate Virgin * who hast given birth to the transcendent God: * do 
thou unceasingly entreat Him with the incorporeal ones, * that He grant forgiveness 
of transgressions * and correction of life before the end, * to us who, as is meet, 
hymn thee with faith and love, ** O thou who alone art all-hymned.  
Stavrotheotokion: O all-hymned Virgin, Mother of Christ God, * Mary, Bride of 
God who knewest not wedlock, * intercession for the faithful, * O Sovereign Lady 
Theotokos: * from every misfortune and all want deliver those who with faith and 
love * flee unto thy protection, ** O thou who alone art the Bride of God.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
The instrument of the tyrant of delusion was mortified, receiving defeat; for he 
expected to vanquish thee through her, but was instead cast down by her and 
trampled mightily and valiantly underfoot.  
With the valiant character of the Lord thou didst endure and make straight His 
ways, making thine abode on the rock of a little island, and lying exposed to the 
elements, as one who had ascended to heaven.  
Thou didst apply thy valiant and beautiful feet to the race, passing from land to 
land, O all-famed one; for thou didst flee the city of the passions and attain unto 
dispassion.  
Theotokion: Thou didst remain a Virgin even after giving birth, O all-hymned one; 
for the beginningless God manifested Himself, passing through thee. And, as He hath 
become a man, we worship the image of His likeness.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Thou didst find the portal of virtue, O venerable one, setting at naught the wiles of 
the enemy, showing thyself to be an intercessor for my life and a guide for my soul, 
which hath been cruelly engulfed by the tempest of life. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 Receiving as a gift from God the power of prayer, thou didst most gloriously 
accomplish all things, O wise one; saving our souls from the depths thou dost deliver 
them from the storm of the passions.  
Theotokion: Thou wast a perfect man, in one Hypostasis, but in two natures, O 
Lord and Word; and when Thou didst become incarnate neither Thine image nor Thy 
form suffered loss.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: From within the sea monster Jonah cried unto the Lord: * “Lead me up 
from the abyss of Hades, I pray Thee; * for with a voice of praise as to my 
Redeemer, * in the spirit of truth * I offer myself to Thee.”  
Shielded by hope, and having strengthened thy soul with the power of God, O all-
famed one, thou wast not afraid to traverse the impassable deep; indeed, thou wast 
saved, borne up by dolphins.  
Thy life truly astonished the angels, put the demons to shame, and enlightened 
mortals, even saving the woman and leading her upon the path of asceticism.  
As is meet, thy passage was truly a likeness of thy labors and honorable struggles, 
O wise one; wherefore thou didst win the victory of chastity over the enemy, slaying 
the serpent by thine abstinence.  
Theotokion: Truly the laws of nature did not apply to thee, O pure Virgin; for, 
giving birth to the Word, God and man, Who is co-enthroned with the Father and 
the divine Spirit, thou didst remain a Virgin.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”: 
As one skilled in ascetic piety, * an honored spiritual athlete by volition, * and an 
inhabitant and citizen of the desert, * we praise the ever-honorable Martinian in 
hymns, as is meet; ** for he hath trampled underfoot the serpent.  
Ikos: From one end of the earth to the other the report of thy beautiful virtues and 
divine struggles hath passed. While a child in stature, thou didst desire to dwell in the 
wilderness, ever sending up hymns, psalms and prayers unto Christ; and growing day 
and night in pangs and tears, thou didst finish thy life in purity and didst put the 
author of evil to shame, O wise one, for thou didst trample the serpent underfoot.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Cease thy material life, become a monastic, flee zealously, go about all the cities 
and lands, as is meet; for Martinian doth teach all to chant without grief: Blessed is 
the God of our fathers!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
In thy constant travels thou wast an image of Paul, driven by love; and thou didst 
attain to it by means of thine abstinence; wherefore, as a stranger to the world thou 
didst make thyself known to the King of heaven, O all-famed one, and wast glorified 
by faith.  
Finishing the course of his asceticism, as a disciple of Christ, and knowing 
beforehand, through the divine Spirit, the hour of his departure from the body, he 
chanted with unwavering soul: Into Thy hands, O Master, do I now commit my spirit 
and soul!  
Theotokion: Bestowing living water, Christ poured it forth from His wellspring; 
and, remaining uncommingled, He made His abode within thy holy womb, O most 
glorious one, granting all to drink of incorruption who cry out with faith: Blessed art 
thou who hast given birth to God in the flesh!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Having sensibly shed the garments of carnal weakness and put on the vesture and 
understanding of manliness, the woman cried out, fasting: Thee do I supremely exalt, 
O Jesus, throughout all ages!  
Established firmly upon the rock of Christ, and having armed herself mightily with 
fasting and faith, the maiden rejoiced with true zeal and cried out in hymns: Thee do I 
supremely exalt, O Jesus, throughout the ages!  
Having transcended corruptible things, and received a share of the incorruption of 
the Most High, and finished the divine race, O God-bearer, thou didst cry aloud, 
receiving thy crown: Thee do I supremely exalt, O Jesus, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Descended from heaven in Thy tender compassion and born of the 
Virgin, O Compassionate God of all, save those who chant: Hymn the Lord all ye 
works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: How great and most glorious are thy mysteries, * the daughter of Adam 
and Mother of the Most High, * the only sure bridge leading the faithful to 
God? * Thee do we, the faithful, with unceasing hymnody * magnify as the 
Theotokos.  
Having transcended the laws of fasting, O father, thou didst shine forth in all 
manner of abstinence, keeping vigil in prayer, and by fasting, keeping purity and 
reverence. Wherefore, Christ, Who hath crowned thee, declared thee victorious at the 
end of thy contest.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Revealed to be worthy of God, thou didst struggle well; for, having cast off every 
burden, thou didst easily sail across the great and treacherous deep of life, O wise 
father, and didst arrive at the calm haven, having completed thy course.  
Theotokion: Thou alone, O Ever-virgin Theotokos, art truly the guide of 
Christians and the intercessor for sinners; for from thee hath deliverance shone forth 
in piety. And therewith do we finish our hymnody in faith, as is meet.  
Exapostilarion in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”:  
Desiring an angelic life, thou didst withdraw to the deserts; and having subjected 
the passions of the flesh, thou didst reveal thyself to be equal to the angels, O God-
bearing Martinian.  
Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Thou art shown to be the mountain which the divine Habbakuk foresaw of old as 
overshadowed and densely wooded, and which David called a mountain of butter and 
curds.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
With the torrents of thy tears thou didst quench the flame of temptations, O 
blessed one, * and taming the billows of the sea and the raging of wild beasts, thou 
didst cry aloud: ** Most glorious art Thou, O Almighty, Who hast saved me from fire 
and tempest!  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
As one skilled in ascetic piety, * an honored spiritual athlete by volition, * and an 
inhabitant and citizen of the desert, * we praise the ever-honorable Martinian in 
hymns, as is meet; ** for he hath trampled underfoot the serpent.  
 
 
