--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 17th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR HERMOGENES, PATRIARCH 
OF MOSCOW & ALL RUSSIA  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the hieromartyr, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
O all-praised martyr Hermogenes, * prison could not conceal thee, * but the grace 
of the Spirit of God received thee. * Thou wast filled with the spirit of understanding, 
* contemplating the kingdom of God which was within thee. ** Pray thou to Christ, 
that He grant our souls peace and great mercy. (Twice)  
O all-praised martyr Hermogenes, * prison could not conceal thee, * for thou didst 
sit therein as upon a throne, * and while incarcerated thou didst open thy mouth; * 
and call upon all Russia to fight for the Faith and homeland. ** Pray thou to Christ, 
that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.  
O all-praised martyr Hermogenes, * prison could not wear thee out, * but the great 
zeal of God seized upon thee, * filling thee with fire which devoured the adversary; * 
and while incarcerated in thy dungeon, thou didst shine before God like a lamp. ** 
Pray thou to Christ, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
Today the hieromartyr Hermogenes * standeth before the Mother of God * and 
with us and for us * he doth invisibly pray: * “O fervent ally, help, save and have 
mercy on Orthodox Russia, ** and preserve it beneath the protection of thy 
goodness!”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel. “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
O city of Moscow, * heart of Orthodox Russia, * city of great hierarchs, * be thou 
adorned by the new wonder-worker ** Hermogenes.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
O house of gloom, * O house of holiness * wherein the holy hierarch reposed, * 
be thou glad, for thou hast found grace: ** the throne of the temple of God.  
Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; * he shall not be 
afraid of evil tidings.  
O sacred house, * O holy tomb, * glory of the Orthodox, * throw thyself open, 
and be thou a well-spring ** of ever-flowing life!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
O fervent helper, * Mother of our God, * pure intercessor: * with the holy hierarch 
entreat thy Son ** on behalf of thy servants.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Troparion of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
O foremost hierarch of the Russian land * and tireless advocate before God, * 
laying down thy life for the Faith of Christ and thy flock, * thou didst deliver thy land 
from ungodliness. * Wherefore, we cry aloud unto thee: * Save us by thy 
supplications, ** O hieromartyr Hermogenes our father!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same tone: 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the hieromartyr, in Tone III:  
The voice of the Holy Orthodox Church crieth out with loving compunction: 
Come ye, my children, for whom I care! Come ye to the great holy hierarch! Come ye 
to the most wondrous hieromartyr. Come ye to the tireless advocate for Russia! Fall 
down and pray from the depths of your souls: O hieromartyr Hermogenes, by thy 
supplications even now save Orthodox Russia, which thou dost love! (Twice)  
Who is this that in compunction hath bent the knees of his body and soul? Who is 
this that hath fallen prostrate? Who is this that with hope hath uplifted his eyes to 
heaven and raised up his hands in steadfast trust? Who is this that groaneth and 
maketh lamentations? As thou dost grieve for our land, O hieromartyr Hermogenes, 
transform our tears into joy.  
O Lord and Savior, if we had not had thy holy hieromartyr Hermogenes as our 
advocate, and Thy goodness to have mercy on us, how would we dare to stand before 
Thy face with our sins, even unto this day? How would we have dared to stand 
against our enemies, preserve the Faith of our fathers, and make steadfast our 
Orthodox land? But thou didst hearken unto the supplication of the great hierarch, 
the most wondrous hieromartyr Hermogenes, who gathered Orthodox Russia 
beneath his wings: and its enemies fled from before its face. And now, through the 
prayers of the holy hierarch, have pity and save us, O Lord!  
“Living and active is the word of the Lord: Fear not those who slay the body, but 
are unable to slay the soul; but rather fear Him who is able to destroy soul and body 
in Gehenna. Thy soul endured patiently because of these words, O hieromartyr 
Hermogenes. “I fear Him alone Who liveth in the heavens,” thou didst say to the 
iniquitous traitors; “What is imprisonment to me? It is the sweetness of solitary 
prayer! What to me are cold and hunger? They are the mortification of a sinful life. 
What is death to me? It is the joy of departing unto Christ! I am not afraid of the fear 
of death; I endure all for the sake of Him Who hath loved me: I endure, and seek not 
to escape it, for the salvation of Russia is from the Orthodox Church! Understand 
this, and submit yourselves, for God is with us by His grace!”  
Understand, ye nations, and submit yourselves! Hearken ye unto the ends of the 
earth! For if ye again strengthen yourselves, ye shall again be vanquished! For the eyes 
of the holy hierarch Hermogenes, who standeth guard over Orthodox Russia, does 
not slumber, his mouth falleth not silent in the defense of the Truth, and his heart 
keepeth watch from the morning till night, as he trusteth in the Lord and prayeth: 
“Let Him exalt the Orthodox Church in Russia, and strengthen the land of Russia 
throughout the ages!”  

--- PAGE 4 ---
“The sins of Russia overtook it, the floods of its iniquities cast it into confusion; 
for iniquity had been added to iniquity, and it was destroyed because of its iniquity; 
yet it turned to the Lord, and was saved when the holy hierarch Hermogenes 
preached, issuing a call to repentance, saying: “Come ye children, hearken unto me! 
Confess ye your sins and humble yourselves amid your iniquities! For the Lord loveth 
the humble of heart and receiveth the contrite of spirit: for with the Lord there is 
mercy, and with Him is great redemption!”  
Through the supplications of the holy hierarch Hermogenes, the Lord hath 
accepted the repentance of those who utter lamentation before Him, and hath 
confirmed His mercy upon those who fear Him. And, lo! throughout Russia they 
rejoice in the Lord and are glad in the Holy Spirit, boasting in the power of Christ and 
magnified by the glory of the Holy Church. The people meditate upon heavenly 
things, seeking the Jerusalem on High. The truth of Orthodoxy is announced to the 
people for the salvation of the whole land. Thus the truth of the Lord abideth in our 
generation, and His mercy hath been conferred upon us!  
Glory ..., in Tone I: 
Come, all ye faithful, let us praise the holy hierarch Hermogenes; the star who 
shone forth from the east of the sun’s dawning and illumined the west of the sun’s 
setting with Orthodoxy of faith, the new star, now revealed in the glorious heavens 
among the company of hieromartyrs, to aid his Church and homeland against their 
enemies, and to confirm the Faith of our fathers. Through the supplications of the 
holy hierarch, O Lord, grant us peace and great mercy.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Let us hymn the whole world’s glory, * who sprang forth from mankind and who 
gave birth to the Master, * the Portal of heaven, Mary the Virgin, * the hymn of the 
Bodiless Powers and adornment of the faithful; * for she hath been revealed as the 
Heaven and Temple of the Godhead. * By destroying the middle wall, she hath 
brought forth peace, * and opened wide the Kingdom. * Therefore, holding fast to 
her as a firm confirmation of the faith, * we have as our champion the Lord born 
from her. * Take courage therefore, take courage, O ye people of God; ** for as the 
Invincible one he shall conquer our adversaries. 
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons: 
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones; no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 

--- PAGE 5 ---
glory; out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom; but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace; but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord; but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace; but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret; but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths; but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them; but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens; but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 

--- PAGE 6 ---
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple 
mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul 
pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This 
the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds; that His 
grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple,  
and this Sticheron of the hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
What is this festival? What is this great cry of the sacred assembly? What is this 
right laudable and beautiful council? Priests rejoice, the people clothe themselves in 
gladness, and all Orthodox Russia doth celebrate as the holy hierarch Hermogenes 
lieth before us, blessing all from the shrine of his relics; graciously comforting all and 
mystically saying: “Fear not, little flock! The ship of Jesus shall not founder in the sea 
of life, and Orthodox Russia, beloved of God, shall not perish! The Lord hath been 
pleased to grant us power, for we stand on the rock of faith and righteousness!”  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
What shall we call thee, O holy hierarch Hermogenes? Angel, for thou wast the 
guardian of Orthodox Russia. Or apostle, for thou didst lay down thy life for the 
Orthodox Faith for the sake of Christ. Him do thou beseech, that He have mercy on 
our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same tone: 
Let us hasten now to the Mother of the Lord Most High, and with the holy 
hierarch Hermogenes let us hymn our fervent helper, for she entreateth her Son, 
Christ our God, on behalf of all, causing all to be saved who have recourse to her 
mighty protection.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
O holy hierarch Hermogenes, we beseech thee: Look down upon Russia and visit 
it with thy supplication: “O Lord, let the enemies of Russia vanish like smoke, and let 
them perish like wax before the fire!”  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Thou didst pour forth thy supplication to the Lord, O holy hierarch Hermogenes, 
and to Him didst thou declare thy grief, saying: “Behold, I lay down my life for my 
sheep! O Lord, accept it as incense of prayer for Orthodox Russia, that it may remain 
in holiness and the right Faith throughout the ages!”  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Cover us with thy supplications, O holy hierarch our father, and teach us to pray in 
an Orthodox manner: “O Lord our Lord, save us before we utterly perish!”  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., in Tone I:  
O all-praised martyr Hermogenes, * even the earth could not conceal thee: * for 
heaven received thee, * and the gates of heaven have been opened unto thee; * and 
dwelling therein, thou delightest in the tree of life. ** Pray thou to Christ, that He 
grant our souls peace and great mercy.  
Both now ..., in Tone I: 
While the holy hierarch Hermogenes standeth before the Mother of God, praying 
for Russia, we also fall down before the most pure one, crying aloud: O most holy 
Theotokos, help us!  
At the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
O foremost hierarch of the Russian land * and tireless advocate before God, * 
laying down thy life for the Faith of Christ and thy flock, * thou didst deliver thy land 
from ungodliness. * Wherefore, we cry aloud unto thee: * Save us by thy 
supplications, ** O hieromartyr Hermogenes our father! (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...,” (Once)  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
O foremost hierarch of the Russian land * and tireless advocate before God, * 
laying down thy life for the Faith of Christ and thy flock, * thou didst deliver thy land 
from ungodliness. * Wherefore, we cry aloud unto thee: * Save us by thy 
supplications, ** O hieromartyr Hermogenes our father!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the first chanting of the Psalter, these Sessional Hymns, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
Assembling, O ye faithful, let us praise him who preserved Russia in days of 
turmoil, for he preached to our land the way of Orthodox stewardship and, boldly 
denouncing the ungodly authority of the usurper, was slain by starvation in prison; 
and now, dwelling with the hieromartyrs, he prayeth that we be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Celebrating thy holy memory today, we earnestly beseech thee to entreat the Lord 
and Savior, O hieromartyr Hermogenes, that He grant Orthodox confirmation to our 
laws.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O ye faithful, let us bless the Theotokos, our helper, the fervent aid of those amid 
misfortune, by whom we have been delivered from foreign bondage.  
After the second chanting of the Psalter, these Sessional Hymns, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
Thou hast appeared today to Orthodox Russia, and the light of thy good pleasure 
hath been signed upon us who chant unto thee with understanding: Thou hast come, 
thou hast appeared, O most glorious wonder-worker!  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
O ye faithful, let us hasten to the relics of the holy hierarch Hermogenes, and let 
us pour forth our grief before him and declare to him our sorrow, that we may obtain 
great consolation; for none who believeth shall depart empty.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Today the Sovereign Lady of the world rejoiceth, beholding the holy hierarch 
Hermogenes crowned with great power by Christ and ever praying for Orthodox 
Russia. Through his supplications, O Mother of God Most High, shelter us beneath 
the protection of thy goodness.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hieromartyr 
Hermogenes, and we reverence thine honored sufferings, which thou didst 
endure for Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Our God is refuge and strength. A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us.,  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, these Sessional Hymns, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
Let us praise the most wise hierarch as the helmsman of Orthodox Russia, who 
guideth it to the heavenly Jerusalem, instructeth it in all righteousness, and saveth it 
from every evil.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Let us praise the most wise hierarch as the guardian angel of Orthodox Russia, 
who maketh our land steadfast in the Orthodox Faith and therein portrayeth Christ.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV:  
Let us bless her who is more honorable than the armies on High; for she helped 
the holy hierarch Hermogenes find rest in the eternal mansions, and also saveth us 
sinners. 
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 67 (LK. 12: 32-40)  
The Lord said: “Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give 
you the kingdom. Sell what ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which 
wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, 
neither moth corrupteth. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. Let 
your loins be girded about, and your lights burning; And ye yourselves like unto men 
that wait for their lord, when he will return from the wedding; that when he cometh 
and knocketh, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed are those servants, 
whom the lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he 
shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve 
them. And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find 
them so, blessed are those servants. And this know, that if the good-man of the house 
had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have 
suffered his house to be broken through. Be ye therefore ready also: for the Son of 
man cometh at an hour when ye think not.”  

--- PAGE 10 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
O Hermogenes, thou wast shown to be a most fervent advocate for the Orthodox 
people, and, boldly rejecting heretical doctrine, didst show thyself to be a model of 
Orthodoxy for all, praying far all who follow thy divine teachings and instructions.  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and that of the hieromartyr, with 8 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “Hear 
the voice of the holy hierarch Hermogenes, O land: Holy Russia, beloved of God, 
shall not perish!” in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
O ye who know jubilation, hymn and magnify the great holy hierarch, and, 
pondering his end emulate his faith.  
An abundance of grace resideth in the shrine of thy relics, O holy hierarch 
Hermogenes; wherefore, we glorify thee as a newly-manifest wonder-worker, and ask 
of thee healings.  
The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord teaching thee also, O holy 
hierarch, to serve the Lord with trembling and rejoice before His countenance. By thy 
supplication grant that we also may make this a good beginning for ourselves.  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of 
them all. Thy life was lived in accordance with these words, O holy hierarch. And, lo! 
thou now rejoicest in the heavens, gladdening all who honor thy memory.  
Thou wast one searching out the testimonies of God, O holy hierarch, for thou 
didst study the law of Christ day and night. The judgments of the Lord are right, for 
the Lord hath caused thee to dwell in the habitations of the righteous.  
Thou didst love the commandments of the Lord from thy youth, and the 
traditions of the holy fathers didst thou preserve until thy death, O holy hierarch; and 
together with them thou dost now render glory unto God. Him do thou beseech, that 
through thee He save our souls.  
Him Whom thou didst love didst thou zealously serve; and thou now chantest 
with the choirs of the saints and prayest for us.  
Theotokion: O fervent advocate, helper of the Christian race, accept the entreaties 
of us who earnestly invoke and pray to thee: Cover thou our Orthodox land with the 
protection of thy goodness.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
I have remembered years of old, and have pondered upon all thy works, O holy 
hierarch; I have found the knowledge of how to live in this world, being taught by the 
holy fathers and the lives of the saints.  
Thou wast a wise bishop for the people, O holy hierarch, and wast like unto the 
man in the ancient chronicles who saw, as in a mirror, the face of the genesis of our 
Orthodox land, learning the wisdom of Orthodoxy in times of old.  
O Lord our Lord, how wondrous is Thy name throughout all of Russia! The Lord 
holdeth our enemies in derision. The Lord is our helper. This truth didst thou 
commit to writing, O holy hierarch, teaching generations of generations, as the 
chronicler of Orthodox Russia.  
Learn, O ye people! Ye people, feel compunction, expressing yourselves in the 
hymns and spiritual songs wherewith the holy hierarch Hermogenes glorified the 
Theotokos, the helper of our race.  
Except the Lord build the house, in vain do they labor that build it. This truth 
didst thou impart to the guardians of our land, O holy hierarch, that their efforts 
prove not to be in vain, and that they not be ineffective.  
Thou wast the priest of the church of the holy hierarch Nicholas, O Hermogenes, 
and, stirring up the gift which abode within thee, thou didst win the great love of the 
Mother of God, by whom thou wast led from glory to glory, even unto heaven, and 
hast come to dwell amid the mansions of the righteous.  
Thou wast like unto the merchant who found a priceless pearl when thou didst 
remove the icon of the Mother of God from the earth like a treasure full of grace, 
which enricheth the poor in spirit.  
Theotokion: The account of thy miracles, O Theotokos, which the holy hierarch 
Hermogenes wrote to the glory of thy Kazan icon, ever moveth all of Orthodox 
Russia to flee to thee amid every evil circumstance, and to pray earnestly: O most 
holy Theotokos, help us!  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Ascending to the summit of heaven, and having been illumined by an effulgence of 
miracles therefrom, O father, thou wast truly shown to be a most radiant pastor for 
Orthodox Russia, and art an invincible intercessor for us amid perils. Wherefore, 
having most gloriously vanquished our enemies, thou didst drive away the delusion of 
heresy and save thine Orthodox land from destruction. Entreat Christ God, O 
Hermogenes, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with love honor thy 
holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Emulating the holy hierarch Hermogenes, let us venerate the most radiant icon of 
the Mother of God as an inexhaustible well-spring of healings, and let us bless the 
Mother of God Most High as the Virgin who, alone among women, gave birth to 
God in the flesh.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
“Declare among the nations the works of God which the Lord Almighty hath 
revealed to us through the icon of His Mother,” didst thou say O holy hierarch, “that 
the heathen may not say: ‘Where is the God in Whom they believe and that their 
mouths may be stopped!”  
The icon of the most pure one was embraced by the earth, yet it was not held fast, 
that it might serve to make steadfast the newly enlightened ones who were becoming 
lost in the darkness of ignorance, and to reveal the light of the truth, as thought the 
holy hierarch Hermogenes.  
Thou art an excellent singer of the praises of the most immaculate one! Thou art 
the confirmation of those who are weak in faith! Thou art the enlightenment of those 
darkened in the darkness of unbelief, and my spirit doth hymn thee!  
Thou didst shoulder the easy and light burden, O Hermogenes, when thou didst 
receive the angelic habit, that thou mightest attain the stature of a perfect man.  
Seeing Hermogenes to be a struggler for the virtues, arrayed in prayer as in a 
garment, the Monastery of the Savior rejoiced; for the sacred archimandrite came to 
restore the community and make piety steadfast.  
As the namesake of Hermolaus thou didst reach maturity, and, living in a 
community, thou didst become like him. And, lo! like a lamp which faileth not in its 
light, thou wast set upon the lamp-stand of the Church of Kazan.  
Fitting is it for one who is most wise to enlighten those who lack wisdom, for one 
who is strong to strengthen the weak; and meet was it for Hermogenes to become a 
bishop, making all strong in the Lord.  
Theotokion: The holy Hermogenes hymned thee as the Lady, Queen and 
Sovereign Lady who helpeth all of us who have recourse to thy mighty protection. 
With him accept our entreaties, and save our souls.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
When thou wast in the Kazan, thou didst enlighten those who knew not the true 
God teaching them to labor for the one God. Wherefore, thou dost rejoice with the 
apostles, receiving the reward of an evangelist of Christ.  
With divine zeal thou didst emulate in glory Gurias, Barsanuphius and Germanus, 
who are wondrous among the saints, O Hermogenes, and assisted by their 
supplications, thou hast passed over to the habitations of the holy hierarchs, standing 
before the one Chief Shepherd, Whom do thou beseech, that we all be saved.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
With mercy thou didst chastise, and in chastising thou didst show mercy, O holy 
hierarch; and with this wisdom thou didst protect thy newly-enlightened children and 
all thy sheep from the ravenous wolves.  
Thou wast a bulwark of Orthodoxy, protecting those who were weak in faith, and 
calling upon Tsar Theodore to care for the salvation of his nation in Christ Jesus, 
showing forth the saving transfiguration of the land.  
The city of Moscow, and with it all of Russia, wept bitterly when the usurper 
seized the throne; yet thou alone, as a mighty champion, didst stand against his 
impiety, boldly confessing the Orthodox Faith.  
With hymns let us bless Hermogenes the confessor, who was undaunted by threats 
of death and the cruel words of the ungodly enemy.  
Before Him upon Whom the ranks of the angels and all the saints gaze, rejoicing, 
thou dost now ever mediate on behalf of Orthodox Russia, O Hermogenes, as a 
confessor.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate Virgin, the restoration of Adam, the Lord is with 
thee, and through thee God is with us! Understand this, ye nations, and submit 
yourselves!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
By the election of the sacred council and the will of God thou didst ascend the 
throne of patriarchal authority, O holy hierarch, that thou mightest save Russia which 
was beset by many perils.  
With thine own hand, O holy hierarch, thou didst write a staunch confession of 
unadulterated Faith, and proclaiming this Faith before the whole Church in the 
Cathedral of the Dormition of the Most pure one, all Russia beheld the rock of the 
true Faith, whereon it is founded and made steadfast in Orthodoxy.  
Thy tongue was the pen of a swiftly writing scribe, whereby the mouth of the 
sinner and the mouth of the deceiver were stopped, and the tumult of the ungodly 
was quelled.  
Dispelling the darkness of falsehood with the word of truth, and blessing the 
Orthodox army to do battle with the traitors, thou didst bear the wonder-working 
relics of the Tsarevich Demetrius through the streets of Moscow, that the truth of 
God might be known and the Orthodox land might be strengthened.  
“If ye repent, ye shall be saved, and the Russian land will be strengthened by the 
power of God,” didst thou say, O holy hierarch.  
At the throne of grace thou wast like a tree planted by springs of water, 
overshadowing Orthodox Russia with the coolness of consolation and the fruits of 
righteousness.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
O holy hierarch, thou didst preach, reprove, summon, pray and command that 
prayers be said in all the temples for the salvation and pacification of the Orthodox 
land.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, thou hope of Christians, protect, preserve, keep 
and save Russia, which hath recourse to thine aid.  
Kontakion of the hieromartyr, in Tone VI: 
Wasting away in imprisonment and starvation, * thou didst remain faithful even 
unto death, O blessed Hermogenes, * driving faintheartedness from the hearts of thy 
people * and calling all to the common struggle. * Wherefore, thou didst set at naught 
the rebellion of the ungodly * and make our land steadfast, * that all might cry out to 
thee: ** Rejoice, O helper of the Russian land!  
Ikos: Come, O ye Orthodox peoples, and with hymns let us bless the most radiant 
luminary of the Church of Russia, the unshakable pillar of the Orthodox Faith, the 
fervent advocate and intercessor for our land, the mighty opponent of the enemy, the 
stern denouncer of the traitors and destroyers of the Orthodox land, the good pastor 
who laid down his life for the sheep, who thus was crowned by the Lord with a 
wreath of glory; and let us fall down before him, crying out thus with faith and love: 
Rejoice, O our father Hermogenes, High priest of Christ who art great among the 
hierarchs of Russia!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In Babylon, the pious youths did not worship the golden image, * but, 
bedewed in the midst of the fiery furnace, * they chanted a hymn, saying: * O 
supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Burning with the fire of cruel malice, Orthodox Russia was like unto a fiery 
furnace in the days of destruction and grievous sedition; yet, bedewed by the power 
of thy words, O holy hierarch, even to this day it chanteth in Orthodox manner: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Hermogenes, the holy hierarch of God, was shown to be the father of all Russia in 
the days of sorrow and evil circumstances; wherefore, summon him and with him 
chant unto the name of the Most High: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
“Pray ye and fast, and transform yourselves into new men, clothed in the virtue of 
the love of God and piety, that the Lord may grant peace and love to us all, mighty 
unity to our land, and victory and triumph over the enemy to our nation.”  
Warmed with love for thy homeland and burning with zeal for the Faith more than 
fire, O holy hierarch, thou didst consume the thorns of sin-loving sedition, restoring 
and making steadfast a life which had grown old.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Fat bulls - the seditious usurpers, foreign rulers and ungodly traitors - surrounded 
Russia; yet when confronted by thy righteousness, O holy hierarch, they vanished like 
smoke before the face of fire, that Orthodox Russia might rejoice in the Lord, and 
that Orthodoxy might triumph.  
The holy hierarchs of Christ - Philaret of Rostov, Ephraim of Kazan, Theoctistus 
of Tver, and Galacteon of Suzdal, were thy godly laborers and helpers, through 
whom thy words were sent forth unto all the earth and thy sound unto the ends of 
Russia, O holy hierarch Hermogenes.  
Theotokion: O ye who amid perils, sorrows and sickness are weighed down by 
many sins, come ye to the fervent helper, the Mother of the Lord Most High; for she 
shall heal and comfort, and bring thee peace.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * ‘Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord’. 
Many alms didst thou give to the people, O holy hierarch, when the rich were 
lacking in mercy and in their avarice neglected to help the poor; and when thou didst 
speak to Abramius, the cellarer of the Lava of Saint Sergius, the granaries were 
opened: the people were fed, and they blessed the Lord.  
“Even though the sea of life doth foam, even though it is lashed to fury by the 
tempest of dangers, yet doth the ship of Christ not sink; for we stand upon the rock 
of Faith and righteousness!” Thus didst thou say, O holy hierarch, and thus was it so. 
And, lo! the Orthodox celebrate and bless the Lord.  
Like a good helmsman didst thou guide the ship of Russia to the calm harbor of 
the Orthodox Church, O holy hierarch; and, lo! our land is seasoned with the grace of 
the Holy Spirit and blesseth the Lord.  
O holy hierarch, thou didst say to those who fear the Lord: “Fear not, little flock, 
for it hath been the good pleasure of the heavenly Father to grant us victory over the 
enemy, and peace!” Thus didst thou believe, and thus didst thou receive according to 
thy faith. And, lo! the Holy Church rejoiceth in the Orthodoxy of our land and 
blesseth the Lord.  
They who rose up against thee mocked thee, casting dust and sand in thy face, 
thinking that thou wouldst pose no threat to the traitors and rebels; yet thou didst 
endure it all for righteousness’ sake, blessing the Lord.  
“Holy Russia, which is beloved of God, shall not perish!” didst thou say to the 
traitors, betrayers and all our enemies, O holy hierarch; “If the Lord doth not build, in 
vain do ye labor! Repent and bless ye the Lord!”  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
“We know not what to call you,” didst thou say to the rebels and traitors, O holy 
hierarch; “Ye have apostatized from God, have fallen away from the catholic and 
apostolic Church; ye have forgotten the vows of our Orthodox Faith: to stand until 
death on behalf of the house of the most holy Theotokos, for the Orthodox Faith 
and the fatherland! Repent and convert, and bless ye the Lord!”  
Theotokion: Fulfilling the dispensation of God concerning us, and uniting those 
on earth with those in heaven, through the Holy Spirit thou didst conceive in thy 
womb, O most immaculate one, and hast given birth for us to the God of all, Whom 
all the works of the Lord hymn and supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify.  
To the most pure Lady didst thou entrust the Orthodox army, O holy hierarch, 
blessing them to stand immovably for the Faith even unto death; and teaching them 
to fear Him alone Who dwelleth in the heavens. Wherefore, thou dost rejoice with 
the confessors of the truth of Orthodoxy.  
Thou didst anathematize the accursed traitors, O holy hierarch, imparting to the 
Orthodox warriors and all lovers of Orthodoxy mercy from the Lord God and from 
thine own humility, and thereby, victory and triumph over the enemy, and salvation 
was won for all Russia; wherefore God gave thee a crown, as unto an architect of the 
life of holiness.  
The voice of fiery zeal for the salvation of the homeland “Cannot be restrained 
even when enclosed in a bare cell, as in a grave; wherefore, thou didst command thy 
disciple, the Abbot Dionysius, and the monks of the Lavra of Saint Sergius to issue a 
call to all of Orthodox Russia, that a war of salvation be waged for the glory of the 
Holy Church and to make steadfast the land of Russia, which thou didst love, and for 
which thou didst pray to God.  
Thou wast a primate of the Church of the apostles, the steward of the Orthodox 
land, a confessor of the Orthodox Faith, a second Chrysostom in denouncing the 
seditious and those who love sin, O holy hierarch; and for this thou wast tortured 
with imprisonment and starvation, and, receiving from God an imperishable crown, 
thou dost now rejoice with the martyrs.  
Glory to God for thee, O hieromartyr Hermogenes! For thee it is enough to 
rejoice in the light of His countenance, and to pray unceasingly that Holy Russia not 
perish, but that it be until the end a light of the revelation of Orthodox righteousness 
for the nations.  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Poor and ailing am I, O holy hierarch, and in my low estate I fall down before thy 
healing relics, asking healing. Thou didst love Him to Whom thou didst surrender thy 
soul, and standest now before Him with boldness as a martyr. Entreat God on our 
behalf, O holy hieromartyr Hermogenes.  
Theotokion: Thee do we confess as the Mother of the Lord Most High, and, 
placing unwavering trust in thee, we beseech thee with compunctionate soul and 
contrite heart: Grant unto all that which is profitable, and save us all, O Virgin 
Theotokos, for thou art the divine protection of thy servants.  
Exapostilarion in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
In the light of the Orthodoxy which thou didst love, O holy hierarch Hermogenes, 
we behold the light of Truth, wherein is the fullness of the gifts of the Spirit. We 
rejoice in the Lord, and magnify thee who shinest with the light of eternal life.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III: 
With hymns let us magnify as more radiant than the armies on High the Mother of 
the never-waning Light, who hath made Russia splendid with the protecting veil of 
her maternal aid.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone VII: 
Praise the saint in his power, for he is able to accomplish all things in Jesus Who 
strengtheneth him; for he healeth all the infirm with the name of the Lord.  
Praise the saint in psalms and hymns! Praise him in spiritual songs! Magnify the 
glory of our fathers! Hymn ye the confirmation of our land! Rejoice in him, and be 
glad! 
Praise the holy one in the council of the sanctified! Praise him, all ye people; for he 
is the adornment of the Church, he is the ornament of our nation, he is our joy!  
Praise the saint among the holy hierarchs! Praise him among the most holy 
patriarchs! Bless him among the confessors, and glorify him among the hieromartyrs! 
Praise him in all his works!  
Glory ..., in Tone VII:  
Come ye, let us bless the good shepherd of our land, who endured all things for 
the Faith of Russia and laid down his life for Orthodoxy and his homeland, and now, 
by the mercy of God, hath been revealed as a wonder-worker to make steadfast the 
faith of the weak, to heal all the infirm and to calm those afflicted by many sins, that 
all might rejoice and chant unto him: Rejoice, O love which warmeth us! Rejoice, O 
power which healeth us! Rejoice, O understanding which enlighteneth us! Rejoice, O 
guardian preserving our Orthodoxy! Rejoice, O holy hierarch Hermogenes!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VII: 
Come, let us praise the supremely parised one, who is more glorious than all 
mortals and Higher in honor than the armies of heaven: the Mother of the Lord Most 
High, our fervent helper!  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the canon 
of the hieromartyr.  
I have remembered years of old, and have pondered upon all thy works, O holy 
hierarch; I have found the knowledge of how to live in this world, being taught by the 
holy fathers and the lives of the saints.  
Thou wast a wise bishop for the people, O holy hierarch, and wast like unto the 
man in the ancient chronicles who saw, as in a mirror, the face of the genesis of our 
Orthodox land, learning the wisdom of Orthodoxy in times of old.  
O Lord our Lord, how wondrous is Thy name throughout all of Russia! The Lord 
holdeth our enemies in derision. The Lord is our helper. This truth didst thou 
commit to writing, O holy hierarch, teaching generations of generations, as the 
chronicler of Orthodox Russia.  
Learn, O ye people! Ye people, feel compunction, expressing yourselves in the 
hymns and spiritual songs wherewith the holy hierarch Hermogenes glorified the 
Theotokos, the helper of our race.  
By the election of the sacred council and the will of God thou didst ascend the 
throne of patriarchal authority, O holy hierarch, that thou mightest save Russia which 
was beset by many perils.  
With thine own hand, O holy hierarch, thou didst write a staunch confession of 
unadulterated Faith, and proclaiming this Faith before the whole Church in the 
Cathedral of the Dormition of the Most pure one, all Russia beheld the rock of the 
true Faith, whereon it is founded and made steadfast in Orthodoxy.  
Thy tongue was the pen of a swiftly writing scribe, whereby the mouth of the 
sinner and the mouth of the deceiver were stopped, and the tumult of the ungodly 
was quelled.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, thou hope of Christians, protect, preserve, keep 
and save Russia, which hath recourse to thine aid.  
Troparion of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
O foremost hierarch of the Russian land * and tireless advocate before God, * 
laying down thy life for the Faith of Christ and thy flock, * thou didst deliver thy land 
from ungodliness. * Wherefore, we cry aloud unto thee: * Save us by thy 
supplications, ** O hieromartyr Hermogenes our father!  
Kontakion of the hieromartyr, in Tone VI: 
Wasting away in imprisonment and starvation, * thou didst remain faithful even 
unto death, O blessed Hermogenes, * driving faintheartedness from the hearts of thy 
people * and calling all to the common struggle. * Wherefore, thou didst set at naught 
the rebellion of the ungodly * and make our land steadfast, * that all might cry out to 
thee: ** Rejoice, O helper of the Russian land!  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 335 (HEB. 13: 17-21)  
Brethren: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they 
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and 
not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, that 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work 
to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation 
for Himself.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 36 (IN. 10:9-16).  
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: I am the door: by me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 
know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
