--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS MELETIUS THE 
GREAT, PATRIARCH OF ANTIOCH  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
O all-wise one, thou didst wisely teach * the incorporeal Word * Who is co-
beginningless with the father * and Who united Himself hypostatically to the flesh; * 
Whose activity is twofold, * through both natures whereof * He is comprised and in 
which He is seen: * One, indivisible in essence, ** and comprehended as existing in 
both.  
Having studied the law of the Lord, * O blessed and holy hierarch Meletius, * thou 
didst reveal thyself to be a tree * standing by the waters of asceticism, * as it is 
written, * bringing forth the fruits of the virtues * through the grace of Him Who 
hath sanctified thy holy soul, * making thee a receptacle ** of the noetic radiance.  
As sayeth Scripture, * thy cheeks were adorned like turtle-doves, O all-wise 
Meletius, * loving abstinence * and forgoing food, * thou didst desire noetic 
sustenance * which Christ richly bestowed upon thee, * when thou didst undertake 
thy manifold labors, * displaying ardent zeal, ** which was manifest when suffering 
misfortunes for the sake of the Faith.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
As thy prayer to the Lord is untiring * and thine entreaty abiding, * O most pure 
one, * quell thou the assaults * and still the waves of my wretched soul; * calm my 
heart, which is in suffering, * I beseech thee, O Maiden, * and impart grace to my 
mind, ** that I may worthily glorify thee.  
Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody:  
Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the Tree, * the ewe-lamb 
who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * “O most desired 
Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? * How is it that 
Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-suffering Word, ** 
and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Meletius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon, the acrostic whereof is “I pour forth thy praises, O all-blessed one”, in Tone 
VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
O thou who standest before the Bestower of light in radiance, illumine the 
darkened eye of my soul with light, and drive away the gloom of the passions by thy 
prayers; for as a holy hierarch, thou hast boldness before Him, O venerable Meletius.  
The Word Who resteth in the Father’s bosom, and Who is equally everlasting and 
of the same essence as the One Who begat Him, hath alone ordained thee now as a 
preacher of His divinity, as a peer to the apostles, O divinely revealed Meletius.  
Shining with divine effulgence, thou didst theologize concerning the only-begotten 
Word, that He is begotten of the Father, uncreated and crowned, O venerable one; 
and, protected by the armor of God, thou didst expel the multitude of those who 
were of one mind with Arius.  
Theotokion: Thou didst give birth in the flesh, O most holy one, to the Word of 
divine origin, Who was previously incorporeal; for thou alone, from all ages, wast 
found to be worthy, by virtue of the radiance of thy purity, the beauty of thy virginity 
and Thine all-immaculate gifts.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Possessed of a soul harder than adamantine, and shedding light upon the corrupt 
doctrine of heresies by thy teaching of piety, O all-blessed one, thou didst revile it. 
Wherefore, all of us, the faithful, honor thee, O divinely wise one.  
Emulating the apostles of Christ in the virtues, as a pillar of Orthodoxy thou didst 
manifestly inherit their authority and throne, O most glorious Meletius, champion of 
piety.  
Adopted by God, thou didst not mindlessly reduce God, the Word of God, to the 
status of a creature, but didst glorify Him as co-beginningless and co-enthroned with 
the Father: the Creator and Fashioner of all the ages, O thou who pleased God.  
Theotokion: Making His abode in thy holy womb, God became incarnate, as we 
know, O Mother of God, and hath saved us by His life-bearing sufferings. 
Wherefore, we know thee to be the portal of salvation, O Virgin.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Studying the law of the Lord day and night, O wise father, thou wast revealed to 
be like a fruitful tree planted by spiritual waters; wherefore, as thou didst blamelessly 
serve God as a bishop, and with Orthodox thought, openly revile the blasphemy of 
Arius and the impious ways of Sabellius, O holy hierarch Meletius, entreat Christ 
God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy 
memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
Having found, through thee, healing for the multifarious ailments of my flesh and 
the manifold passions of my soul, relief from grief, and a ready release and speedy 
deliverance from misfortunes and sorrows, O most immaculate Lady, with 
unwavering faith and fervent heart I confess thy mercies and thy many miracles 
wrought for the sons of mankind; and I pray that thou wilt ever preserve and keep me 
beneath the shelter of thy wings.  
Stavrotheotokion: The ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer 
upon the Cross, exclaimed, weeping, and bitterly lamenting, crying aloud: “The world 
rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee; but my heart is pained, beholding Thy 
crucifixion, which Thou endurest in the tender compassion of Thy mercy. O 
longsuffering Lord, Abyss and inexhaustible Wellspring of mercy, take pity and grant 
forgiveness of sins unto those who with faith hymn Thy divine sufferings.”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
As one manifestly superior, O initiate of the mysteries, thou didst inherit the 
throne of the preeminent Peter who was ordained by Christ; and emulating his ways, 
thou didst glorify the Savior, the Son of the living God, following His teachings.  
Adorned with all manner of gifts, thou wast a preacher of the noetic Monarchy 
which is recognized in the Father, the only-begotten Son and the divine Spirit, O all-
wise one; teaching the Unity of essences which is in the three Hypostases, O 
venerable one.  
Nurtured on goodness, and conforming to its splendor, illumined by communion 
with the divine radiance, thou didst become a secondary light for the Church, O 
divinely revealed one, revealing the enlightenment of piety to those who have 
recourse to thee with faith.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: That Thou mightest rescue Thine image, which had been buried by 
the passions, in the richness of Thy goodness, Thou didst make thine abode within 
the Virgin’s womb, rendering it a temple O Wisdom of God, wherein Thou didst 
dwell with mankind, O Compassionate One, saving the inhabited world. 
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Those who wickedly put forth every evil and demonic heresy hast thou surpassed 
by nobility of soul, radiance, an all-holy way of life and steadfast piety, O divinely 
revealed and most blessed father Meletius.  
Repulsing with all diligence those who shared the heresy of Arius, O God-bearer, 
with the Orthodox Faith thou didst confirm the ruling Principle in the Trinity, 
preaching the one God to us, O all-blessed father Meletius.  
Thou wast a most true initiate of the mysteries of the most holy Trinity, 
worshiping the Word as one in essence and co-enthroned with the Father, and the 
divine Spirit as of one essence with the Father and the Son, O most honorable father 
Meletius.  
Theotokion: The armies of the hosts on high call thee blessed, O all-pure one, and 
all the generations of mankind glorify thee as is meet; for those on earth, joining with 
those is heaven in unity, hymn thy birthgiving, O Virgin.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Thou didst dry up the torrents of heresies, and open wellsprings of proper 
dogmas, O divinely wise champion of Orthodoxy, blessed of God.  
Having caused the turbid and godless stream of Arius to wither up, thou didst 
abundantly give the assemblies of the faithful to drink of the waters of grace, 
adorning the majesty of the Church. 
 Living properly by divine principles, O father, thou didst become a supremely 
radiant husbandman, an undistorted mirror of piety, and a guide for pastors.  
Theotokion: The proclamations of the prophets, heralding thy most pure 
conceiving and thine ineffable birthgiving, illumine the souls of those who hymn thee 
in Orthodox manner, O Bride of God.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VI:  
Fearing the boldness of thy spirit, * the apostate Macedonius fled away; * but we, 
thy servants, celebrating a service of prayer to thee, * have recourse to thee with love, 
O Meletius, * converser with angels, fiery sword of Christ our God, * who hast cut 
down all the ungodly; ** wherefore we hymn thee as a beacon enlightening all.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The holy Council, which the Holy Spirit had assembled from the ends of the earth, 
had thee as its presiding bishop, and its members hymned His divinity: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst receive a presidency equal in honor to that of the apostles of Christ, 
didst inherit their divine teaching, and, emulating their life, didst chant: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Possessing a most keen intellect which, directed toward the vision of God, didst 
mock the dim vision of the heretics; and, teaching the pious, thou didst cry aloud: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O all-pure Virgin and Theotokos, Mother of the Light, thou wast like 
a clear mirror bright with the grace of thy purity; wherefore, together we chant to 
thine Offspring: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Most splendidly didst thou teach all to worship the One Godhead, in the Father, 
the Son and the Spirit, each Hypostasis manifestly preserving its character, infinite 
power and one ruling principle; And chanting to Him, thou didst cry out: Ye people, 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
As a temple of sanctity, O holy hierarch, thou dost hallow all who make haste to 
call upon thy name, and who with love depict thine image, O blessed father, and 
chant with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
With instruction in the mysteries didst thou enlighten thine exemplary flock; and 
now thou hast caused the Church of the first-born to grow, increasing, because of thy 
hierarchal and mystical ministries, the number of those who have shone forth from 
ages past. And with them thou criest out unceasingly: Ye priests hymn; ye people 
supremely exalt the Lord throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: Taught by the mystery which took place within thee, O all-pure one, 
and which, through thee, hath reaped the deliverance and salvation of the souls of 
mortals, with the Archangel Gabriel we cry aloud to thee, saying: “Rejoice, O 
Theotokos!”, hymning and supremely exalting thee throughout all ages, O pure one.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Standing immaterially before the Immaterial One, thou didst splendidly theologize 
concerning Him Who is, in essence and co-essentially, the Creator and Lord of all, the 
Word and Wisdom of the Father. Cease thou never to pray that He save those who 
with faith praise thee, O divinely eloquent one.  
The good and Holy Spirit, beholding thee exerting thyself in spiritual labors and 
zealously contending for Him against those who fight against Him, crowned thee as a 
victor and, receiving thee as is meet, hath enrolled thee among the choirs on high, O 
all-blessed one.  
Having completed the contests of piety, having finished the best of races and 
taught the Orthodox Faith most piously, thou didst receive a crown of righteousness 
from the Creator of all, O divinely eloquent one, sending forth a hymn of hymns 
from the Council of teachers.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, grant that I may safely pass through the tempest of life, 
and quell the assaults of temptations and passions, as thou art good, and guide me 
along right path of virtue, that I may unceasingly magnify thee as my benefactor.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Meletius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VI:  
Fearing the boldness of thy spirit, * the apostate Macedonius fled away; * but we, 
thy servants, celebrating a service of prayer to thee, * have recourse to thee with love, 
O Meletius, * converser with angels, * fiery sword of Christ our God, * who hast cut 
down all the ungodly; ** wherefore we hymn thee as a beacon enlightening all.  
