--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 25th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, TARASIUS, 
ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Come, ye who love the divine * and who honor the spiritual, * and let us behold 
today the banquet * of the sweet savor of abstinence, * which Tarasius, the divine 
host, * hath noetically prepared for us by his immaterial virtues; * and let us all cry out 
without hesitation: * Pray thou, we entreat thee, ** that we obtain the forgiveness of 
our sins!  
Truly revealing the Faith to the whole world, * O wise and eminent father, * thou 
didst inscribe it, * shaking off the defilement of heresy, * and establishing the 
comeliness of the Church, * following the teachings of the apostles of Christ. * 
Wherefore, with them we all cry out to thee: * O right laudable father, ** pray that 
our souls be saved!  
Thou didst receive all of Christ, * and the blessedness of almsgiving, * which is 
love for the poor; * for richly pouring forth alms upon them, * thou hast received the 
promise of the merciful; * for mercy will cry out to be praised at the judgment. * 
Wherefore, thou didst depart unto life. * Pray thou, we beseech thee, ** that we 
obtain forgiveness of our sins.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
The only uncontainable God, * Who became a man in His goodness, * didst thou 
bear in thy womb without restraint and confinement, * O most holy Bride of God. * 
Wherefore, I beseech thee: * Release me from the passions * which restrain and 
confine me, * that having traversed the straight and narrow path, ** I may attain unto 
that which leadeth to life, O Virgin.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the ripe Cluster, * Whom thou didst bear in 
thy womb without being tilled, * hanging upon the Tree, O pure one, * thou didst 
exclaim lamenting and crying aloud: * ‘I beseech Thee O my Child, * pour forth that 
sweetness * by which the drunkenness of the passions is taken away, * for my sake, O 
Benefactor, ** who didst bear Thee in Thy tender compassion! 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Tarasius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Deliver me from assault, captivity and bondage, and guide me to repentance, O 
Compassionate One, leading me quickly to Thy love.  
Possessing streams of life in thy heart, O wise one, thou wast as a river of God 
filling the Church with thy teachings and watering its furrows, O father.  
When thy precious head was anointed with the oil of the divine Spirit, O Tarasius, 
it flowed richly down upon thy beard, as upon the beard of Aaron, down to the hem 
of thy garment, like the dew of Hermon.  
Theotokion: Isaiah crieth, O pure Virgin: “Behold, having seedlessly conceived the 
Angel of Great Counsel in thy womb, thou hast given birth to Him, O pure one, 
remaining a virgin even after giving birth!”  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Thou wast the strengthening of all hearts through the bread of thy words, O holy 
hierarch; and noetically anointing our hearts with oil, thou hast gladdened them as 
with wine.  
With the fervor of understanding and zeal of faith thou didst become eminent 
among the fathers, breaking the opposition of the heretics like the gates of Hades.  
Lifting up thy venerable hands to God, thou didst ask for peace for thy flock. 
Wherefore, having ascended to thine inheritance on high, thou hast found rest.  
Theotokion: Strange is the Offspring, and strange is the generation which hath 
been accomplished anew in the womb of the Virgin; He hath raised up from 
deception the nature which had been dragged down into corruption.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III, Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine faith ...”:  
Thou didst shine forth with the works of divine knowledge, illumining the Church 
with radiance; and slaying heresies with thy words, and emulating the hospitality of 
Abraham, thou didst pour forth love and caring for the poor, O father Tarasius. 
Entreat Christ God to grant us great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only most pure Virgin Mother * 
who surpassed the angels in purity. * By the divine waters of thy supplications * 
cleanse me who, more than all others, * have become dust, defiled by carnal 
transgressions; ** and grant me great mercy, O pure one.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.  
With the sweat of piety didst thou sow the word of God in the Church, reaping 
the grain of Orthodoxy, O Tarasius. In the land of the meek hast thou made thine 
abode, and with them rejoicest in gladness.  
The fear of God of which Isaiah spake, O venerable one, didst thou receive within 
thee through the Spirit; giving birth thereunto for the Church. Thereby the offspring 
of heresy have been dashed to pieces on the rock of faith.  
With the shedding of tears thou didst wash away defilement, O venerable one, and 
reaching the wellspring wherein the undiluted drink of everlasting sweetness gusheth 
forth, thou didst attain to thine ultimate desires.  
Theotokion: God the Word, having been conceived without seed in thy womb, O 
all-immaculate one, issueth forth unaltered in nature unto the human race; Him do 
thou ever entreat on behalf of thy servants, that our souls be saved from misfortunes.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
With the power of thy words thou didst denounce the noetic diseases of the 
impious, and with the bonds of divine love bind thy flock, preserving it unharmed 
through hope and faith.  
Going without food through abstinence, thou didst nourish thy soul with the bread 
of pure prayer, divine doctrine and exalted humility.  
As a father thou didst weave the robe of the Church, O wise one, and Christ 
arrayed thee therein with honor for the sake of thy faith, as one shining forth in the 
splendor of Orthodox teaching.  
Theotokion: O pure one, we all have thee as an intercessor, a mighty foundation of 
hope, support, shelter and rampart, and a bridge leading to the kingdom of heaven.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
As sacrifice and victim thou didst submit thyself to God with faith, maintaining the 
fulfillment of His un-bloodied service.  
Having now passed from earth to immaterial glory, O venerable one, by thine 
earnest supplication heal my soul which hath been defiled by material passions.  
Thou didst cut away the thickness of the Scriptures with the profound paring-knife 
of thine intellect, O Tarasius, and wast the scribe’s pen of the Church.  
Theotokion: Thy birthgiving is cause for perplexity, for thou givest suck unto the 
Nourisher in a strange manner, and nurturest with milk the immaterial Creator Whom 
thou didst hold in thine arms.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III,  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Having illumined the Church with Orthodox dogmas * and taught all to honor 
and bow down before the precious icon of Christ, * O blessed one, thou didst 
denounce the godless decree of the iconoclasts. * Wherefore, we cry out to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O wise father Tarasius!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Thou hast been shown to be a cup of wisdom, full of the virtues; and having called 
the flock together by the preaching of thine exalted life, thou didst delight them, O 
divinely wise father, crying out with them: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thou hast gone before us to the mansions of heaven and precious delights, and 
rejoicing with thy God thou art glad. Wherefore, honoring thee, O most blessed one, 
we cry aloud with boldness: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thy loins girded about with the manliness of understanding, and arraying thyself in 
the life which leadeth to faith, O Tarasius, thou didst go up in haste to the banquet of 
the King most high, chanting: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: He Who was begotten without mother from the Father, cometh forth 
from thee without father; and, preserving thy purity inviolate, He hath shown thy 
birthgiving to be most pure and thy virginity to be undefiled; for in thee the law of 
birth-giving hath been made new.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Of old in the furnace of the holy children, * Thou didst prefigure Thy 
Mother, O Lord, * in the image of those who entered therein, * and rescued 
therefrom remained unconsumed. * Her who hath been revealed today do we 
hymn * unto the ends of the earth, * supremely exalting her throughout all 
ages.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thou hast been shown to be like a morning cloud letting fall drops of rain and 
dew, O wise one, from the wealth of goodness thou hast amassed on earth; anointing 
the hearts of the hungry, as a brightly lit spiritual lamp.  
Illumined with the light of thy works and the vesture of thy high priesthood, thou 
wast shown to be the key of chastity, the sustenance of abstinence, the teacher of true 
prayer, the way of repentance and the law of life.  
O my soul, make time for repentance and bring forth the fruits of conversion, 
fearing the curse called down upon the barren fig tree, and the threat of being hewn 
down. Assuage Christ with the fruitfulness of the virtues.  
Theotokion: Forget not the cries of thy servants, O dread intercessor, but by thy 
supplications rescue us from all tribulations and every threat; for thy maternal 
entreaty moveth God to relent.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
With the fire of abstinence thou didst put down the cunning and darts of the 
enemy, truly burning up the carnal wrath of the flesh with the burning coals of thy 
purity, O Tarasius, having been deemed worthy of the radiance thereof.  
Making thine abode with the choirs of the patriarchs, with them thou chantest the 
angelic hymn: Holy, Holy, Holy is God the Begetter, the begotten Son, and the Spirit 
Who proceedeth without separation! O holy Trinity, glory to Thee!  
We cry out to thee as to one who with Paul entered into the heights of heaven: O 
most blessed Tarasius, blessedness of God, confirmation of the Church, victory of 
the Orthodox, we pray thee: Grant cleansing unto us who honor thee with love.  
Theotokion: The Son Who before all ages was beginningless with the Father, and 
Who hath ineffably become incarnate from thy pure blood, O most pure Mother, 
who knewest not wedlock, hath revealed Himself to us as the Sun, and, driving away 
the darkness, hath enlightened all things.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Tarasius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: 
Having illumined the Church with Orthodox dogmas * and taught all to honor 
and bow down before the precious icon of Christ, * O blessed one, thou didst 
denounce the godless decree of the iconoclasts. * Wherefore, we cry out to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O wise father Tarasius!  
 
 
