--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 24th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY 
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE FIRST AND SECOND FINDINGS  
OF THE GLORIOUS HEAD OF THE FORERUNNER  
AT VESPERS 
If it be not the Fast, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon; and On “Lord, I 
have cried ...,” 6 Stichera. But if it be the Fast, we chant the usual Kathisma, and sing the service 
to the Forerunner combined with that from the Triodion.  
Six Stichera of the finding, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”; 
Rejoice, O sacred and light-bearing head, venerated by the angels, which of old was 
severed by a sword and which cut down the shame of impurity with sharp reproofs, a 
wellspring of miracles giving drink unto the faithful, and which proclaimed the saving 
advent of the Savior, and of old perceived the coming of the Spirit which took up His 
abode in thee who stood between the grace of the Old and New Covenants. Entreat 
Christ God to grant our souls great mercy! (Twice)  
The head of the Forerunner, which was once concealed in an earthen vessel, hath 
appeared, yielded from the bosom of the earth and pouring forth streams of healing; 
for in the waters he washed the head of Him who covereth the chambers of the 
firmament with waters and raineth down divine forgiveness upon mankind. 
Wherefore, let us bless it as truly most glorious, and in its discovery let us joyously 
keep festival, entreating Christ to grant our souls great mercy. (Twice) 
The head which proclaimed the Lamb of God Who hath appeared in the flesh, 
which with divine commands hath declared to all the ways of saving repentance, 
which of old denounced the transgression of Herod and was therefore severed from 
its body, enduring concealment for a time, hath shone forth upon us like a radiant 
sun, crying out: Repent ye, and in compunction of soul submit now to Christ Who 
granteth the world great mercy! (Twice) 
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Thy divinely preserved head, the treasury of divine gifts, O Forerunner, hath shone 
forth from the bosom of the earth; and we, faithfully receiving and bowing down 
before it, O glorious one, are enriched by thee with most glorious miracles and the 
forgiveness of our sins, O Baptist of Christ!  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH 
Thus saith the Lord: Comfort ye, comfort ye my people. Speak ye comfortably to 
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is 
pardoned: for she hath received of the Lord’s hand double for all her sins. The voice 
of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in 
the desert a highway for our God. O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into 
the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with 
strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God! When 
the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst, I 
the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them. I will open rivers 
in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a 
pool of water, and the dry land springs of water. Drop down, ye heavens, from above, 
and let the skies pour down righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth 
salvation, and let righteousness spring up together; I the Lord have created it. Go ye 
forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, tell 
this, utter it even to the end of the earth; say ye, The Lord hath redeemed his servant 
Jacob. And they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts: he caused the 
waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock also, and the waters gushed 
out. Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, 
thou that didst not travail with child: for more are the children of the desolate than 
the children of the married wife, saith the Lord. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF MALACHI 
Thus saith the Lord: Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the 
way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even 
the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in, behold, he shall come, saith the 
Lord of hosts. But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when 
he appeareth? for he is like a refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ soap: And he shall sit as a 
refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as 
gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. And I 
will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, 
and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oppress 
the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the 
stranger from his right, and fear not me, saith the Lord of hosts. For I am the Lord, I 
change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. Even from the days of your 
fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto 
me, and I will return unto you, saith the Lord of hosts. But ye said, Wherein shall we 
return? And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith 
the Lord of hosts. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I 

--- PAGE 3 ---
make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth 
him. Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between 
him that serveth God and him that serveth him not. Remember ye the law of Moses 
my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes 
and judgments. Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the 
great and dreadful day of the Lord: And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the 
children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth 
with a curse, saith the Lord Almighty, the Holy one of Israel. 
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the finding, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Come, ye faithful, * and let us honor today * the precious head of the Baptist 
which was severed, * greeting it with hymns on the day of its uncovering, * honoring 
it with love, * for it poureth forth the grace of healings upon us. * Of old Herod the 
adulterer cut it off, * having been adorned ** by the savagery of Herodias.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Like gold from a mine, * so hath the head of the Forerunner shone forth * from 
the earth, * having appeared in an earthen vessel * it plainly speaketh forth, * 
rebuking the adulterous and murderous Herodias, * radiantly illumining our thoughts. 
* And venerating it, O ye faithful, let us honor it today with hymns, ** for it doth 
entreat God on our behalf.  
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
The head of the forerunner, * which of old was hidden in a vessel in the ground * 
like a divine treasure, * is today disclosed to the ends of the earth, * pouring forth an 
abundance of streams of healing, * curing sicknesses and enlightening souls. * Where-
fore, receiving the grace of consolation, * let us hymn it reverently ** with songs.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Like a most precious shrine of divine thoughts, thy head O all-praised John, hath 
shone forth today from the secret places of the earth, as from thy mother’s womb, 
clearly foreseeing the mystery of the ineffable Being, it hath rendered the whole earth 
fragrant, emitting the myrrh of sanctification, noetically preaching the way of 
repentance and entreating the Savior of all on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
O new wonder greater than all the wonders of old! * For who hath ever known a 
mother to give birth without having known a man, * and to bear on her arm Him 
Who sustaineth all creation? * Yet it was the will of God to be born. * O most pure 
one, who carried Him as an infant in Thine embrace * and before Whom thou hast a 
mother’s boldness: * cease not to pray on behalf of those who honor thee, ** that He 
have compassion and save our souls. 
Troparion of the finding, in Tone IV: 
The head of the Forerunner, which hath shone forth from the earth, * sheddeth 
rays of incorruption and healing upon the faithful. * Assembling a multitude of angels 
on High, * it calleth upon the human race below ** to send up glory with one voice 
to Christ God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS:  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the finding, in Tone IV: 
The head of the Forerunner, which hath shone forth from the earth, * sheddeth 
rays of incorruption and healing upon the faithful. * Assembling a multitude of angels 
on High, * it calleth upon the human race below ** to send up glory with one voice 
to Christ God.  
 Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
As a divine treasure hidden in the earth, Christ hath revealed thy head unto us, O 
prophet and Forerunner; wherefore, assembling on the feast of its discovery, with 
divinely eloquent songs we all hymn the Savior Who hath saved our life by thine 
intercession. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
We hymn thee, O Bride of God, Mother of Christ God, glorifying thine unap-
proachable Offspring, by Whom we have been delivered from the deceit of the devil 
and from all misfortune, O Lady Theotokos; and we faithfully cry out: Have mercy 
on thy flock, O thou who alone art all-hymned!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Freed from the impassable bosom of the earth like gold from a mine, thy sacred 
head hath most gloriously enriched all the thoughts of the faithful with knowledge 
divine, crying out: Repent! as is its wont. And bowing down before it, O Forerunner, 
we faithfully glorify Christ with loud voices. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O Virgin Mother of God, * Sovereign Lady * we thy servants with gratitude 
fervently hymn thee, * ever entreating thee for mercy, * and crying unto thee: * ‘O 
most holy Virgin, * deliver us from enemies visible and invisible * and from every 
threat of the adversary, ** for thou art our protection’. 
After the Polyeleos 
The Megalynarion: We magnify thee, * John the Forerunner of the Savior, * 
and all honor the finding of thy venerable head. 
Selected Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded ...”:  
Like a pearl was the head of the Baptist concealed in the damp earth, and, adorned 
like a divinely radiant lamp, it illumineth the whole world, working wonders. For like 
the dawn hath the Forerunner put forth the sun most splendidly, preaching to us 
again with unwaning light, crying out: Behold, the Lamb of God! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
We ever thank and magnify thee, O most pure Theotokos, * and bowing down, we 
hymn thy birthgiving and unceasingly cry aloud, * O thou who art full of grace: do 
thou Save us, * O all-merciful Virgin, * in that thou art good, do thou snatch us from 
the demons * at the hour of trial, and the dread sentence, ** that we, thy servants, 
may not be put to shame.  
Song of Ascents, the first Antiphon of Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: There will I make to spring forth a horn for David, * 
I have prepared a lamp for my Christ.  
Verse: Remember, O Lord, David and all his meekness.  
Let every breath praise the Lord! 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, §31 (7:17-30)  
At that time: A rumor concerning Jesus went forth throughout all Judaea, and 
throughout all the region round about. And the disciples of John shewed him of all 
these things. And John calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to Jesus, 
saying, Art thou he that should come? or look we for another? When the men were 
come unto him, they said, John Baptist hath sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he 
that should come? or look we for another? And in that same hour he cured many of 
their infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto many that were blind he 
gave sight. Then Jesus answering said unto them, Go your way, and tell John what 
things ye have seen and heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are 
cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to the poor the gospel is preached. And 
blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me. And when the messengers of 
John were departed, he began to speak unto the people concerning John, What went 
ye out into the wilderness for to see? A reed shaken with the wind? But what went ye 
out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they which are gorgeously 
appareled, and live delicately, are in kings’ courts. But what went ye out for to see? A 
prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a prophet. This is he, of whom it 
is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way 
before thee. For I say unto you, Among those that are born of women there is not a 
greater prophet than John the Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom of God is 
greater than he. And all the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified God, 
being baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the 
counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
The precious head of the Baptist of Christ, which of old preached repentance to all 
the faithful, denounced the impurity of the iniquitous Herod, and lay upon a charger, 
hath appeared out of the hidden places of the earth and lieth before those who have 
recourse unto it with faith, who touch it with fear and bow down before it with 
spiritual love. Granting forgiveness of transgressions, and with forgiveness it 
bestoweth that which is needful and great mercy.  
Canon to the Theotokos (the Paraklisis), with 6 Troparia, including its Irmos; and that 
to the Forerunner, with 8 Troparia, in Tone VI: 
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory.  
Come, ye faithful, and with spiritual odes let us glorify the Forerunner, the voice of 
the Word, weaving hymns with a right laudable tongue and an almighty spirit, though 
our lips be impure.  
With peaceful tranquility the Church of Christ hath been calmed, and with 
countless multitudes it is prosperously tended, chanting its yearly hymns unto thee, O 
Forerunner.  
Assembling, O ye faithful, let us all honor with hymns, as is meet, the God-bearing 
head of the Forerunner which hath been given unto us by God as an inviolate 
treasure.  
Theotokion: O pure one, who received the Creator, as He Himself desired, beyond 
understanding assuming flesh seedlessly from thy womb, thou hast truly been shown 
to be the Sovereign Lady of creation.  
Katavasia: As appointed by the Typicon.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
A barren womb put thee forth as a divine off-shoot, a glorious attendant to the 
Bride which is the Church of the nations, betrothing Her to Christ, the true God and 
Bridegroom.  
O Forerunner John, the wretched adulteress could not stop thy divinely eloquent 
voice with the sword, for from the earth thou hast revealed thy divine head to us.  
The city of Jerusalem, desiring thee and radiantly celebrating, keepeth festival, 
having found thy head as a hidden treasure and an inexhaustible wellspring of 
healings, O Forerunner.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: The wonder of thy divine birthgiving surpasseth the order of nature; 
for in a manner transcending nature thou didst conceive God in thy womb and, 
having given birth, dost ever remain a Virgin.  
Sessional Hymn of the finding, Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded ...”:  
Like a treasure laid up in a hiding place was the head of the Forerunner preserved, 
the voice of the Word was hidden in a cistern; but like a grain of wheat planted in the 
depths of the earth it blossomed forth, yielding the fruit of divine life. The discovery 
thereof we all honor, glorifying Christ Who hath given it the grace to pour forth 
healings. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Secretly pondering in his mind that which was commanded, * the incorporeal one 
presented himself without delay * in the house of Joseph, * and said unto her who 
knew not wedlock: * “He Who bowed the heavens down by His descent * shall be 
immutably contained wholly within thy womb! * And beholding Him assuming the 
guise of a servant in thy womb, * I am afraid to cry to thee: ** Rejoice, thou Bride 
unwedded!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Clearly thou wast the seal of the Old Covenant and the prophets, O spiritually rich 
Baptist, and preaching unto the ends of the earth, thou hast been revealed as the 
adorner of the bridal chamber of the New Covenant, O Forerunner.  
O Forerunner rejoicing, thou didst endure the covering of thy precious and 
glorious head with coarse rags, as with a garment of royal purple.  
By thy divine instructions, O John, a poor man, and a homeless wanderer, hath 
revealed thy divine head to be an abundant treasure.  
O Forerunner, ever pray that the city of Jerusalem which honoreth thee be 
illumined with the radiance of the divine Spirit, and that it rejoice with the incorporeal 
ones in thy divine memory.  
Theotokion: Eating hath shown me to be a dead plant, O most pure one, but the 
Tree of Life Who revealed Himself through thee, hath raised me up and made me an 
heir to the nourishment of paradise.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
O Baptist, thou wast not a reed shaken by the trying winds of enmity, but an 
unshakable pillar for the people of God; for thou didst manifest thyself by the power 
of Elijah and the Spirit.  
He that rejected the Godhead and belittled the glory of Christ, Who was baptized 
of thee, concealing thy divine grace, is rightly kept from the fold of God.  
Thou hast opened up the portal of a bountiful and divine wellspring which poureth 
forth the waters of divine grace upon those who with love hymn thee, O glorious 
Forerunner, gladdening all with the streams of healing.  
Theotokion: Bearing the noetic beauty of thy soul thou didst become the Bride of 
God, sealed in thy virginity, O pure one, enlightening the world with the radiance of 
purity.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Christ called thee a true prophet, and the most exalted of the prophets, the Baptist 
and Forerunner of Life; for thou didst behold Him Whom the Law and the prophets 
foretold.  
The fountain of miracles, the treasury of grace, thy sacred head, O Baptist, Prophet 
and Forerunner, could not bear to be concealed, and, having revealed itself, it poured 
forth springs of healing.  
The Christ-loving and right glorious city hath set before itself thy precious and 
divine head, O Forerunner, as richly praiseworthy, and a radiantly adorned shield of 
salvation.  
Theotokion: Moses, great among the prophets, prefigured thee in the ark, the table, 
the candlestick and the jar, signifying the incarnation of the Most High which took 
place through thee, O Virgin Mother.  
Kontakion of the finding, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the Highest ...”:  
O prophet of God and Forerunner of grace, * having obtained thy head from the 
earth like a most sacred rose, * we ever receive healings, * for now, as of old, ** thou 
dost preach repentance in the world  
Ikos: Thou wast exalted above all mankind, O John, as the Lord Himself bore 
witness. Hence, I fear to offer thee hymns of praise; yet, inspired by love, I have 
made bold to begin a hymn. Wherefore, deem me not to be an unworthy helper, that 
I may crown thy holy head, O thrice blessed one; for thou hast preached repentance 
to the world.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
The Offspring of the Virgin called thee the greatest among those born of women, 
for thou didst live for Him on earth like an incorporeal one, an equal to the angels, 
crying out: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
From within the barren womb of thy mother, thou didst recognize Him Who had 
taken up His abode within the Virgin’s womb, O Forerunner; and, with the voice of 
thy mother, leaping up, thou didst cry out to Him: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Out of the wilderness thou didst appear like a radiant dawn, an angel of light, 
taught by the most holy Spirit, teaching us to cry out: O God of our fathers, Blessed 
art Thou!  
Having acquired thee as a treasure, O ever-memorable one, this city is now truly 
blessed among all cities, O Forerunner of Christ. Wherefore, keeping festival it crieth 
aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Through thee, O Virgin Mother, a radiant Light hath shone forth 
upon the whole world, for thou didst give birth unto God, the Creator of all. Him do 
thou beseech, O most pure one, that He send down great mercy upon us, the faithful.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
The Forerunner was sent as the voice of the Son of God, crying out to barren 
hearts, making steadfast the pious faith in Him Who is God, Whom we supremely 
exalt throughout all ages!  
Even now the Forerunner saith: Prepare ye the way of the Lord! For, having come 
for the sake of our sanctification, He maketh His abode in our hearts with the Father 
and the Spirit, throughout all ages.  
When the voice of the Father was heard, and the divine Spirit was seen by the eyes 
of man, John the Forerunner, laying his hand upon Thee, O Christ, became a God-
bearer in every way.  
Thou wast sanctified from the womb by the Spirit of God, and shown to be a 
prophet while yet carried in the womb; and now, thou hast been shown to be the 
delight of the city that seeketh thee in the bosom of the earth, O prophet.  
Theotokion: The golden candlestick prefigured thee who hast ineffably received 
the unapproachable Light which illumineth mankind with the knowledge of Himself. 
Him do we supremely exalt throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Being clearly one who kept the Ten Commandments, O Forerunner, thou wast 
rightly honored by Christ with ten-fold gifts. Wherefore, knowing thee to be a friend 
of the Word, we bless thee as an initiate of the mysteries of the Spirit.  
Thou wast revealed to be a prophet of Christ and an apostle, an angel and 
forerunner, the Baptizer of God Incarnate, a priest and faithful martyr, a preacher to 
those bound in Hades, a rule for virgins, and an offspring of the desert.  
The unbelieving soul of the priest hath been reproved by the miracle of the 
withered hand; for when his faith blossomed anew after thy head appeared, O blessed 
one, his outstretched hand was renewed.  
The ranks of angels have truly proclaimed thy prophetic appearance to him who 
beheld thee, emulating the divine announcement of Gabriel which the sacred 
Zacharias received before thy birth.  
Theotokion: Let us draw forth the healing of our passions, making haste to the 
glorious temple of the Forerunner; for choirs of angels, the souls of all the righteous, 
the Sovereign Lady and John the Baptist enter therein, bestowing healings.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “To the disciples ...”: 
Thy precious and luminous head hath shone forth from the impassable bosom of 
the earth, O Forerunner John, beacon of the immaterial light; and, celebrating the 
discovery thereof with love, we beseech thee to obtain the forgiveness of our grievous 
deeds, that we may complete the period of abstinence well, by thy prayers, O all--
praised Baptist of the Savior. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
The divinely wise assembly of the faithful, which doth minister and faithfully hymn 
thee as truly the Theotokos, is comforted, O all-pure one. Wherefore, grant that by 
thy prayers we may properly finish the course of the fast, and bow down before the 
precious Cross and the saving sufferings of thy Son and God.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the finding, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Thy most precious head * hath opened the outer gates of abstinence, * O all-
praised one, * setting before all the sweetest of divine gifts, * and with faith partaking 
of them, * we sweeten the bitterness of fasting, * praising thee with faith, and crying 
out to Christ God: * O Jesus Almighty, ** Thou art the Savior of our souls! (Twice)  

--- PAGE 12 ---
The head of the Forerunner * which putteth forth myrrh * like an ever-flowing 
stream of water, * hath today been set upon a mystical and divine table, * noetically 
perfuming and dispelling * the bitterness of sorrows, * and filling with gladness all 
who cry out with love: * O Jesus Almighty, ** Thou art the Savior of our souls!  
Like a most sharp sword * thy head hath severed the heads of the iniquitous foe, * 
pouring forth healings and divine gifts * upon all who reverence the Law. * 
Wherefore, we faithfully praise thee, * the friend and Forerunner of the Creator, O 
John, * and earnestly cry out to Him: * O Jesus Almighty, ** Thou art the Savior of 
our souls!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Faithfully receiving with a voice of praise the most precious head of Thy Baptist, O 
Lord, which today was revealed taken from the earth, we Thy sinful servants, led to 
prayer, pray that on the day of Judgment we may for his sake, obtain cleansing and 
great mercy from Thee.  
 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
O right loving God and Savior, from all evil circumstances save Thou Thy 
servants, by the prayers of Thy Forerunner, and of all the saints, and through the 
entreaties of Thy Mother.  
Great Doxology and Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY:  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: four from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon to the Forerunner.  
A barren womb put thee forth as a divine off-shoot, a glorious attendant to the 
Bride which is the Church of the nations, betrothing Her to Christ, the true God and 
Bridegroom. (Twice) 
O Forerunner John, the wretched adulteress could not stop thy divinely eloquent 
voice with the sword, for from the earth thou hast revealed thy divine head to us.  
The city of Jerusalem, desiring thee and radiantly celebrating, keepeth festival, 
having found thy head as a hidden treasure and an inexhaustible wellspring of 
healings, O Forerunner.  
Christ called thee a true prophet, and the most exalted of the prophets, the Baptist 
and Forerunner of Life; for thou didst behold Him Whom the Law and the prophets 
foretold.  
The fountain of miracles, the treasury of grace, thy sacred head, O Baptist, Prophet 
and Forerunner, could not bear to be concealed, and, having revealed itself, it poured 
forth springs of healing.  
The Christ-loving and right glorious city hath set before itself thy precious and 
divine head, O Forerunner, as richly praiseworthy, and a radiantly adorned shield of 
salvation.  
Theotokion: Moses, great among the prophets, prefigured thee in the ark, the table, 
the candlestick and the jar, signifying the incarnation of the Most High which took 
place through thee, O Virgin Mother.  
Troparion of the finding, in Tone IV: 
The head of the Forerunner, which hath shone forth from the earth, * sheddeth 
rays of incorruption and healing upon the faithful. * Assembling a multitude of angels 
on High, * it calleth upon the human race below ** to send up glory with one voice 
to Christ God.  
Kontakion of the finding, in Tone II: 
O prophet of God and Forerunner of grace, * having obtained thy head from the 
earth like a most sacred rose, * we ever receive healings, * for now, as of old, ** thou 
dost preach repentance in the world  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §176 (I Cor. 4:6-12).  
Brethren: God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in 
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus 
Christ. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power 
may be of God, and not of us. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we 
are perplexed, but not in despair; Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not 
destroyed; Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life 
also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. For we which live are always 
delivered unto death for Jesus’ sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest 
in our mortal flesh. So then death worketh in us, but life in you. 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree and like a 
cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: Truth is sprung up out of the earth, and righteousness hath looked down 
from Heaven.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, §40 (11:2-15)  
At that time: John having heard in the prison the works of Christ, sent two of his 
disciples, And they said unto Jesus, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for 
another? Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and shew John again those things 
which ye do hear and see: The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers 
are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel 
preached to them. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me. And as 
they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What went ye 
out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind? But what went ye out 
for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? behold, they that wear soft clothing are in 
kings’ houses. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and 
more than a prophet. For this is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my 
messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. Verily I say unto 
you, Among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John 
the Baptist: notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than 
he. And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth 
violence, and the violent take it by force. For all the prophets and the law prophesied 
until John. And if ye will receive it, this is Elias, which was for to come. He that hath 
ears to hear, let him hear. 
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
