--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
THE COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS PORPHYRIUS, 
ARCHBISHOP OF GAZA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...” 
O venerable father Porphyrius, * taking the Cross of Christ upon thy shoulder * 
thou didst abandon all * and didst attain unto the desert, * and do battle with the ruler 
of this world, * armed with fasting and prayers. * Wherefore, as a temple of the Spirit 
of God, * thou didst cast him down together ** with carnal mindedness.  
As of old God saved the three youths from the fire * by His Angel, * so now by 
thee hath He saved three youths * that had been dragged down into a pit; * for when 
they were borne as in a basket * He overshadowed them * with the light of a cloud * 
which formed three crosses on their bodies ** unto the reproof of those who 
opposed thee, O Porphyrius.  
Who can worthily hymn * thy temptations and pangs, * thy misfortunes and 
tribulations, * thy struggles for the faith, O Porphyrius? * For thou didst show the 
boldness * which thou hast before God to be great. * Wherefore, we entreat thee, * 
for thou hast such boldness: ** Pray thou on our behalf to the Lord, that we be 
saved!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
The pre-eternal God, * taking flesh from thy blood, * hath shown thee forth, O 
pure one, * as an intercessor for all mankind. * Wherefore, deliver thy servants * from 
all misfortune and every evil circumstance, * and grant that all who glorify * and bow 
down before thee ** be deemed worthy of the splendor of the elect.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Cross * and voluntarily accepting 
suffering, O Jesus, * Thy Virgin Mother, O Master, * cried aloud: Woe is me, my 
sweet Child! * How is it that Thou dost endure * unjustly inflicted wounds, O Physi-
cian * Who healeth the infirmities of mankind, * delivering all from corruption ** in 
Thy tender compassion?  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Porphyrius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
The canon to the holy hierarch, the composition of George, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
The Church, adorned today with thy teachings as with royal purple, O Porphyrius, 
hath been rendered resplendent, hymning the Lord of all.  
Having shone forth in thy life with divine discourses, thou wast shown to be a 
beacon for all mankind, ever illumining them with thy deeds and teachings, 
enlightening the ends of the earth.  
Cleansed by the sprinkling of the Holy Spirit and arrayed in a vesture of divine 
virtues, O Porphyrius, thou didst enter into impassable places to minister as a priest 
unto Him who anointed thee.  
Theotokion: The Son of God, wishing to speak to those who dwell on earth, out 
of His ineffable love for mankind, which passeth understanding, O Bride of God, was 
born from thee in the flesh, granting regeneration unto the faithful.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Beneath thy feet thou didst lay low the arrogance of the godless who spoke against 
the God of all Himself.  
With the fire of thy words thou didst wisely consume the kindling of Manes, 
extending to the faithful, the enlightenment of thy doctrines.  
Setting the feet of the faithful firmly upon a steadfast rock, O Porphyrius, thou 
didst shake the very foundation of the godless from its footing.  
Theotokion: All the earth hath been filled with the true knowledge and ineffable 
glory of thy Son and God, O pure one.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine faith ...”: 
Thou didst shine forth in thy deeds like the morning star, driving away all heresy 
from the Church, O holy hierarch Porphyrius, enlightening the hearts of the faithful, 
that they might hymn and glorify the Lord. Wherefore, celebrating thy memory today, 
we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
He that alone is Lord, without separating from His divine nature, yet taking flesh 
in thy womb, remained God though He became a man, preserving thee after thy birth 
giving an immaculate Mother and Virgin as thou wast before giving birth. Him do 
thou entreat that we be accorded great mercy!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone III: 
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished Ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, beholding Him that sprang forth from her without pain hanging upon the 
Cross, lamenting like a mother cried out: Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that Thou 
dost suffer Who art to deliver mankind from the sufferings of dishonor?  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
standing in its place, * the Church, worthily crieth out aloud: * Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
Having within thy soul the Sun of righteousness and the most radiant splendor of 
the faith, O Porphyrius, thou didst illumine all the fullness of the Church with thy 
discourses.  
Made steadfast in the love of God the Word, O Porphyrius, thou didst disdain all 
the allurement of things visible. Wherefore, we honor thee as an equal to the angels 
and an honorable and holy hierarch.  
As thou didst partake of the ineffable Mysteries, O Porphyrius, thou didst preserve 
them by thy pure actions in a pure and ineffable manner, as a worthy initiate of the 
mysteries.  
Theotokion: Gloriously hath the Church been adorned by thy divine magnificence, 
O pure one; and, manifestly embellished thereby, it doth glorify thee with love, 
hymning thy birthgiving.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
With thy words of truth thou didst break the chains of the rhetors, O Porphyrius, 
in all ways establishing the dominion of faith.  
Having drawn forth the Comforter on earth, O venerable one, thou didst pour 
forth bountiful rivers of the teachings of piety, O Porphyrius.  
Having dried up the torrents of godlessness with the fire of thy words, O 
Porphyrius, thou didst enlighten mankind with proclamations of piety.  
Theotokion: Strengthened by thee, O most pure one, with the power of the Spirit 
we vanquish the adverse foes of the truth of Christ.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
O Porphyrius, we all truly have thee as a noetic image of the virtues, ever shining 
forth with divine deeds; wherefore, we honor thee.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Robed in the power of the Comforter as are those who behold the Word face to 
face, thou hast been shown to be invincible to the foes, driving away and cutting 
down their impiety.  
Renewing mankind by the water of baptism and adoption, thou didst lead them 
forth as children of the Creator, presenting them pure and immaculate, O Porphyrius.  
Theotokion: Mindful of thy divine mysteries and ineffable glory, which 
transcendeth all telling, we who boast in thee, O most pure one, unceasingly glorify 
thee as the true Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the Highest ...”:  
Adorned with thy most sacred ways, * thou wast resplendent in the vesture of the 
priesthood, * O all-blessed, divinely wise Porphyrius; * and thou dost spread beauty 
by thine exalted healings, ** praying unceasingly on our behalf.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
The Church of Christ, assailed by contrary winds and assaults, O father, was firmly 
established by thee; and it chanted unto Him: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, O Lord!  
With valor didst thou triumph over the assemblies of heretics, O wise father, 
arrayed in the armor of the Word, and crying out to Christ in thanksgiving: Blessed 
art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Thou didst enter into the paradise of noetic virtues, where thou didst pluck the 
comely flowers of truth, shedding a sweet fragrance throughout all the world, O 
father Porphyrius.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, the mighty Word of God, Who was born of thee, hath 
given thee unto all the weak as their strength and dominion, wherefore they cry aloud: 
Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
With thy words thou didst arm and firmly establish the Church of Christ, O wise 
one. Wherefore, it doth ever triumph over the invasion of heresies and chant 
victoriously unto Christ, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
With thy mind continually dwelling on Heaven, O Porphyrius, thou didst ineffably 
obtain divine release from the senses, and beholding the mysteries of Christ with 
faith, thou didst cry out to Him: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 By thy prayers, O Porphyrius, didst thou stop the mouths of the noetic lions that 
wickedly vented blasphemies; and with the mighty darts of thy divine words thou 
didst crush their jaws, earnestly crying out to Him that made thee strong: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: He that sitteth upon the throne of the Father’s glory, His Son and 
Word, Who was born of thee in the flesh, O pure one, hath made thee a divine 
chariot and a most glorious throne, O thou who alone art hymned by all mortals as 
their Sovereign Lady.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
As precious gifts thou didst bring to the bountiful Master thy God-pleasing virtues, 
and those who have been delivered from heresy by thee, magnifying the Creator of 
all, O venerable father.  
With the showers of thy tears thou didst quench the flame of the passions; and 
serving the Creator with dispassion, thou hast been granted greater glories, O 
Porphyrius, ever hymning and magnifying Him.  
Joining chorus with the angels, saints and the venerable on High, O father 
Porphyrius, entreat the Lord and Benefactor on behalf of those who hymn and praise 
thee with faith.  
Theotokion: The Master, Who for our salvation became a man, hath given thee, O 
pure one, as a mediator, protection and healing unto all who glorify thee with faith 
and magnify Him with love.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Porphyrius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Adorned with thy most sacred ways, * thou wast resplendent in the vesture of the 
priesthood, * O all-blessed, divinely wise Porphyrius; * and thou dost spread beauty 
by thine exalted healings, ** praying unceasingly on our behalf.  
 
