--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 20th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER LEO, BISHOP OF CATANIA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O Lord, even though at the tribunal ...”: 
O Lord, * Thou didst show forth the holy hierarch in the world * as a successor to 
the apostles * in word and deed, * and a preacher of correct doctrine; * wherefore, 
thou hast made him an instructor of hierarchs * and a partaker ** of Thine incorrupt 
glory.  
Holding thee as a living pillar * and an expounder of the right teachings of the 
Word, O Leo, * the Church of Christ * ever remaineth unshaken, * beholding the 
truth thereof, * and glorifying the Lord, * the Master of all, ** Who hath glorified 
thee.  
O Lord, * Thou, the Word, didst show the holy hierarch * to be a sharp sword * 
against the impious, * and for Thine Orthodox Faith, * cutting down the teachings of 
falsehood, * and increasing piety in the world, ** O Master.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Behold the groaning * of my contrite heart, * O Bride of God, * and accept, and 
reject not, the lifting up of my hands, * O pure and all-immaculate Virgin Mary, * as 
thou art full of love for mankind; * that I may hymn and magnify thee ** who hast 
exalted our race.  
Or this Stavrotheotokion, in the same in Tone VIII: 
Stavrotheotokion: When the most pure one * beheld Thee led to the slaughter, * 
following Thee with tears she cried aloud: * Whither hast Thou gone, O my Son,? * I 
can no longer bear not beholding Thee ** O my abundantly merciful Jesus.’ 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Leo our father, ** entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor Leo, the wellspring of miracles”, the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Having acquired thee as a divine beacon of the light of Christ, O wise Leo, the 
Church is richly illumined with the radiance of thy virtues and miracles.  
From thy childhood thou didst offer thyself to the Master of all, and by mortifying 
the passions thou didst become a living sacrifice, slaying thyself in an un-bloody 
manner, O blessed one.  
Thy life shineth forth, adorned with the virtues and ornamented with the radiance 
of miracles, O God-bearer, revealing thee to all.  
Theotokion: O undefiled Maiden, thou wast a divine temple for Him Who made 
His abode in thee in a manner past understanding, and Who hath driven deception 
from the souls of men.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Preserving the saving and pious doctrines of Orthodoxy inviolate, O father, thou 
didst pasture thy flock in life-bearing meadows, leading them to the fold of heaven.  
Having ascended to the heights of the virtues, O venerable one, thou didst receive 
sacred anointing, and with most exalted conciliar sessions didst praise the Most High, 
serving Him with grace, like an angel, O all-wise one.  
Having endured trials for the sake of Christ, O venerable one, through deification 
thou didst become immortal, pouring forth goodly fragrant myrrh unceasingly, and 
sanctifying those who have recourse to thee with faith.  
Theotokion: O tongs of the divine and luminous Ember, O bush which was not 
consumed by the fire of the Godhead: burn up all my flammable passions, and rescue 
me from everlasting fire.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
In the splendors of thy virtues, thou didst shine forth like a great sun upon the 
universe, enlightening the assemblies of the faithful with the brilliance of miracles, 
and dispelling the darkness of the passions. O venerable Leo, entreat Christ God, that 
He grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence, * when taking flesh in thy 
womb, * He remained God though He had became a man; * and even after thy 
birthgiving, preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, * as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. * Him do thou earnestly beseech, ** that He grant us great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Having cultivated the noetic field of thy mind, thou didst reap the grains of godly 
virtues and healings an hundredfold, O most noetically rich hierarch.  
Thy holy shrine continually poureth forth holy myrrh, sanctifying the souls of 
those who have recourse to thee with faith, O glorious one.  
O holy hierarch, thou wast the cleansing of illnesses, the expeller of evil demons, 
and the refuge of those of faith.  
Theotokion: He Who is utterly Infinite was contained within thy womb, O most 
pure one, in His goodness saving me who am sunk in my many sins.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Gazing with a most pure mind upon the Mind which is the Cause of all, thou didst 
receive from Him the radiance of gifts, the sacred effulgence of healings, whereby 
thou dost dispel the darkness of the passions, O divinely inspired one.  
He who with demonic deceptions deceiveth all who believe in Christ didst thou 
justly commit to a fiery judgment, O blessed one, and as a true and saving shepherd 
thou didst deliver souls from his most pernicious harm.  
When the fire was kindled, thou didst stand in its midst unharmed, O most 
glorious one; for the divine dew of the Holy Spirit surrounded thee as an initiate of 
the sacred mysteries, a servant of the glory of God, a partaker of the radiant splendor 
of the Most High.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: Of old, perceiving the ineffable depth of the mystery of thy precious 
birthgiving, O divinely joyous one, the honored prophets proclaimed it beforehand, 
using the divers images granted them.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Through thy supplications the blind recovered their sight, O divinely wise father; 
for, having Christ working within thee, and the eyes of thy soul ever directed toward 
Him, thou didst richly receive that for which thou didst ask.  
Thou didst strike the emperor with awe, O wondrous one, when, entering his 
palace, thou didst bear burning embers in thy robe; for God glorified thee who, by 
thy life, didst glorify Him, O Leo. 
The shrine of thy relics emitteth sweet fragrance and ever poureth forth a divine 
oil, like a pure and fragrant wellspring, O all-blessed one. And thereby sickness is 
driven from the faithful and health given to those in need.  
Theotokion: Sanctify my soul, O Virgin who hast given birth to the holy Word, 
our One God, Who truly resteth most purely in the saints; and, as thou art merciful, 
bestow upon me a shower of compunction, O all-immaculate one.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “As first-fruits ...”: 
The Church hath thee, O all-blessed one, as a great beacon shining more brightly 
than the sun. * By thy supplications preserve it invincible, unshaken and unharmed by 
any heresy, ** in that thou art ever-memorable.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Emulating, while in the flesh, the ranks of the divine incorporeal beings, O 
divinely wise one, thou didst serve God unceasingly, chanting: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
The ears of the deaf didst thou open by thy divine supplications, O all-blessed one; 
and manifestly enabling the lame to walk aright, thou didst cry aloud: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
At the Master’s divine behest thou didst remain unconsumed upon entering into 
the midst of the fire; and at thy prayer, Heliodorus, who was not close to it, was con-
sumed by righteous judgment.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: The fire of the Godhead did not consume thy womb, O Virgin 
Mother, but became incarnate from thee, bedewing the ends of the earth with divine 
splendors. Wherefore, we chant to thee.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Grace was poured forth into thine ears, O father Leo, initiate of the divine 
mysteries; wherefore, God anointed thee hierarch for the people who cried aloud: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thou wast well-pleasing to the all-eternal King, O all-blessed father Leo, and 
standing before the earthly king bearing burning embers, thou didst astonish his mind 
with exceedingly glorious miracles.  
Planted like a fruitful olive-tree in the house of the Lord, O father, thou bringest 
forth as fruit, even after thy demise, a divine oil from thy godly body, driving every 
illness from the faithful who with love have recourse to thee, O wise one.  
Theotokion: He Who bringeth about all blessings by His will, O all-immaculate 
one, desiring to make His abode within thy womb, appeared in the flesh and deified 
me, who before, became corrupt through the evil counsel of the serpent.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: All are awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * for the 
Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man in the 
Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure Theotokos. 
Rejoicing with godly voices we call thee blessed, who lived honorably and as-
cended to the heavens, by thy supplications do thou save us from sufferings, 
tribulations and evil circumstances, O right-wondrous holy hierarch and pastor.  
As a branch of the true Vine, O father, thou didst put forth the grapes of the 
virtues, which pour forth the sweetness of miracles; and drinking thereof with faith, 
those who ever praise thee receive health and joy, O Leo most wise.  
Thy body was the temple of the holy and adored Spirit, O father Leo, and now 
lieth within the divine temple which thou didst erect to His glory in honor of the 
martyr Lucia, pouring forth therefrom rivers of miracles upon us who venerate thee 
with faith.  
Ever illumining the ends of the earth with rays of the virtues, like a most radiant 
sun, thou hast now passed over to the never-waning Light. Wherefore, O Leo, most 
noetically rich hierarch, from the most cruel darkness deliver those who celebrate thy 
radiant memory.  
Theotokion: I fear Thy Second Coming, O only King, and, having sinned 
immeasurably before Thee, I am afraid and tremble in mind; but as Thou art good, 
turn and save me, O Jesus, through the prayers of her who gave birth to Thee.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Leo our father, ** entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
The Church hath thee, O all-blessed one, as a great beacon shining more brightly 
than the sun. * By thy supplications preserve it invincible, unshaken and unharmed by 
any heresy, ** in that thou art ever-memorable.  
 
 
