--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 27th DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER  
PROCOPIUS THE DECAPOLITE & CONFESSOR 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable confessor, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
With most pious thought, * with purity and holiness of mind, * by restraining the 
passions, * and by observing * the commandments of Christ and piety, * O most 
blessed and noetically rich confessor, * thou didst strive to preserve the dignity * of 
the image which was, in the beginning, ** fashioned according to the image and 
likeness of God.  
Having first undertaken ascetic endeavor, * and followed it afterwards with 
suffering * in a divinely wise manner, * thou wast in both well pleasing unto the 
Creator, * Who alone requireth of us * purity and nobility of soul. * And glorifying 
His advent in the flesh, * thou didst venerate the holy image ** of His divine 
manhood.  
Denouncing, O venerable one, * those who wickedly rejected * the incarnation of 
the Word, * thou didst perfect the truth, * upholding it by enduring wounds * and all 
manner of afflictions, * by thy fetters and imprisonment; * wherefore, thou didst 
become an heir to the kingdom of Christ, ** ineffable joy and everlasting radiance.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
As thy prayer to the Lord is untiring * and thine entreaty abiding, * O most pure 
one, * quell thou the assaults * and still the waves of my wretched soul; * calm my 
heart, which is in suffering, * I beseech thee, O Maiden, * and impart grace to my 
mind, ** that I may worthily glorify thee.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
Troparion of the venerable confessor, in Tone VIII:  
With the torrents of thy tears thou didst irrigate the desert; * by the sighs which 
arose from the depths of thy soul thou didst bring forth fruit an hundredfold; * and 
thou wast a beacon for the whole world, shining with miracles. ** O Procopius our 
father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon, the acrostic whereof is: “I rightly hymn thy struggles, O blessed one”, the 
composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI:  
ODE I 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory.  
Made steadfast by love of piety, thou didst withstand the threefold waves of the 
world by thy divine zeal, O venerable one, crying out to God a hymn of victory, for 
He is glorious.  
Thy radiant life and splendor of soul manifestly wrought within thee, O venerable 
one, an intense image of mingled piety and virtue.  
Illumined by the supra-natural and radiant teaching of Christ, thou didst cause the 
assaults of the passions to fade away by abstinence, chanting a hymn of victory unto 
the Omnipotent One.  
Theotokion: Having conceived in a divine manner the incarnate Word Who before 
was incorporeal, O most pure one, in a manner transcending nature thou hast given 
birth to Him for us, remaining a Virgin even after giving birth.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Thy God-pleasing soul, aflame with zeal on account of thy faith, O blessed God-
bearer, mightily destroyed the bitter cruelty and rage of the iniquitous ones.  
Stained by thy blood, thou didst emulate the sufferings of the martyrs, O thrice-
blessed Procopius, and with a manly soul thou didst patiently endure wounding at the 
hands of the impious.  
Thou didst wisely undertake a twofold struggle, O venerable one: denouncing 
heresies and manfully enduring the assaults of the lions with divine wisdom, O 
divinely wise Procopius.  
Theotokion: The Wisdom and Word of the Father, Who though existing from 
before all time, ineffably assumed flesh in the latter days, from a Mother who knew 
not a man, rendering her the Theotokos.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
Adorned with the beauties of abstinence, thou didst adorn thy soul with the blood 
of martyrdom, shining more brightly than the sun, O wondrous and venerable Pro-
copius.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O ye faithful, let us bless the Theotokos, * our helper, the fervent aid of those 
amid misfortune, ** by whom we have been delivered from foreign bondage.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding thy Son lifted up upon the Tree, O most pure one, 
with thy maternal womb wounded with pain, thou didst piteously cry aloud: “Woe is 
me! How is it that Thou hast set, O my timeless Light?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
O venerable Procopius, by setting fire to thy heart with torrents of tears, O blessed 
and venerable one, thou didst cultivate the seed of the virtues with pure thought.  
Thou didst subject earthly wisdom to the divine, O father, taking up a life of 
fasting and joining the choirs of the martyrs, O all-blessed one.  
As a divine martyr most true in piety, thou didst denounce the insanity of the here-
tics, manfully disdaining the cruelty of the ungodly.  
Theotokion: Having conceived the Creator outside the laws of nature, O all-
immaculate one, thou hast given birth to Him without corruption, and hast surely 
become the true Theotokos.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
We honor thee as is meet, O father, who wast sanctified by fasting and ended thy 
life in blood; for the memory of the righteous is ever celebrated and commemorated 
with hymns of praise.  
The Lord, Who wisely transformeth all and arrangeth it for the good, as He 
desireth, through thine abstinence and the glory of thy martyrdom transformed the 
foul murder committed by the impious.  
Taking the full armor of the Cross upon thy shoulders, O father, thou didst follow 
after Christ, forgetting all that lay behind thee, intent upon the race which lay before 
thee.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, we hymn the Lord Who clothed Himself in mortal 
flesh taken from Thee, which was subject to the passions, and Who hath made it 
capable of becoming divine, through his uncommingled hypostatic union.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Passing from the glory of fasting, O ever-memorable one, thou didst truly hasten 
to the glory and honor of martyrdom, clad in a robe of purple dyed in thine own 
blood.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Having overcome the transitory nature of things by thy soul and divinely wise 
thought, O all-blessed one, thou didst piously take wing to that which hath ever 
existed, and is good and hath no end.  
Beholding thee enriched with mighty abstinence and meekness, Christ regarded 
thee in His love for mankind, revealing thee to be a participant in His glory, O 
passion-bearer Procopius.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Sovereign Lady, by thy mystical efforts heal the 
grievous and cruel afflictions of my soul, applying the sufferings of thy Son as true 
medicines.  
Kontakion of the venerable confessor, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
The Church, possessing thee today * as a morning star, * dispelleth all the darkness 
of heresy, * honoring thee, O most glorious Procopius, ** initiate of the heavenly 
mysteries.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
As thy life was most radiant with fasting, O divinely wise one, so was thy suffering 
shown to be steadfast; for thou didst glorify Christ, crying aloud: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Girded about with the purity of chastity, O wondrous father, by thy courage under 
torture, and by grace, thou didst receive a splendid crown, crying aloud: O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The iniquitous ones, who do not venerate Thy most pure image, O Savior, 
wounded Thy servant, cruelly lacerating him, as he hymned Thee, saying: O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: We all call thee blessed, O all-immaculate one, gladdened by thy 
birthgiving; for now delivered thereby from the corruption of the flesh, we cry out to 
Him: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Shown even before thy death to be free from corruption, O venerable one, thou 
didst depart from hence to life incorruptible, splendidly accepting death as a stairway, 
O divinely wise Procopius.  
Thou wast shown to be full of the radiance of grace and didst depart to the never-
waning light, O father, laying aside every material desire. Wherefore, we honor thee, 
O divinely wise Procopius.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Armed with the power of the divine Spirit, thou didst vanquish the hosts of the 
spirits of wickedness. Wherefore, the gates of heaven were opened to thee, O blessed 
one, who chantest unto Christ throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady who alone art blessed of God, as thou didst 
foretell, all generations bless thee as the true and most pure Theotokos, whom we 
supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Willing to suffer under the law, O martyr, by abstinence thou didst mortify the 
assaults of the passions and the uprisings of the flesh, O favorite of Christ; wherefore, 
with the armies of the bodiless hosts, thou hast now found the immortal delight of 
dispassion.  
Standing in splendor before the righteous Judge as a victor, O Procopius, having 
received an imperishable crown, pray thou earnestly on behalf of those who celebrate 
thy sacred memory and the divine feast of thy repose.  
Illumined now by the threefold radiance which proceedeth ineffably from the one 
Godhead, thou hast been deemed worthy of a rich inheritance and ultimate joy, 
rejoicing with the heavenly armies, O father Procopius.  
Theotokion: The incorrupt Word of God, assuming a corruptible form, hath, by 
the good pleasure of the Father, clad mankind in incorruption, having made His 
abode within thee, the divinely joyous one. Wherefore, O most pure one, with the 
armies of heaven we magnify thee.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable confessor, in Tone VIII:  
With the torrents of thy tears thou didst irrigate the desert; * by the sighs which 
arose from the depths of thy soul thou didst bring forth fruit an hundredfold; * and 
thou wast a beacon for the whole world, shining with miracles. ** O Procopius our 
father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable confessor, in Tone IV: 
The Church, possessing thee today * as a morning star, * dispelleth all the darkness 
of heresy, * honoring thee, O most glorious Procopius, ** initiate of the heavenly 
mysteries.  
