--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 23rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR POLYCARP, BISHOP OF 
SMYRNA  
AT VESPERS:  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of Heaven ...”: 
While living on earth thou wast joined to the incorporeal ones, * and with them 
dost thou unceasingly minister unto the Trinity, * O divinely blessed father. * 
Wherefore, ever dwelling in the Highest * as a heavenly man, thou dost initiate those 
who are on earth ** into the mysteries of God.  
O divinely blessed one, * thou wast shown to be a branch * of the activity of 
Christ planted by God, * putting forth grapes of the divine Word, * whence we 
faithfully draw forth precious sweetness; ** and with our whole heart we offer thy 
teaching to all the world.  
Illumined with divine splendor, * thy body consumed by material fire, * thou didst 
pass over to the immaterial radiance, O father. * Grant us forgiveness by thy prayers, 
* bringing light to the gloomy night of the passions of our souls, ** O wise one.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone I, in the same melody:  
Tempest-tossed on the abyss of transgressions, * fleeing to the calm haven * of thy 
most pure supplication, * I cry out to thee, O Birthgiver of God: * Save me, O all-
immaculate one, ** extending thy mighty right hand unto thy servant!  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb * lifted up upon the Cross, * the 
immaculate Virgin cried aloud, weeping: * “O my Child most sweet, what is this new 
and most glorious sight? * How is it that Thou Who holdest all things in Thy hand ** 
hast been nailed to the Tree in the flesh?”  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Polycarp, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS:  
The canon to the holy hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise the divine 
Polycarp in hymns”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone II:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Radiant with the effulgence of Christ and filled with His enlightenment, O divinely 
wise father, illumine my darkened soul by thy prayers.  
The enlightenment of the preaching of salvation shone forth with rays upon all, 
illumining thy pure heart like a flawless mirror, O father.  
Thou wast an inscription of the new Law, O father, written not with ink, but by 
the Spirit of God, containing the divine Gospel of grace.  
Theotokion: Knowing God Who was incarnate of thee without carnal desire, and 
Who was before creation and all ages, we truly confess thee to be the Theotokos.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Thou wast a fruitful olive tree, as the Psalm doth say, O divinely revealed Polycarp, 
bringing forth the gladness of preaching in the house of thy Lord.  
Thou didst diligently direct thy mind according to the command of the Savior, O 
divinely blessed one, and wast an eminent pastor of His Church as was meet.  
In torment thou didst offer thyself wholly unto Christ as a living sacrifice, having 
suffered previously through the witness of thy conscience and by fasting, O all-
blessed one.  
Theotokion: Thou didst shake off the dust of our mortality, truly giving birth unto 
immortality, and by thy birthgiving hast woven for us garments of incorruption, O 
Virgin.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having truly cultivated the vine of grace in thy soul, O wise father, thou didst pour 
forth the word of faith like wine, making glad the thoughts of all the faithful, and 
revealing thyself to be an impassible abyss of miracles. Wherefore, thou art the 
adornment of martyrs, O Polycarp, who ended thy life by fire and hast been deemed 
worthy of everlasting light. Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness unto those 
who celebrate thy holy memory with love.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Having fallen with wicked thoughts, * I have sunk into the abyss of sin, * and, 
groaning, I cry to thee with all my heart, O all-pure one: * Show forth upon me the 
wonder of thy rich mercy, * the unfathomable depth of thy tender compassion * and 
the immeasurable wealth of thy compassions, * and grant me repentance and 
forgiveness of transgressions, * that I may cry unto thee with love: * Entreat Christ 
God, that He grant remission of sins unto me, ** for thee do I, thy servant, have as 
my hope.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
O father Polycarp, thou hast been shown to be a most fertile and right fruitful 
grove of the Master.  
As a perfect whole-burnt offering and a pure sacrifice thou didst offer thyself to 
the Savior of all, O father Polycarp.  
We hymn the mighty endurance of thy soul and the valor of thy struggles, O 
glorious one.  
Theotokion: Illumine with thy light my gloom-enshrouded soul, O pure one who 
hast given birth to the everlasting Light.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Thy mind, enlightened with spiritual radiance and mystically aflame with fire, O 
venerable one, didst clearly learn by the fire of thine end, O divinely wise one.  
Thou didst receive the stream of life as from a torrent of nourishment, O most 
wise one, being taught by the beloved disciple who drew it forth from the deep of 
wisdom.  
Riches and radiant glory, length of days and life incorruptible hath Christ, the true 
Wisdom, given thee, O father, as one greatly beloved of Him.  
Theotokion: The Ancient of Days descended upon thy sanctified womb like dew 
upon the fleece, O most pure one, from whom the Lover of mankind hath appeared 
as a new Adam.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Having died to the whole world, O divinely eloquent one, and remaining alive to 
Christ alone, thou hast passed on to Him, receiving incorruption of life.  
Walking nobly, O blessed one, and showing thyself to be a child of the Light and 
of peace, thou didst recognize Marcian as the first-born of the darkness of night and 
an adversary.  
Taught by thy words, O father, we conquer every vile heresy and the wicked 
assemblies of the impious who would introduce two principles.  
Theotokion: Having conceived the pure Lamb that taketh away the sin of the 
world, O all-immaculate one, beseech Him to grant forgiveness of sins unto thy 
servants.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of the angels ...”: 
Offering sacrifices of the virtues unto the Lord as spiritual fruits, * O wise 
Polycarp, * thou wast therefore glorified by God as a worthy hierarch. * Wherefore, 
enlightened today by thy words, * we hymn thy praiseworthy memory, ** glorifying 
the Lord.  
Ikos: Having drawn forth from the goodness of wisdom, O father, thou didst fill 
thy flock with divine knowledge; and shining forth with the radiance of the three-fold 
Sun of the all-holy and ineffable Godhead thou didst teach the one glory, the one 
Godhead, the un-begotteness of the Father, the generation of the Son, and the 
procession of the Spirit; whereby the godlessness of idolatry was hewn down at its 
root, bringing the souls of the faithful to God as mature fruits, for in His name we 
have been baptized and in Him we believe, glorifying the Lord.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Burning with steadfast thought, thou didst pass the flame, O glorious one, as the 
three youths passed through the furnace bedewed by the immaterial fire; and 
remaining unconsumed, thou didst cry aloud in the midst of the fire: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Blessed art thou, and good it is for thee who hast made thine abode amidst the 
mansions of the righteous, where the armies of martyrs, and the choirs of the wise 
apostles cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Souls that were previously barren hast thou brought to Christ as most fruitful, 
having laid them low with the cultivation of the Spirit and set comely seed therein, 
instructing them to chant with thee: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O all-pure Virgin Mother, thou alone hast been shown to be the 
unwedded Mother of God Who hast wrought all things in wisdom. Wherefore, 
piously crying out to thee, O all-immaculate one, we chant: Blessed art thou who hast 
given birth to God in the flesh!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Celebrating the mysteries of Christ, O glorious one, thou didst offer thyself unto 
God as a rational sheep, an acceptable and right pleasing and rich sacrifice, O thrice-
blessed Polycarp.  
In thine old age thou didst show forth a youthful and most profound courage. 
And by the power of the Cross thou didst raise thyself up to divine struggles, O 
venerable and divinely wise one, the glory of Christ’s hieromartyrs.  
Made steadfast by the Cross and worthily vested in hierarchical beauty, O father, 
thou didst enter the Church of God with thy blood, to appear before Christ the Chief 
Shepherd.  
Slain for Christ like a renowned ram, O thou who hast been revealed to be sacred, 
thou didst show thyself to be an emulator of His sufferings and hast become a 
partaker of His glory and a co-heir to His Kingdom.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Virgin, pure Birthgiver of God, be thou to me, who 
am lost in the wilderness of life, a luminous pillar of fire and a cloud of light guiding 
me to the heavenly inheritance.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Shining forth, thy radiant memory enlighteneth the souls of those who piously 
celebrate it, O wondrous father; making them partakers of the effulgence of God. 
And with hymns, O divinely wise one, we bless it as is meet.  
Standing before the throne of the Master with the choirs of the holy angels on 
High, entreat Him, that we may attain unto His saving Passion and Resurrection, 
radiantly perfecting the divers forms of the virtues.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Knowing thee, O father, to be a crown-bearer who hath received the trophy of 
honor from the right hand of God, and who hast finished thy course, filled with light, 
we earnestly set thee before Christ as an intercessor.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, with hymns we the faithful with oneness of mind magnify 
thee as the Theotokos, the Mother of the Word, as a mediator of everlasting and 
divine life, in that thou hast shone forth upon us the Sun of righteousness.  
 
Exapostilarion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us ...”:  
Being a disciple of the beloved disciple, O Polycarp, thou didst bring to the Lord 
much fruit of the faithful. And thou didst offer thyself as a sacrifice on behalf of thy 
flock. Pray thou now for us all.  
Theotokion: O God, send down Thy compassions upon Thy people and Thy 
flock, through the prayers of Thy most pure Mother and of all thy saints; and grant 
Thy great mercy unto us all.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Polycarp, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Offering sacrifices of the virtues unto the Lord as spiritual fruits, * O wise 
Polycarp, * thou wast therefore glorified by God as a worthy hierarch. * Wherefore, 
enlightened today by thy words, * we hymn thy praiseworthy memory, ** glorifying 
the Lord.  
 
