--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 21st DAY OF THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER TIMOTHY OF SYMBOLA IN 
BITHYNIA  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS EUSTACE, 
ARCHBISHOP OF ANTIOCH  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII, 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O divinely wise father Timothy, * by great, abstinence * and frequent prayer * thou 
didst utterly destroy * the movements of the passions; * and receiving the grace of 
dispassion, * thou wast shown to be a receptacle of the divine Spirit. * Wherefore, as 
alive even after death, O divinely blessed one, ** thou dost ever drive away evil 
spirits.  
O divinely wise father Timothy, * thou wast a true emulator of Abraham, * 
everywhere healing * those who have recourse unto thee. * In thy pangs thou didst 
acquire the strength of Job; * and, possessing the meekness of David, * on earth thou 
didst live a life equal to that of the angels, * receiving thine ultimate desire, ** and 
praying on behalf of us all.  
O divinely wise father Timothy, * a model of chastity, an example of abstinence, * 
an image of piety, * and a wellspring of compunction, * an unshakable foundation of 
Orthodoxy, * an ever-flowing stream of healings, * a never-setting sun, a child of 
divine grace, * and the adornment of monastics wast thou shown to be, ** O most 
honored one.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in the same Tone,  
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you ...”:  
Possessed of a heavenly life, * thou wast truly ordained by God * to serve as a 
priest, * and with a pure mind didst offer up services unto Him. * Though enduring 
misfortunes and suffering, O blessed one, * for the sake of thy divine preaching * and 
steadfast truth, * which was confirmed by thy words, ** thou didst not cease from 
denouncing the mindless ones.  
With the word of thy sacred discourse * thou didst manifestly set afire the tinder * 
of the blasphemy of the impious Arius, * who did not comprehend that the Father 
and the Son * are called equal in honor by nature, * O most sacred Eustace; * and 
thou didst enlighten the hearts of the faithful * and didst keep with truth ** those 
who with faith celebrate thy memory.  
Wielding the staff of thy words, * O most sacred shepherd, * thou didst preserve * 
the rational flock of God unharmed * from all manner of wolves. * Wherefore, the 
good Shepherd * hath led thee into the fold of heaven, * where the souls of the elect 
and righteous fathers are, ** O God-bearing and most blessed Eustace.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same tone and melody:  
Whom hast thou emulated, O wretched soul, * who in no wise dost rouse thyself 
to repentance * nor fearest the fire * which awaiteth the wicked? * Arise, and cry 
aloud, * calling upon her who alone is quick to help: * O Virgin Mother, * entreat thy 
Son and our God, ** to deliver me from the snares of the deceiver!  
Stavrotheotokion: The ewe-lamb, as she beheld the Lamb * stretched out of His 
own will upon the Tree of the Cross, * cried out maternally, * in pain with her 
weeping: * O my Son, what is this strange sight? * O Longsuffering One, how is it 
that Thou art slain, * Who, as Lord, bestoweth life upon all, * granting resurrection to 
mortals? ** I glorify Thy great condescension, O my God!  
Troparion of the holy fathers, in Tone IV:  
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
ODE I  
Canon of the venerable one, in Tone VIII  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
Ever do we praise thee, O blessed father Timothy, thou noetic star shining forth in 
the heights of abstinence, illumining the hearts of the faithful.  
Having the upright eye of thy mind directed towards God, thou didst shake off the 
sleep of despondency, O father, and wast a temple of the divine Spirit and a place of 
sanctification, O Timothy.  
Protected against the wiles of the wicked one by thy humility, O father, thou didst 
pass over unharmed and ascend unto God, delighting continually in His glory, O 
blessed Timothy.  
Theotokion: With hymns let us honor the Theotokos, the virginal maiden who, in 
a manner past all telling, without seed conceived in her womb God, the Creator of all, 
and truly gaveth birth unto Him in the flesh.  
Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone VII  
Irmos: Let us chant unto God, * Who alone helped Moses * lead Israel out of 
Egypt, * for He hath been glorified.  
With hymns let us praise the great Eustace, the summit of the fathers, who was 
invested with the grace of discourse.  
Manifest as a zealot of the Faith, O venerable one, thou didst preserve the Church 
of Christ unencumbered by capture through thy struggle against heresy.  
As the mouth of the Word, thou didst pour forth an abyss of doctrine, O 
venerable one, wherein thou didst drown the impiety of Arius.  
Theotokion: As thou hast given birth in the flesh unto the Word, the Origin of life, 
at the word of the archangel, beseech Him unceasingly, that our souls be saved.  
ODE III  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Savior Thou art my confirmation, * my refuge and power *; do Thou 
establish my wavering heart * in the fear of Thee, * for none is as holy as Thee, 
O our God.  
In having compassion upon all in thine almsgiving, thou wast another Abraham, 
receiving those who came to thee from all places, O Timothy, thereby pleasing the 
God of all. 
  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thou didst mortify thy members on earth, as the Apostle Paul instructeth, O 
father; and thou wast shown to be a partaker of the life of heaven, wherein do thou 
ever remember those who honor thee.  
The sun of the orient of thy works was never-setting, O father, ever illumining the 
ends of the earth with the rays of thy struggles, and driving away the darkness of the 
demons.  
Theotokion: O holy Virgin, Mother of the King of kings, burst the bonds of my 
transgressions, and guide me to the paths of repentance by thy prayers.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: My heart hath been established in the Lord; * my horn hath been 
exalted in my God; * my mouth hath been enlarged over the enemy; * and I 
am gladdened in Thy salvation.  
Drawing the sword of truth, thou wast shown to be the chief commander of piety, 
stabbing the opponents of the faith, O Eustace.  
Having cultivated the Church with pangs of love, O blessed one, with the scythe 
of thy doctrine thou didst cut down all the tares at the root.  
When thou didst truly preside with glory at the Council as senior hierarch, O 
divinely blessed one, with the stones of thy words thou didst wound Arius, who is 
truly the origin of falsehood.  
Theotokion: Thou wast born in a manner past telling, and hast appeared as was 
well-pleasing unto Thee, O our Savior; and Thou hast renewed the world, O Lord.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII,  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having learned the Word, Who for our sake was born of the Virgin without 
corruption, thou didst preach His divinity to the godless, and didst lead many to God 
through faith by many manifestations of sacred miracles. Wherefore, O God-bearer, 
celebrating thy holy memory we illumine our souls with thy grace and cry out to thee 
together: O God-bearing Timothy, entreat Christ God to grant forgiveness of sins 
unto those who honor thy holy memory with love!  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone III,  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
Thou didst preach the Word, Who is consubstantial with the Father and the Spirit, 
O father Eustace, and didst soundly strangle with the cords of thy teachings the 
mindless Arius, who blasphemed against sound doctrine. Wherefore, rejoicing, thou 
hast joined the choirs of the fathers, the godly teachers. With them do thou 
remember us.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
As an uncultivated vine, O Virgin, thou didst put forth a most comely Cluster, 
which poureth forth for us the wine of salvation to gladden the souls and bodies of 
all. Wherefore, blessing thee ever as the cause of good things, with the angel we cry 
out to thee: Rejoice, thou who art full of grace!  
 
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure Mother, who kneweth not wedlock, seeing Thee 
hanging dead upon the Cross, O Christ, lamenting maternally, said: “With what hath 
the iniquitous and thankless assembly of the Jews, which hath delighted in Thy many 
and great gifts, rewarded Thee, O my Son? I hymn Thy divine condescension!”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Made ever steadfast by thy prayers, O most glorious father Timothy, thou didst 
count the bows and arrows of the noetic foe to be like the darts of children.  
Bowing down with love before the image of Christ’s dispensation toward us, O 
divinely wise Timothy, thou didst endure trial of torments at the hands of those who 
rejected it.  
Thou wast an unshakable pillar, never resting in thy ceaseless glorification of God; 
remaining a partaker of the beauties thereof, O Timothy.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth on earth unto a new Child, Who was begotten 
without corruption from the Father before all ages, O pure Mother, thou restoration 
of Christians.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Thy virtue O Lord hath covered the heavens, * and Thou hast filled all 
things with Thy praise. * Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Gathering together weapons of the victory of faith, O father, thou didst fell the 
impious Arius with the darts of thy words.  
When the splendor of thy words issued forth like lightning, O most wise Eustace, 
it utterly consumed the wicked belief of Arius.  
With thy words didst thou set a fence about the Church as the vineyard of the 
Word, O most venerable one.  
Theotokion: O pure Virgin, thou hast given birth in the flesh unto the 
beginningless Word, Who was before thee and Who, through thee in a manner 
beyond telling, became incarnate.  
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE V  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Disperse, O Word, the darkness from my soul, * O Christ God, the 
Light-Giver, * Having driven out the primordial darkness of the abyss, * grant 
unto me the light of Thy commandments, * that early in the morning I may 
glorify Thee. 
Standing before the Trinity with a cleansed mind, O blessed father, and illumined 
with rays of splendor therefrom, do thou ever enlighten us who languish in darkness 
due to the passions of our souls.  
Having adorned thy flesh with abstinence and thy soul with dispassion, O wise 
one, thou wast shown to be a favorite of the King of all, manifestly receiving gifts of 
miracles from Him, O Timothy.  
The barren woman who drew nigh, asking thine aid, not with a deceitful mind, but 
with a pure heart, was revealed to be fertile by thy prayer, and cured of her 
barrenness; wherefore she hymneth Christ our God.  
Theotokion: He that dwelleth in the highest, having made His abode in thy womb, 
rendered thee more spacious than the heavens, O Mary Theotokos. In that thou art 
good, O Bride of God, cease not to entreat Him on behalf of us all.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: My soul riseth unto Thee at dawn, O God, * for Thou art light, and Thy 
commandments * have become healing for Thy servants, * O Lover of 
mankind.  
Thou hast dispelled the gloom of heresies and hast shone upon all the ends of the 
earth the rays of thy teachings, O blessed Eustace. (Twice)  
Hedged round about by the swords of thy teachings, we who stand for the divine 
faith vanquish heresies.  
Theotokion: Cease not to entreat God, Who was born of thee in the flesh, O 
Virgin, that thy servants be delivered from every evil circumstance.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Preserving well the dignity of thy virginity throughout thy whole life, thou didst 
never look upon the face of a woman, utterly repelling the harm that results 
therefrom.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thou didst make haste unto the noetic harbor without sinking beneath the waves 
of the pleasures, O all-blessed Timothy; for thou didst sail well by the force of life--
bearing winds, O all-glorious one.  
In accordance with the psalm, thou didst depart, living in the mountains and ever 
dwelling in the wilderness, O wise one, until thou didst enter into the heavenly city of 
God, O blessed Timothy.  
Theotokion: He that sitteth upon the shoulders of the cherubim in His infirmity, 
dwelt finitely in thy womb in His flesh, but not in His divinity, hath issued forth from 
thee, saving me, O all-immaculate one.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Jonah cried out from the belly of Hades: * Lead my life up from 
corruption! * And we cry aloud unto Thee: * O almighty Savior, have mercy on 
us!  
With the wind of thy divinely inspired words didst thou calm the tempest of the 
heretical, guiding the Church to the harbor of piety, O most blessed one. (Twice)  
Blameless in virtue, O venerable one, thou wast revealed to be glorious in word 
and life, O adornment of the Church of Christ.  
Theotokion: Cease not to entreat our God Who was ineffably born of thee, O 
Theotokos, that we who hymn thee may be delivered from misfortunes, O pure Ever-
virgin.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Shining forth from the east like a most radiant star, * thou hast shone the virtues 
of thy wonders upon the hearts of the faithful, ** O all-blessed wonderworker 
Timothy.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: By an angel didst Thou refresh the Children in the furnace * 
transforming the roaring flames to dew. * O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Having quenched the flame of the passions with the dew of thy tears, thou didst 
pour forth the grace of miracles, cleansing the defilement of our passions, O Timo-
thy.  
Truly hast thou received divine blessedness, and inherited the land of the meek, O 
venerable one, delighting in the joy of the elect.  
As thou hast acquired boldness, O blessed one, ask thou forgiveness of sins for 
those who celebrate the memory of thy repose with love.  
Theotokion: All we that have been delivered from the primal curse by thy most 
holy birthgiving bless thee, O undefiled Theotokos, who alone art blessed.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: In the Chaldean furnace, * the children of Abraham joined chorus with 
the Angel, saying: * Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!  
Having won the battle against the heretical with the sword of the Spirit, and 
crowned by Christ, thou hast received unfading honors.  
Thy mouth hath been shown to be a two-edged sword wielded against the 
impious, by the hand of the Word, O father, for it cut them down in battle.  
With the winnowing fan of thy teaching thou hast hurled away like chaff the errors 
of Arius, gathering the grain of faith into the granary of life, O father.  
Theotokion: We all honor the Theotokos, in that she hath given birth to the 
Savior, and we cry out with faith: Rejoice, O handmaid and Mother of Christ our 
God! 
ODE VIII  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Thou who dost cover Thy chambers on high with the waters, * Thou 
Who hast set the sands to bound the sea * and Who upholdest all things: * the 
sun doth sing Thy praises, * the moon giveth Thee glory, * every creature 
offereth a hymn unto Thee, * as their Fashioner, throughout the ages. 
Thou wast a slayer of the passions through great abstinence and the tremendous 
pangs of standing at vigil, O venerable one, ever teaching the virtues to the hearts of 
mortals by thy spiritual ascents, mounting from glory to the glory of life unending, 
and incorruption.  
O venerable one, from the depths of thy soul thou didst offer thy pure prayers 
unto the most pure God as a sacrifice, and from Him didst thou receive the divine 
gift of working miracles, expelling demons and healing men’s infirmities.  
A hater of evil, guileless, merciful and meek, adorned with righteousness, O father, 
thou wast venerable and blameless, refraining from every injustice, a pillar for 
monastics. Wherefore, we, the faithful, honor thee throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: The Word of the Father chose thee alone, the beauty of Jacob, and 
made His abode in thy womb as was His good pleasure; He that is more comely than 
all mankind passed through thee, cleansing our darkened nature, O all-pure one.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The King of glory, who is alone without beginning, * Before Whom all 
the powers of heaven stand in awe * and the hosts of angels tremble: * O ye 
priests praise and ye people * supremely exalt Him throughout the ages. 
Having parted the divine depths of the Scriptures with the staff of thy wisdom, O 
holy hierarch of Christ, thou didst lead the new Israel over to the land of Orthodoxy; 
but the Arians thou didst drown like the Egyptians.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Descending from the vision of heaven upon the Arian tower of Babel, thou didst 
confuse the tongues of the heretical, O wise Eustace, preaching the unanimous faith 
throughout the ages.  
With thy confession of the truth didst thou end thy life in the West, yet thou didst 
shine forth upon thy flock in the East, emitting the splendor of piety forever, O wise 
one.  
Theotokion: Him that created Adam in His image, Who came forth from his 
nature and saved the race of mankind, hymn, O ye priests, and exalt Him, O people, 
throughout the ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, * Who hath exalted the horn of 
salvation on our behalf * in the house of His child David, * wherein the 
Dayspring from on high hath visited us, * and guided us on the path of peace.  
Thou hast been revealed to be; A temple of sanctity, a wellspring of compunction, 
a stream of compassion, an unfathomable abyss of love, a true favorite of the Lord, a 
citizen of heaven, a kinsman of angels and a torrent of miracles, O most wise one.  
Knowing the Judge to delight in mercy, O father, thou didst not spurn the 
stranger; but, good to all, thou didst open the purse of thine alms, O venerable one, 
becoming a father to the orphaned, a defender of widows, the vesture of the naked 
and the food of the hungry.  
Thou didst leave earth for the heavens, where, whilst yet walking well in the flesh, 
thou didst live thy life, O venerable one, praying that we who faithfully honor thy 
holy memory be granted cleansing of our sins.  
Thy precious shrine ever poureth forth upon us a torrent of healings, O father, 
drying up the outpourings of all the passions, and watering every soul, bringing it to 
fruitfulness, O sacred Timothy, favorite of Christ.  
Theotokion: Following thy words, all generations call thee blessed, O blessed one; 
for thou, O most holy and pure one, didst give birth unto Him Who is truly blessed, 
Who hath truly fashioned all the blessed to serve Him.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: О ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify the Theotokos, * who in a 
manner transcending nature became a mother, * and is a Virgin by nature, * 
she alone is blessed among women! 
Squeezing the grapes of the Scriptures in the press of thy teaching, thou hast given 
the faithful to drink of the wine of the truth of Christ, which maketh our hearts glad, 
O father.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Wielding thy tongue of theology as a two-edged sword, thou hast felled the wicked 
rage of Arius, which sheddeth the blood of innocent souls, O blessed one.  
Spiritually celebrating the appointed and holy day of thy most holy memory, we 
beseech thee: Earnestly pray, O holy hierarch, that we be saved.  
Theotokion: We magnify the true and most pure Theotokos, who in her womb 
conceived the uncircumscribable Word, and hath been revealed to be the Mother of 
Life. 
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the saints, in Tone IV:  
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Kontakion of venerable father Timothy, in Tone IV: 
Shining forth from the east like a most radiant star, * thou hast shone the virtues 
of thy wonders upon the hearts of the faithful, ** O all-blessed wonderworker 
Timothy.  
 
 
