--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 4th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER, THE RIGHT-BELIEVING 
GREAT PRINCE DANIEL ALEXANDROVICH OF MOSCOW  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
Called from on high, from the dwelling-place of heaven, thou didst lift up the 
radiant eye of thy mind and, spurning the fleeting beauties of this world, thou didst 
prefer those of eternity; and taking the fire of divine love into thy heart, thou didst 
prepare thyself for the angelic life, causing thy pure mind to soar aloft unto Christ. 
Standing before Him today, O blessed Prince Daniel, pray thou that our souls be 
saved. (Twice)  
Thou didst reject kingdom, glory and thyself, and followed after Christ with joy, 
and taking the cross upon thy shoulder thou didst ascend unto Him, even to the 
eternally incorrupt glory of His kingdom. Standing today before Him, O Daniel 
favorite of Christ, pray that our souls be saved.  
The desire which thy name signifieth set thy heart on fire for the path which 
leadeth to the city of heaven, and traveling thereon to meekness and humility, in 
accordance with thy desire thou didst reach the heavenly abodes. Joining chorus there 
with the angels today, O most blessed Prince Daniel, pray thou that our souls be 
saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Thou wast a right fruitful scion of the root of Alexander, producing the fruit of 
the virtues; for in holiness, righteousness and humility, in almsgiving and purity of 
zeal, thou didst emulate thy father, and, splendidly adorned therewith, didst become a 
spacious dwelling-place of the Holy Trinity. Standing now before God with thy 
father, pray that thy city and monastery find peace, and that all the children of Russia 
may be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
No one that fleeth unto thee, O most pure Virgin Theotokos, * departeth from 
thee ashamed; * for those that asketh grace of thee, ** ever receiveth a gift for their 
profitable petition.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Thou wast shown to be * the abode of the Holy Trinity, * O blessed Daniel; * 
wherefore, hymning thee, ** we all cry out to thee: Rejoice!  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
O ye hierarchs and priests, * ye elders and youths, * leap up in splendor today, * 
and let us magnify in hymns ** the memory of the blessed one.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Let us all praise today * the boast of the princes of Russia, * the blessed Prince 
Daniel, * who by his supplications ** preserveth his homeland unharmed.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Today the temple of our God is filled with gladness, wherein the right-believing 
Prince Daniel, our great helper, doth rest in holiness in his relics, and sanctifieth all 
who with faith have recourse unto his precious shrine; and, granting healing, he 
prayeth for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign lady, * accept the supplications of thy servants, ** and deliver us from 
all want and grief. 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Illumined by divine grace, * thou didst set aside the glory of thy principality, * O 
divinely wise Prince Daniel, * and in thy heart away from this vain world * 
unwaveringly placing thine understanding upon the Creator, * thou didst shine forth 
like a star in the east of the Russian realm, * finishing the good race well by thy chaste 
and angelic life, * having kept the faith in purity. * Wherefore, even after thy repose 
God hath glorified thee with miracles, * pouring forth healing upon those who with 
faith have recourse unto thy precious shrine: * for this cause we, thy people, glorify 
thee today. * As thou hast boldness before Christ, ** pray that thy homeland be 
saved, and that our land find peace.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the venerable one: 4 in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”:  
Having put away the fleeting glory of the world, O divinely wise Daniel, illumined 
by the effulgence of the Holy Spirit thou didst cause the uprisings of the passions to 
wither away through abstinence, and taking up the cross, the light burden of the 
Gospel, and following after Christ the Master, thou didst find the ladder leading to 
heaven, where ascending thou didst reach the heavenly Jerusalem; and wast revealed 
to be a fellow heir to the kingdom of Christ, wherefore rejoicing with the angels, thou 
delightest in the divine vision of His countenance. Him do thou beseech, that He 
grant peace and great mercy to our souls.  
Having wholly set aside the rule of thy princely realm, and made steadfast by 
meekness of character, burning with a most ardent desire for God, thou didst take up 
the monastic life, O Prince Daniel, emulator of God; and having withered all carnal 
desires, thou didst reveal thyself to be a pillar of chastity; and being humble of mind, 
thou didst raise thyself up to the heavenly dwelling-place. Standing there continually 
before Christ God, pray that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.  
Having set aside all delight in earthly things for the sake of a higher delight, thou 
wast zealous for abstinence, striving to quench the flame of the passions with the 
tearful torrents of thy prayers, thou didst nurture thy soul with abstinence and fasting 
as with most nutritious food. Wherefore, having lived a blameless and righteous life, 
thou didst reach the throne of the Master; and illumined by the splendors thereof, 
entreat Christ the King, that He grant peace and great mercy to our souls.  
Having set all thy hope on the Judge of the contest and having forsaken the broad 
path of the world, thou didst tread the narrow and difficult path of the monastic life; 
and, considering purple and fine linen, royal vesture, glory and riches to be transitory 
and of no worth, thou wast deemed worthy to receive the riches of heaven and ever-
lasting glory. And abiding now in life incorruptible, beseech Him before Whom thou 
standest, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy.  
And 4 Stichera, in Tone II:  
With what divine hymns shall we praise the Great Prince Daniel, the lover of 
abstinence and fasting, the merciful ruler in governance, the protector of widows and 
orphans, the feeder of the poor, the comforter of the sorrowful and strangers, the 
champion of the Orthodox, the dispeller of enmity, the helper of the oppressed, for 
whose sake Christ hath granted the Russian land peace and great mercy?  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
With what most festive praises shall we bless the blessed Daniel, the industrious 
husbandman of the garden of Christ, the pure reflection of humility of mind, the 
adornment of monks, the joy of the venerable, converser with the angels, the fellow 
heir with the inhabitants of heaven, the glory of the Russian land, the vanquisher of 
visible foes, for whose sake Christ hath granted peace and great mercy to the Russian 
people?  
With what wreaths of praise shall we crown the most wise Daniel, the boast of the 
princes of Russia, the inexhaustible well-spring of divine healings, the pure and 
undefiled habitation of the Holy Trinity, the river of miracles which never runneth 
dry, the rule of the virtues, the emulator of the life of the bodiless ones, the citizen of 
heaven, for whose sake Christ, Who hath peace and great mercy, hath set at naught 
the hordes of the barbarians?  
With mouths giving joyful utterance let us magnify Daniel, the radiant star shining 
forth in the noetic firmament of Russia, the fervent helper of our city, the speedy aid 
of those amid tribulations, the redeemer of all who have recourse to him, the man 
invincible in battle, for whose sake Christ, casting down all the arrogance of the 
enemy, hath granted peace and great mercy to His people.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Come, ye assemblies of those who love the feasts of the Church, ye hierarchs and 
priests ordained by God, and ye monks, together with the Christ-loving multitude, 
and forming a splendid choir, let us chant the hymnody of David to the right fruitful 
offspring of Alexander, the divinely blessed Prince Daniel. For, lo! planted in the 
blessed house of his father, like a lofty palm-tree he hath flourished in the virtues, and 
even unto his day of repose, was a faithful emulator of all the works of his father. 
And joining chorus with him now in the heavens, he prayeth unceasingly, that his 
homeland and our realm be preserved, granting victory over the adversary by his 
supplications.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in the same tone:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 

--- PAGE 5 ---
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
At Litiya, these Stichera, in Tone III:  
Thou wast a divinely chosen scion of the ranks of the nobility of Russia and the 
heir to the throne of its realm, O divinely wise Prince Daniel. For, living on earth, 
thou didst lift up thy noetic eyes to God Who dwelleth in the heavens; and abiding 
now with gladness in the courts of heaven, thou dost direct the noetic eye of thy 
blessed soul upon the land of Russia, watching over thy realm, thy city and thy holy 
monastery, wherein thy much-healing holy relics are preserved by the goodness of 
Christ.  
Having adorned the divinely fashioned temple of thy blessed soul with the 
priceless pearls of comely virtues, and made the lower understanding of thy body 
subject to thy higher soul, created in the image of God, thou hast made thine abode 
in the city of Jerusalem on high, and illumined therein with beams of radiant 
everlasting blessedness, thou dost keep festival with the angels. Entreat the divine 
Trinity, O saint, that all those Orthodox who honor thy holy memory be saved, and 
that they be deemed worthy to dwell in the abodes of the righteous.  
Loving the meek and humble Christ with all thy heart, thou didst despise 
pretension; and having walked the spiritually profitable path of humility, forsaking thy 
princely authority and the worldly life full of vanity, thou didst make thine abode in a 
monastery of God-pleasing monastic struggle, O most glorious wonderworker Prince 
Daniel; and becoming a good novice therein, with god-speed thou didst enter the 
habitations of heaven by humbleness of mind. Beseech Christ Jesus our God, that we 
may also be deemed worthy thereof.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Rejoice and be glad, O mighty city of Moscow, and let thy children leap up within 
thee, keeping splendid festival in memory of the right-believing Prince Daniel who 
issued forth from the root of Alexander: the feeder of widows, orphans and the poor, 
comforter of the sorrowful, speedy helper and aid of those who have recourse unto 
him. Standing today before his precious shrine, and reverently bowing down, let us 
cry aloud: O divinely blessed Prince Daniel, by thy supplications grant peace and great 
mercy unto thy people!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to 
thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of 
our souls! 

--- PAGE 7 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
O divinely wise Prince Daniel, thou didst earnestly follow the call of Christ thy 
Master, Who said: “Follow Me!”; for, taking up thy cross, the invincible weapon, and 
manfully fortifying thyself against the baneful passions, thou didst vanquish hordes of 
enemies visible and invisible. And having dwelt here in a God-pleasing fashion, thou 
dost now rest peacefully in the heavens.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Having acquired great patience, thou didst prevail against all the perils encoun-
tered by thee from those who hated thy homeland, O right-believing Prince Daniel, 
and by mighty fasting and God-pleasing prayer thou didst receive from Christ the 
heavenly gift of healing all manner of illnesses. Wherefore, grant that we also may be 
freed from all misfortunes.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Strengthened by the Orthodox Faith, thou didst remain firm in the 
commandments of God through divinely wise understanding, O Prince Daniel 
blessed of God, and mightily following the precepts of the Lord, thou didst live a life 
of chastity in fasting, amazing thy people with God-pleasing prayers, whereby ask of 
Christ God great mercy on our behalf.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Today the joyous memorial hath shone forth upon all people, but all the more on 
the mighty city of Moscow, wherein lie the holy relics of the all-blessed Prince Daniel, 
whose precious shrine they approach with faith; and he delivereth from misfortunes, 
repelling all the assaults of the enemy, and bringing peace to his homeland, 
unceasingly entreating the supremely good God on behalf of all the Russian people, 
that delivered from all tribulations and dangers, we may all receive the kingdom of 
heaven through his prayers.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, O all-pure 
one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign Lady, ** 
the intercession, protection and salvation for our souls! 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
After the Blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Illumined by divine grace, * thou didst set aside the glory of thy principality, * O 
divinely wise Prince Daniel, * and in thy heart away from this vain world * 
unwaveringly placing thine understanding upon the Creator, * thou didst shine forth 
like a star in the east of the Russian realm, * finishing the good race well by thy chaste 
and angelic life, * having kept the faith in purity. * Wherefore, even after thy repose 
God hath glorified thee with miracles, * pouring forth healing upon those who with 
faith have recourse unto thy precious shrine: * for this cause we, thy people, glorify 
thee today. * As thou hast boldness before Christ, ** pray that thy homeland be 
saved, and that our land find peace. (Twice)  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...” (Once)  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Illumined by divine grace, * thou didst set aside the glory of thy principality, * O 
divinely wise Prince Daniel, * and in thy heart away from this vain world * 
unwaveringly placing thine understanding upon the Creator, * thou didst shine forth 
like a star in the east of the Russian realm, * finishing the good race well by thy chaste 
and angelic life, * having kept the faith in purity. * Wherefore, even after thy repose 
God hath glorified thee with miracles, * pouring forth healing upon those who with 
faith have recourse unto thy precious shrine: * for this cause we, thy people, glorify 
thee today. * As thou hast boldness before Christ, ** pray that thy homeland be 
saved, and that our land find peace. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:  
With divine wisdom thou didst desire to bear the easy yoke and light burden of the 
commandments of the Gospel, O right wondrous Prince Daniel, and, trampling 
underfoot the evil machinations of Belial with such labor and struggle, thou wast not 
weighed down by sins, but wast beautifully adorned with the virtues; wherefore, thou 
didst easily pass over to the mansions of heaven.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V:  
Thee, the Queen of heaven, the Virgin and Theotokos, do we, the generation of 
mankind, bless. Since thou alone art a mighty and fervent intercessor for the human 
race, unceasingly entreat the Word of God, to Whom thou hast given birth supra-
naturally, that He free us from the burden of grievous sin and show us forth as heirs 
to His kingdom.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Possessed of a nobility of a soul divinely created according to the image of God, O 
venerable father and wonderworker Daniel, with divine wisdom, throughout all thy 
life, thou didst unceasingly soar aloft to the divinely creative Cause of all things, the 
one Godhead in Trinity; wherefore, with all worthiness thou wast perfectly adorned 
with piety according to His likeness. Entreat our Lord and Creator, that He save us 
sinners and make us also pious according to His likeness.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
All the ranks of heaven and of mankind living on earth were astonished at thee, O 
Sovereign Lady, Mother of God, for thou wast deemed worthy to give birth in the 
flesh, in a manner transcending nature, unto the hypostatic Word of God the Father. 
Thou art like a noetic ark, containing within thee not the divinely inscribed tablets of 
Moses, but the very Hypostasis of the effulgence of the Trinity, Jesus Christ our 
Lord, the Giver of the Old and the New Covenants, by Whom thou hast passed in 
the flesh into the dwelling-places on high. Him do thou entreat, O most pure Virgin, 
that He save our souls.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We bless thee, O right-believing Prince 
Daniel, and we honor thy holy memory, for thou dost entreat Christ God on 
our behalf.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Having lived thy life in piety and holiness, thou wast shown to be the God-
pleasing ruler of the eminent city of Moscow, possessed of a throne and governing 
the realm of thine authority with the law of God; and believing in the true God, and 
defending the Holy Church and all the people from all enemies, thou wast shown to 
be invincible, O ever memorable Daniel our father. And having adorned thyself with 
the angelic life and lived angelically in thy monastery with humility of mind, thou 
didst ascend to the heights of the virtues, receiving the inheritance of the most 
beauteous paradise. Entreat Christ the Lord, that He grant forgiveness of 
transgressions unto those who honor thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, all-pure Mother, immaculate reflection of eternal 
life, the good pleasure of God the Father, dwelling-place of God the Son, activity of 
God the Holy Spirit, beautifully adorned and perfect habitation of the purity of the 
one Godhead in three Hypostases! Rejoice, key to the kingdom of heaven, who hast 
granted entry unto all who have recourse unto thee and cry: Rejoice, O Sovereign 
Lady! Grant unto all a healthful and proper sojourn and an inheritance of everlasting 
paradise with all the saints!  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 43 (MT. 11: 27-30)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: 
and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, 
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye 
who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and 
learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 
For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
O people of the reigning city of Moscow, come ye today unto the monastery of the 
great and wondrous Prince Daniel, rejoicing on the day of his celebration, and let us 
enter the temple of our God and, approaching the shrine of the relics of His favored 
one, let us form a spiritual choir and chant hymns of praise, saying: Rejoice, earthly 
angel who emulated the life of the angels by thy pure life! Rejoice, citizen of heaven 
and heir to everlasting joy, who took up the light yoke of Christ thy Master and bore 
it lightly! And now, O most blessed Prince Daniel, since thou hast received the 
reward of thy labors and entered into the joy of thy Lord, and hast boldness before 
Him, pray that all who honor thy holy memory in an Orthodox manner, abide in 
peace and receive from Christ God great mercy.  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and two canons of the venerable one, with a total of 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon I of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is “Send me Thy grace, O Christ, 
that I may glorify Thy favored one”, (the composition of Metropolitan Platon of 
Moscow), in Tone IV:  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Enlighten my mind and illumine my senses, driving the gloom of sins from my 
soul, O Christ God, that with a pure conscience I may be able to compose hymnody 
and magnify Thy favored one, the blessed Prince Daniel.  
Illumined by the radiant effulgence of the Holy Spirit, thou wast revealed to be a 
most radiant luminary of the Russian land, O divinely wise Prince Daniel; wherefore, 
standing now before the brilliant Light of the Trinity, pray for thy native land.  
From childhood thou didst dedicate thyself to God, and throughout all thy life 
thou wast a true emulator of the Gospel of Christ; wherefore, thou hast been 
recognized as an heir to the kingdom of heaven, O ever-memorable Prince Daniel.  
Theotokion: Thou alone, O Bride of God, hast been deemed worthy to bear in 
thine arms the Creator Who sitteth upon the cherubim; and by all generations thou 
hast been acknowledged as the worthy receptacle of God the Word  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Canon II of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
Always contemplating the kingdom of heaven, thou didst forsake thine earthly 
power, loving God the King of all alone. Dwelling now with Him in the mansions of 
heaven, entreat Him on behalf of those who honor thee, O right-wondrous Daniel.  
The Master chose thee from earliest infancy, sanctifying thy soul as an honorable 
and immaculate temple and preparing it to be a dwelling-place for Himself; and He 
hath glorified thee with miracles, O divinely blessed Daniel, thou favorite of Christ.  
Bereft of thy godly father as an infant upon his repose, thou wast raised and 
guided by God, revealing thyself to be a true reflection of all thy father’s works, O 
blessed one.  
Theotokion: All of us, the generations of mankind, bless thee as the Virgin who, 
alone among women, hast seedlessly given birth to God in the flesh. Setting our hope 
on thee, we are saved, and fleeing unto thee, we are freed from all tribulations.  
Katavasia: I will open my mouth ..., 
ODE III 
Canon I  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Submitting to the law of the Savior, O all-glorious Daniel, thou didst reject the 
sweet passions of the flesh, and, splendidly illumined by thy virtuous soul, thou didst 
attain unto the kingdom of heaven.  
Thou wast the great adornment of the Church, wherein thou wast shown to 
Christ, the King of glory, as an heir of the heavenly temple, O blessed one, where 
thou hast been deemed worthy to hymn the Trinity together with the angels.  
With patience thou didst wait upon the Lord, and He heard thee and hearkened to 
the voice of thy ceaseless supplications, calling thee to everlasting gladness, making 
thee an heir to paradise.  
Theotokion: O good Sovereign Lady who didst conceive the Creator of all in thy 
womb and hast given birth to the Savior and Lord for the world: Him do thou 
beseech, that He deliver us from all temptations and preserve us in purity of life.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Adorned with fruitful virtues, thou didst manifestly cut off every corrupting 
pleasure of life, unceasingly looking toward the beauty of God.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Ever arrayed in an adornment of miracles, thou wast revealed to be a 
wonderworker; wherefore, deliver us from earthly harm, O blessed one, that we may 
continually hymn God Who hath glorified thee.  
Having preserved thy chastity, and being adorned with the understanding of the 
Gospel, with humility of mind thou didst contemplate Christ; and now thou dost 
rejoice with Him eternally.  
Theotokion: O pure Virgin Mother, thou hast given birth to the unapproachable 
Light Who illumineth the whole world with the brilliant rays of His divinity.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Thou didst spring forth as an all-comely branch of a goodly root, and like a 
fragrant lily thou wast adorned with the virtues, mercifully regarding the poor and 
destitute and all the people under thy rule, O blessed and ever-memorable Prince 
Daniel; and moving obstinate heretics and enemies to love and humility, thou didst 
live a God-pleasing life in vigils and labors, receiving from thy Lord a worthy reward.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Thou wast the divine tabernacle, O only most pure Virgin Mother, who hast 
surpassed the angels in purity and conceived in thy womb the all-beginningless Word 
Who with the Father is equally without beginning, and for the whole world thou hast 
given birth to the Redeemer. With the water of thy divine supplications cleanse me 
who more than all others am defiled by carnal transgressions, granting my soul peace 
and great mercy.  
ODE IV 
Canon I  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
Having purified thy precious body by abstinence, like gold by fire, O most sacred 
one, thou didst present it to the Creator as comely; wherefore, He hath given thee an 
incorrupt robe of eternal blessedness.  
Forsaking family, riches and power for the sake of Christ, and taking up thy cross, 
thou didst struggle in a godly manner; wherefore, thou dost now rejoice with the 
choirs of the venerable.  
Emulating the divinely wise fathers in the virtues, thou didst plant the evangelical 
seed of the word of God in thy heart, producing fruit for the Master, and receiving 
from Him a worthy reward.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, thou hast given birth within time to the Timeless 
One Who became the God-man; wherefore, earnestly beseech Him, that He free 
from everlasting torment and save mankind, who was created according to His image.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: With noetic eyes the Prophet Habbakuk * foresaw Thy coming, O 
Lord; * wherefore he cried aloud: * ‘God shall come out of Theman!’ Glory to 
Thy power! * Glory to Thy condescension!  
Thou didst mortify all the deadly passions of the flesh by the grace of Christ; 
wherefore, with the life-creating applications of thy miracles enliven those who are 
suffering, delivering them from the gates of death.  
Protected by the shield of piety, O blessed one, thou wast a model of princely 
governance and the monastic life for the people of the Lord; wherefore we all bless 
thee.  
Thou wast shown to be a well-spring of miracles, O divinely blessed Prince Daniel. 
And those who with faith approach thee and bow down before thy precious shrine 
receive the healings they seek.  
Theotokion: We all know thee to be the Mother of God, the Virgin who was 
shown to be incorrupt even after giving birth; wherefore, entreat Him Who was born 
of thee, that, He deliver from everlasting corruption those who hymn thee with faith.  
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Unceasingly aflame with the fire of the love of God, O most honored one, having 
left the world thou didst elect to live as a monk in a monastery; wherefore, enriched 
by the gifts of the Holy Spirit, thou savest the people by thy working of miracles.  
Lo! thy temple is most beauteously adorned with miracles as with radiant stars, 
and, rejoicing, it is ever blessed, piously celebrating thy most honored memory, O 
great wonderworker Daniel.  
Thou dost repel the onslaught of divers periods and tribulations by thy 
supplications, O divinely blessed Prince Daniel. Ask thou forgiveness of sins for all 
who diligently celebrate thy most festive memorial.  
Theotokion: We have thee alone, after God, as the intercessor of our race; 
wherefore, we pray: since thou hast boldness before thy Son and our God, entreat 
Him, that we be saved.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Disdaining that which is transitory and corrupt, thou wast deemed worthy to 
behold that which is incorrupt. Continually glorifying Christ there, beg Him, that He 
show us forth as inheritors of His eternal glory.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Thou didst live virtuously and morally in thy principality, and emulating the life of 
the angels, making thine abode in the monastery thou didst found; and having lived a 
pure life therein, thou dwellest now in the mansions of heaven.  
God hath shown thee forth as the intercessor and helper of thy city, thy monastery 
and all the Russian people; wherefore, defending thy city, bring great peace in all 
things unto thy monastery, and mediate salvation for thy people.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate, incorrupt Maiden, Sovereign Lady Mother of 
God, mercifully regard thy servants, who with faith flee unto thy protection, and 
entreat thy Son, that He deliver us from all misfortunes.  
ODE VI 
Canon I  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Ever standing before the throne of the grace of the Trinity, rejoicing with all the 
angels and bestowing upon the world a wealth of miracles, save us all by thy 
supplications.  
The gates of Eden were opened unto thee, and the inhabitants of heaven received 
thee with great joy and gladness. Rejoicing there with them, continually visit with 
mercy all who honor thee with faith.  
Thou hast been shown to be a fervent intercessor for thy people, a helper of 
widows and orphans, the feeder of the poor, the consolation of the sorrowful, and 
the confirmation of thy city and monastery.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be the redeemer of the human race, O 
Mother of our God; wherefore, with faith we fall down before thee, praying: Entreat 
thy Son, O all-immaculate one, in that thou art good, that He deliver us from all 
misfortunes and temptations.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Thou hast been given unto Russia as the desired gift of God, resplendent with the 
rich gifts of miracles; wherefore, continually shining with the effulgence of the 
Trinity, thou hast been deemed worthy to join chorus with the multitude of the choirs 
of the saints.  
The shrine wherein thy precious and holy relics lie, O divinely blessed Prince 
Daniel, poureth forth a spring of miracles upon those who with faith approach and 
bow down before them.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Blessed is the city, and blessed is the monastery wherein thou didst deign to 
struggle in thy lifetime; and leaving thy relics behind as a priceless gift after thy 
repose, thou dost mercifully regard all who live therein.  
Theotokion: Having fallen into many misfortunes and dangers, I am beset by a 
storm of countless sins; wherefore, I flee unto thee, O Virgin, as to my fervent 
intercessor. Entreat God Who became incarnate of thee, that He grant forgiveness of 
sins unto thy servant.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Chosen by God from thy parents’ loins, * raised from infancy in the law of the 
Lord to be a perfect man, * and having received the famed city of Moscow as thine 
inheritance * by the providence of God, * thou wast revealed to be a faithful steward 
for thy pious people, * O divinely blessed Daniel. * And instructing them by thine 
example, * and continually teaching them the commandments of the Lord, * ever 
walking the path which leadeth to everlasting life, * thou didst attain unto the 
kingdom of heaven, * where, dwelling with the angelic choirs, * thou chantest unto 
God: ** Alleluia!  
Ikos: On earth thou didst reveal thyself to be an angel in the flesh, O divinely wise 
Prince Daniel, unceasingly glorifying the Creator of heaven and earth; for in every 
way thou didst strive throughout all thy life to fulfill His will, doing good unto all, 
receiving from Christ the gift of working miracles. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: 
Rejoice, for thou wast chosen by God from thine infancy; rejoice, for by Him wast 
thou called to the citizenship of heaven! Rejoice, for with piety and righteousness 
thou didst adorn the reign of thy power; rejoice, for thou didst receive from God 
victory over heretical foes and the creators of enmity! Rejoice, for, having forsaken 
this deceptive world, thou didst hasten to the calm haven of the angelic life, wherein 
thou didst provide an example of abstinence for all; rejoice, for thou wast deemed 
worthy by Christ of gifts of grace and miracles for thy great struggles! Rejoice, for in 
heaven thou dost gaze with all the saints upon the life-creating Trinity and dost chant 
unto Him continually: Alleluia!  
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Rising early unto God from thy childhood, O spiritually rich one, thou didst flee 
the darkness of the passions of the body, enriched by abstinence and the gift of 
miracles, O venerable one. And dwelling now with the heavenly choirs, thou chantest 
unto the Trinity: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
The fame of thy miracles went forth into all of Russia, O blessed one, enlightening 
thy people, who, delivered by thy wonderworking from all tribulations and perils, 
chant unto the Trinity: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 17 ---
With hymns and spiritual songs we praise thee, O blessed one, and standing round 
about thy precious and much-healing reliquary, we cry out to the Trinity Who hath 
glorified thee: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Even after birthgiving thou didst remain a Virgin, as thou wast before 
giving birth; for thou hast given birth to God the Word, Who hath delivered us by thy 
mediation. To Him, O ye faithful, let us chant unceasingly: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Canon II  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Manifestly following the steps of Thine all-blessed father Alexander, O divinely 
wise and ever-memorable Daniel, thou didst receive the principality of Moscow as 
thine inheritance; and having afterwards lived the monastic life, thou didst pass over 
to the mansions of heaven, where thou dost continually hymn the blessed God of our 
fathers. (Twice)  
With divine wisdom thou didst live in fasting and vigilant prayer, unceasingly 
glorifying thy Creator, and chanting unto Him: O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
Theotokion: As one beautiful, thou hast given birth to the Comely One Who hath 
transformed our ugliness back to its pristine form, O all-immaculate Maiden. To Him 
do we chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Canon I  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
As is meet, the reigning city of Moscow doth celebrate today on the day of thy 
repose, and as is meet, and the honored monastery which thou didst found, and 
wherein thy holy relics reside, doth bless thee, crying out to the Creator: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
In thy merciful compassion thou didst feed the poor and destitute, and hast 
received eternal mercy from Christ. And ever standing before Him, thou chantest 
with the angels: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Mindful of thy great aid and intercession, O divinely blessed Prince Daniel, and 
having assembled on the day of thy commemoration, we render praise unto thee, as 
to the common helper of us all, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Theotokion: He Who beareth all things by His almighty power was clothed in 
human flesh through thee, O all-immaculate Virgin, for the benefit of those who 
chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * ‘Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord’. 
Today the people of the great city of Moscow, hastening together to the monastery 
of the right-believing Prince Daniel on the festive day of his memorial, chant unto the 
Trinity: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
O all ye hierarchs and ye assemblies of priests, come ye to the temple of our God, 
where the relics of the Great Prince Daniel lie; and kissing them, let us cry out to the 
Creator: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Today, celebrating in God the festival of the holy Daniel, the Church of Christ 
calleth all the faithful to praise the favorite of Christ, who poureth forth healing upon 
those who approach him with faith and chant unto the Creator: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Following the words of Isaiah the prophet, we confess thee to be the 
Theotokos; for thou hast given birth to the Child who is called Emmanuel, Who is 
older than time. To Him do we cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX 
Canon I  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Hastening today to thy monastery and the temple of our God, O right-believing 
Prince Daniel, we earnestly beseech thee: Grant unto thy people peace and health and 
joyous consolation amid sorrows, that with faith we may bless thee, our speedy 
defender.  
The Lord hath shown thee to be the founder and first leader, the prince of the city 
of Moscow, O divinely blessed Prince Daniel. And praying unceasingly unto Him, 
mercifully visit thy city and monastery, and save them from all tribulations.  
Praising the memory of thy feast, all thy people, together with a multitude of 
monastic fasters, bow down before thee, and seeing the most glorious miracles given 
thee by God, ask mercy of thee. Disdain not their entreaties.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother of God, who hast given birth to Jesus Christ, the 
Light Who enlighteneth every man, we beseech thee: Deliver thy people from all 
misfortunes and perils, that we may ever magnify thee as the helper of our race.  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: O ye people, with glory let us honor the pure Theotokos, * who 
received the fire of the Divinity in her womb * yet remained unconsumed, * let 
us magnify her with hymns.  
In thy life thou didst ever magnify the one Godhead in three Hypostases, the 
divine and all-creating Cause. Wherefore, standing before Him, pray for thy people, 
that they may be saved from all misfortunes and dangers.  
Thou didst show great zeal for piety, O blessed Daniel, becoming an excellent 
example for all thy people; wherefore, standing now before the Creator of all, pray 
that all may be delivered from tribulations and trials, and that we may be shown to be 
inheritors of God’s kingdom.  
As great as thou wast in thine Orthodox principality, O divinely wise Prince 
Daniel, to the same extent thou didst humble thyself; wherefore, the supremely good 
God hath supremely exalted thee and given thee a heavenly inheritance, and the grace 
of miracles, which do thou mercifully grant unto thy faithful people, praying to the 
Lord on our behalf.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth to our Redeemer and Savior, O all-immaculate 
Virgin; wherefore, beseech Him to deliver us from our transgressions and make us 
heirs to His kingdom, that we may ever magnify thee, our intercessor.  
Exapostilarion in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Illumined by the light of the deifying and most divine Trinity, thou wast revealed 
to all Russia as a light shining with the goodly radiance of the grace of Jesus Christ, O 
right noble Prince Daniel. Wherefore, entreat the life-creating Trinity that we may be 
illumined with the most divine light, that inheriting everlasting joy with thee, we may 
hymn God Who hath glorified thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
All our hope of salvation do we place in thee, O Mother of God who knewest not 
wedlock, and we ever invoke thine aid: Save us from the assaults of the enemy and 
from grief, loosing the sinful bonds of our evils, and snatch us from ever lasting fire, 
that we may ever magnify thee, the intercessor of our race.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
O Christ God, thou hast given the godly Daniel to the land of Russia as a most 
glorious wonderworker, a speedy aid for all amid tribulations, a helper of widows and 
orphans, a liberator of captives and feeder of the poor, a splendidly radiant luminary, 
who enlighteneth the whole Russian land delivering his people from all misfortunes. 
By his prayers grant confirmation unto his city and monastery, and great mercy to 
Thy people.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
O Christ God, Thou hast given the blessed Daniel, Thy favored one, as an 
unshakable pillar, a revealer of piety, a dispeller of ungodliness and enmity, the 
confirmation of the Orthodox Faith, a mighty bulwark of chastity, a pure reflection of 
the angelic life, an emulator of the purity of the incorporeal beings, and instructor of 
piety. By his supplications preserve Thou his city and monastery unharmed, and grant 
great mercy to Thy people.  
O Christ God, Thou hast given the all-blessed Daniel to Thy far-famed city of 
Moscow as a mighty defender, the boast and confirmation of princes, a most glorious 
victor over enemies, the invincible champion of Christians, who preserveth his 
homeland in peace, the common intercessor and helper of all. By his supplications 
grant victory over the enemy, and send down great mercy upon Thy people.  
O Christ God, Thou hast given the most praised Prince Daniel as an 
unfathomable abyss of miracles to all Thine Orthodox peoples, and a well-spring of 
healings unto all who approach him, an intercessor for all the sorrowful, a most 
wondrous physician for the sick, a comfort for those in sorrow and grief and a hope 
unashamed for the despairing. By his prayers set at naught all the arrogance of the 
enemy, and grant great mercy to Thy people.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O people of Moscow, come ye today and let us praise the original founder of your 
city and its first leader, the right-wondrous Prince Daniel Come ye, and let us clap our 
hands in psalmody, celebrating his spiritual festival today and glorifying him as our 
wondrous helper! Come, let us fall down before his precious reliquary, kissing his 
much-healing relics; and reverently rendering honor, let us cry out to him, saying: 
Rejoice, thou mighty confirmation of all thy people and champion of all Christians! 
Pray thou unceasingly to Christ for them, that He grant them peace and great mercy!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: * Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from Ode III of Canon I of the venerable one; 
and 4 from Ode VI of Canon II.  
Submitting to the law of the Savior, O all-glorious Daniel, thou didst reject the 
sweet passions of the flesh, and, splendidly illumined by thy virtuous soul, thou didst 
attain unto the kingdom of heaven. (Twice) 
Thou wast the great adornment of the Church, wherein thou wast shown to 
Christ, the King of glory, as an heir of the heavenly temple, O blessed one, where 
thou hast been deemed worthy to hymn the Trinity together with the angels.  
With patience thou didst wait upon the Lord, and He heard thee and hearkened to 
the voice of thy ceaseless supplications, calling thee to everlasting gladness, making 
thee an heir to paradise.  
Thou hast been given unto Russia as the desired gift of God, resplendent with the 
rich gifts of miracles; wherefore, continually shining with the effulgence of the 
Trinity, thou hast been deemed worthy to join chorus with the multitude of the choirs 
of the saints.  
The shrine wherein thy precious and holy relics lie, O divinely blessed Prince 
Daniel, poureth forth a spring of miracles upon those who with faith approach and 
bow down before them.  
Blessed is the city, and blessed is the monastery wherein thou didst deign to 
struggle in thy lifetime; and leaving thy relics behind as a priceless gift after thy 
repose, thou dost mercifully regard all who live therein.  
Theotokion: Having fallen into many misfortunes and dangers, I am beset by a 
storm of countless sins; wherefore, I flee unto thee, O Virgin, as to my fervent 
intercessor. Entreat God Who became incarnate of thee, that He grant forgiveness of 
sins unto thy servant.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Illumined by divine grace, * thou didst set aside the glory of thy principality, * O 
divinely wise Prince Daniel, * and in thy heart away from this vain world * 
unwaveringly placing thine understanding upon the Creator, * thou didst shine forth 
like a star in the east of the Russian realm, * finishing the good race well by thy chaste 
and angelic life, * having kept the faith in purity. * Wherefore, even after thy repose 
God hath glorified thee with miracles, * pouring forth healing upon those who with 
faith have recourse unto thy precious shrine: * for this cause we, thy people, glorify 
thee today. * As thou hast boldness before Christ, ** pray that thy homeland be 
saved, and that our land find peace.  
 
 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Chosen by God from thy parents’ loins, * raised from infancy in the law of the 
Lord to be a perfect man, * and having received the famed city of Moscow as thine 
inheritance * by the providence of God, * thou wast revealed to be a faithful steward 
for thy pious people, * O divinely blessed Daniel. * And instructing them by thine 
example, * and continually teaching them the commandments of the Lord, * ever 
walking the path which leadeth to everlasting life, * thou didst attain unto the 
kingdom of heaven, * where, dwelling with the angelic choirs, * thou chantest unto 
God: ** Alleluia!  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?  
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, § 213 (GAL 5: 22-6: 2) 
Brethren, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who 
are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the 
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, § 47 (MT. 12: 30-37)  
The Lord said: “He that is not with Me is against Me; and he that gathereth not 
with Me scattereth abroad. Wherefore I say unto you: All manner of sin and 
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Spirit shall 
not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it 
shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be 
forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come. Either make the tree 
good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the 
tree is known by his fruit. O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good 
things? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. A good man out of 
the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things: and an evil man out of the 
evil treasure bringeth forth evil things. But I say unto you, That every idle word that 
men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. For by thy 
words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.”  
Communion Verse: In everlasting memory shall the righteous be; he shall not 
be afraid of evil tidings.  
