--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 1st DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRED NUN EUDOCIA  
 (If this feast falleth within the Great Fast, we chant Alleluia at matins; but if it falleth outside the 
Fast, we chant “God is the Lord ...” and the Troparion of the saint.)  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Having first fasted * and withered the uprisings of the flesh * through abstinence, 
* thou didst later set at naught the wiles of the enemy through martyrdom * and 
having triumphed over him, * O divinely blessed Eudocia, * Jesus, the Lover of 
mankind, * and the Savior of our souls, ** hath crowned thee for thy twofold 
struggles.  
In the furrows of thy heart * thou didst receive the divine seed * like rich soil, O 
divinely blessed one, * and thou didst truly put forth the grain of martyrdom, * 
producing it a hundredfold. * Thou didst lay it up in noetic granaries * through the 
power of the Spirit Who transformed thee * and wrought in thee a greater change 
through grace, ** O all-praised Eudocia.  
By thy life-creating utterance * thou didst raise up the dead, * O glorious Eudocia, 
* having first mortified the passions of thy body * with the pangs of abstinence. * 
And now thou dwellest with the martyrs in the heavens, * having completed the 
course of martyrdom * with the help of the Spirit, ** and thou prayest for all who 
hymn thee with faith.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Rejoice, O beam of solar radiance, * throne of the never-setting Sun, * having 
shone forth the ineffable Sun! * Rejoice, O mind * shining with divine splendor, * 
flash of lightning illumining the ends of the earth, * true luster of gold. * O most 
comely and immaculate one ** who hath caused the unwaning Light to shine upon 
the faithful!  
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of mankind, 
crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What is this, O my 
Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou 
hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** I 
marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  
Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Having bound thy soul to the love of Christ with uprightness of mind, * as a 
disciple of the Word thou didst avoid corrupt, transitory and beautiful things by 
ignoring them; * and having first mortified the passions by fasting, * thou didst put 
the enemy to shame by thy suffering. * Wherefore, Christ hath deemed thee worthy 
of a twofold crown. ** O glorious Eudocia, venerable sufferer, entreat Christ God, 
that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the venerable martyr, in Tone II: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Be Thou well pleased to transform the misery of my soul into delight, O Good 
One, by the prayers of Thy passion-bearer Eudocia; and grant that I may worthily 
hymn her, O Word.  
Who can openly confess the depth of Thy compassion, O Christ? For it hath made 
into a refuge of salvation one who of old was an abyss of transgressions.  
Like good soil thy most glorious soul received the gentle rain of the teaching of 
the venerable Germanus, bringing forth the fruit of piety.  
Having received the noetic ember of Christ within thy heart through baptism, O 
all-pure one, thou didst truly reduce falsehood and the passions of the flesh to ashes.  
Theotokion: Thou hast truly been revealed to be a godly habitation more spacious 
and honorable than the heavens, O Virgin Theotokos; and the choirs of the angels 
now rejoice in thee.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Thy venerable one, O Christ, having acquired a firm resolve and an unassailable 
rampart in her bosom, was not shaken by the assaults of the enemy, but utterly 
destroyed him.  
Desiring the beauty of Christ, and consumed by His love, thou didst unite thyself 
to Him through martyrdom, O divinely wise and all-glorious Eudocia.  
Having purified thyself with Christian baptism, by thy tears and, ultimately, by the 
blood shed by thee in martyrdom, thou didst become a sanctified temple of the 
Trinity.  
Theotokion: Blossoming forth from Anna as a joy to thy race, O Virgin, thou didst 
give birth to the King; and women, released from the curse by thee, rejoice in thy 
birth giving.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Illumined by divine radiance, thou didst leave behind the darkness of deception 
and while in the flesh received immaterial life; and being filled with the divine grace of 
the Spirit, thou didst raise up the dead by thy command. Wherefore at the end of thy 
life, thou wast divinely adorned with the crown of martyrdom, putting the deceiver to 
shame, O Eudocia, equal of the angels. Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness 
of transgressions unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
With the river of thy divine blood, O glorious Eudocia, thou didst cause the abyss 
of ungodliness to dry up.  
She who before entrapped the senseless in the snares of fornication doth now 
draw the faithful into the kingdom of God.  
Having rightly distributed the corruptible wealth which thou didst unjustly amass, 
thou didst inherit the riches of incorruption.  
Theotokion: Incarnate of the pure Virgin, O Lord, Thou hast shone forth the 
Light in the night and darkness of transgression.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Shining forth, the never-waning Light truly drew the glorious one from the 
darkness of the passions and, leading her to the path of dispassion, hath shown her to 
be most radiant.  
Having betrothed thyself to the Son of God the King, O most glorious one, by 
thine honored invocation thou didst raise up the son of the king, who had died a 
grievous death.  
At the tribunal, O glorious one, thou didst profess Christ with manly mind 
proclaiming Him to be God incarnate; and, beheaded by the sword, thou hast joined 
chorus with the martyrs.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: We the faithful, having thine intercession as our hope, and 
surrounded by the misfortunes of bitter sufferings, earnestly have recourse unto thee, 
O Virgin Sovereign Lady.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
In that the zeal of thy faith was fervent, thou didst trample underfoot the opinions 
of the unbelievers, O martyr Eudocia, winning the victory of martyrdom.  
Having joined the torrents of thy tears with the drops of thy blood shed in 
martyrdom, thou hast perfected the one cup of salvation by both.  
She who before was full of stench through the magnitude of her impurity, is now 
filled with a most sweet fragrance and rejoiceth with the choirs of the virgins.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O pure Theotokos, joy of the world! Grant thy joy unto 
those who in faith cry out to thee with the angel, and banish our grief.  
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV:  
Having contended well in thy suffering, O all-praised one, * even after thy death 
thou dost sanctify with outpourings of wonders * us who with faith have recourse to 
thy divine temple; * and, holding festival, we entreat thee, O venerable martyr 
Eudocia: ** May we be delivered from spiritual afflictions and draw forth the grace of 
miracles.  
Ikos: The church of the passion-bearer hath been shown to be a paradise, having 
acquired in its midst a tree of immortality, her precious body; and those who partake 
of the fruit thereof are mightily sanctified by its branches. And beholding how a dead 
body truly poureth forth healings, all are amazed, and brought to their senses. 
Wherefore, with haste come ye all now with me, the lowly one, and, washing away 
our filth, let us draw forth the grace of miracles.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Trampled underfoot, the enemy and deceiver, who of old ensnared thee, striving 
to capture thee with the down-pouring of evil, cried aloud, saying: “Woe is me! I have 
been vanquished by thy sacred union with God, O pure and all-praised Eudocia!”  
Having mortified the wisdom of thy flesh with great abstinence, thou didst 
resurrect the dead by thy boldness before God and by thine unwavering entreaty, O 
Eudocia; for He fulfilleth the will of those who fear Him.  
Bearing the sufferings of Christ upon the shoulders of thy soul like a divine adorn-
ment, thou didst attract Him by thy desire for incorruption; wherefore He betrothed 
thee as His bride who blamelessly crieth aloud: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: Manifestly proclaiming thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, Gideon 
bore a bowl full of the water he had wrung from the fleece; for the whole Godhead 
made its abode within thee, O most pure one: the blessed Fruit of thy womb.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Having noetically approached thy true Love, without hesitation thou didst endure 
the wounding of thy flesh and the bitter pain of the fire, O all-glorious martyr, 
blessing Christ throughout all ages.  
Having won victory by the three-fold billows of tribulations with the mast of the 
Cross and the rudder of the spirit, thou didst reach the safe harbor of the kingdom of 
God, O glorious one, blessing Christ throughout all ages.  
Thou didst cast off the ugliness of the passions and didst clad thy soul in the 
beautiful robe of dispassion; wherefore, Christ, betrothing thee to Himself as a bride, 
hath granted thee to dwell in the mansions of heaven.  
Theotokion: By thee, O Theotokos, our ancestors have been freed from the curse; 
and, lo! women now suffer for Christ, and the female nature rejoiceth, as said the 
protomartyr Thecla the virgin.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
The vision of thy countenance, which shone like the sun in spiritual radiance, O 
pure one, was revealed to be a sight strange to the unbelievers who looked on; for, 
having loved Christ, thou wast glorified by Him as is meet, O most honored one.  
Having lighted the lamp of thy soul, O martyr, thou hast now entered into the 
splendor of the bridal chamber of Christ rejoicing with the wise virgins, bearing thy 
blood as oil. With them be thou mindful of all who praise thee with faith.  
Like a sweet-smelling rose, O divinely wise Eudocia, thou didst blossom forth 
beautifully from the thorns of deception, perfuming the souls of the faithful, and dis-
pelling the foul stench of the deception of unbelievers; wherefore, we call thee 
blessed.  
O pure martyr, by thy supplications to God our Redeemer save those who lovingly 
celebrate thy memorial, and take away the spiritual defilement of us who so poorly 
hymn thee.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: Cease thou never to entreat thy Son and God, the Lover of mankind, 
O Virgin, on our behalf; for we have acquired thee as our hope, and by thine 
intercession we who glorify thee with faith are delivered from tribulations and 
passions, and from transgressions and sufferings.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Having bound thy soul to the love of Christ with uprightness of mind, * as a 
disciple of the Word thou didst avoid corrupt, transitory and beautiful things by 
ignoring them; * and having first mortified the passions by fasting, * thou didst put 
the enemy to shame by thy suffering. * Wherefore, Christ hath deemed thee worthy 
of a twofold crown. ** O glorious Eudocia, venerable sufferer, entreat Christ God, 
that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV:  
Having contended well in thy suffering, O all-praised one, * even after thy death 
thou dost sanctify with outpourings of wonders * us who with faith have recourse to 
thy divine temple; * and, holding festival, we entreat thee, O venerable martyr 
Eudocia: ** May we be delivered from spiritual afflictions and draw forth the grace of 
miracles.  
 
 
