--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 5th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR CONON  
AT VESPERS:  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O unwaning, divine ray, * luminous radiance of the commandments of God, * 
ever-memorable passion-bearer, most excellent of martyrs! * Thou hast dispelled the 
gloom of darkness * like a brilliant star, O blessed one! * O good offering, * and 
unblemished sacrifice! * Wherefore, unceasingly entreat Christ, ** that He save our 
souls.  
O proclaimer of the truth! * Showing thyself to be a sword-wielding opponent of 
ungodliness, * thou didst fell the enemy * with the severing of thy head, O most wise 
one, * clearly proclaiming the command of God, * speaking good things to the 
unlearned people. * O Conon, dweller with the martyrs: * entreat the Redeemer, * 
that He deliver from the passions ** thy servants who hymn thee.  
Good was the transformation * which the Lord of our fathers wrought upon thee 
* by the right hand of the Most High, * O most glorious passion-bearer! * A fruit 
blossoming forth from the root of unbelief * wast thou revealed to be, O all-blessed 
and praised Conon, * and, having Christ as thy most excellent Leader, * thou didst 
mightily overthrow ** the hordes of the demons.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
Rejoice, bearer of the divine Light, * most bright star, and tabernacle of sanctity! * 
From thy most pure womb * Light hath shone upon us, * illumining the ends of the 
earth, * and enlightening them with His grace. * Rejoice, O most pure one, origin of 
salvation! * Rejoice, report and saying ** awesome to those who trust in thee!  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician * and healer of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS:  
Canon, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn Conon, the crowned martyr,” in Tone VI: 
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Illumine my mind with the light which hath been most clearly manifest in thee, O 
martyr, that with divine hymnody I may praise thee, the martyr of Christ and steadfast 
spiritual athlete.  
Taught by the instruction of the angel of God, O blessed one, thou didst truly 
transcend the flesh, like an angel on earth, restraining the lusts and adorning thyself  
Having kept the commandments of God, thou didst openly revile the iniquity of 
the Hellenes, O venerable one; and having convinced many by sacred miracles, thou 
didst lead them to God by thy teachings.  
Theotokion: Having adorned thyself with the comeliness of the virtues, thou didst 
give birth to Him Who is more comely than all of mankind and Who hath wisely 
adorned us with His own comeliness, O all-immaculate one.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Having adorned thy soul with divine virtues, O venerable one, O martyr, thou 
didst truly make of it a dwelling-place for the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.  
They who of old fell miserably into the abyss are by thine exalted teachings, 
shining afar, led up to an eminent height, O martyr Conon.  
As a temple of God, thou didst cast down idols by thine invocations of God, O 
all-blessed one, standing forth in the temple of the idols, guiding the erring to the 
knowledge of God.  
Theotokion: He Who alone is holy was born from thee, O most holy one, in a 
manner past understanding and all telling, sanctifying mortals who are enslaved to the 
passions because of the vile counsel of the enemy.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Having arrayed thyself in the full armor of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be a 
destroyer of demons and a constant sacrifice for the faithful. Possessed of an 
impregnable tower of faith, thou dost bear us up to the heights of thy miracles. 
Hence, thou hast, fittingly received wreaths of victory from God, O much-suffering 
martyr Conon. Wherefore, we cry to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of sins to those who honor thy holy memory with love.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, * we have been overcome by the 
storms of our uncountable sins, * and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, * we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. * Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee * to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O most pure one, * 
unto Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, * that those who worthily 
hymn thee ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Thou didst lay low the temples of the idolaters, O holy martyr, and committed 
their gods to utter perdition, working miracles and performing wondrous signs.  
When the Word of God came to thee in a holy manner, O holy martyr, He 
subjected the hosts of demons to thee and glorified thee with many wondrous 
demonstrations.  
The supremely good One, loving thee greatly, O Conon most great, gave thee the 
great chastiser Michael, manifestly teaching thee the greatest of the mysteries.  
Theotokion: O holy Lady who hast given flesh to the all-holy Word, grant 
sanctification to my soul, guiding my mind which rusheth headlong through trackless 
wastelands.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Having most manifestly dyed for thyself a martyr’s cloak with the flow of thy 
sacred blood, O wise martyr, rejoicing, thou dwellest in the habitations and splendors 
on high.  
The evil-minded one stretched thee out, O blessed and ever-memorable one, who 
possesseth a mind wholly stretched out towards God, and he mutilated thee who 
called upon the great name of the Almighty.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Adorned and enlivened by grace, as a martyr thou didst endure the drops of blood 
of the wounded; and vanquishing ungodliness, O Conon, thou wast deemed worthy 
of immortality.  
Theotokion: Delivered from the ancestral curse, O most pure one, we have all 
received blessings through thee. Wherefore, with love we bless, magnify, honor and 
call thee blessed.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Having shone like the sun with radiant virtues and most glorious miracles, and 
having greatly adorned thyself with the endurance of sufferings, thou hast enlightened 
the ends of the earth which praise thee, O great renowned martyr.  
Having shown thyself to be most comely in the beauty of thy wounds, thou 
workest most wondrous miracles; and having died and been buried, dost still 
vanquish infirmities, driving away the spirits of deception, O blessed one.  
Cure the passions of our souls, O wise one, and dispel the weaknesses of the flesh, 
for thou hast been given to us by God as a most excellent physician, O glorious 
Conon.  
Theotokion: The Lord looked upon thee, and through thee, O most pure one, 
visited those who had withdrawn far from Him. Wherefore, as thou didst say, the 
generations of the saved call thee blessed.  
Kontakion of the martyr, in Tone III:  
Having lived on the earth in angelic purity, * thou wast deemed worthy to 
converse with angels, * bringing thy parents to the knowledge of Christ, * and having 
confessed the one God in Trinity, * thou didst suffer unto the shedding of thy blood. 
* O martyr Conon, ** entreat Him unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
The never-waning light shone upon thee who hated the darkness of the passions, 
O venerable one, and gladness hath seized thee who fervently fought the good fight. 
Wherefore, standing before Christ, do thou remember us.  
Exalted by divine virtues and awesome miracles, O venerable Conon, foundation 
of martyrs, thou hast revealed thy heart to be meek and thy mind to be humble, 
whereby thou didst destroy all the haughtiness of the enemy.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
As one dreadful to all the demons, thou didst command them to submit to thy 
sacred commands, O divinely wise one, as to God Who glorified thee, O Conon, who 
hast glorified Him with good works on earth.  
Theotokion: He Who accomplisheth all things desired to make His abode within 
Thy most immaculate womb, O Theotokos, the one God Who is glorified in the holy 
councils as great and awesome.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thou didst steadfastly oppose the vain-minded one who sought to compel thee to 
offer worship to his strange and abominable gods, O passion-bearer. Wherefore, 
having suffered lawfully, thou hast been glorified.  
Those wounded by the onslaughts of the demons were healed by thy divine teach-
ings, receiving deliverance from sorrows, and hymning thy grace, O divinely wise one.  
Those who have recourse with faith to the shrine of the venerable one draw forth 
the healing of all manner of ailments, for it manifestly floweth with the grace of the 
Spirit, quenching the passions with its torrents of grace.  
Theotokion: O divinely joyous one, offer supplication to God the Creator, that He 
save our souls and deliver us from the grasp of the passions and the temptation of 
evil-doers.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Thou wast seen to be like a ship riding the tempests of the sea of life without 
taking on water, O God-bearer, guiding thy freight of good deeds safely to the comely 
harbors of rest, the kingdom of God and light.  
Having armed thyself with the Cross as with a breastplate, thou didst strip bare the 
hordes of the enemy and enslave them under thy beautiful feet; and being a faithful 
servant of the Master, thou didst deliver those who are beguiled by the enemy.  
Standing before Christ with the countless hosts of heaven, as one crowned, 
remember us who praise thee with love, that by thy prayers we may find mercy and 
deliverance from the evil and the cruel ones, O all-praised Conon.  
Theotokion: With thy light, O Virgin, illumine me who am ever caught fast in the 
night of despondency, and am cast down to the ground, and who commit every sin 
through the depravity of my mind, that, saved by thee, I may hymn thee, the greatly 
hymned one. 
