--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH 
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR THEODOTUS 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
O all-glorious one, thou wast revealed to be, * a most sacred priest, * the 
foundation of the Church, * a pillar unshakable, and a most true wonderworker, * 
bestowed of God, O glorious one, * a most radiant and sacred luminary * and a 
garden of paradise, * having acquired Jesus the Bestower of life as the Tree of life in 
thy midst, ** O hieromartyr Theodotus.  
Beaten with leathern thongs, * and stretched out on a tree, * and bitterly lacerated, 
O right wondrous one, * imprisoned in a dungeon, * thy feet cruelly pierced with 
nails, * and laid upon a heated bed of iron, * thou wast revealed to be steadfast, * 
glorifying Him Who strengthened thee ** amid all thy torments, O hieromartyr 
Theodotus.  
Strangling the enemy * with the cords of thy struggles, * thou didst vanquish his 
power; * and having been most splendidly courageous, * thou dwellest as a crowned 
victor in the kingdom of heaven, * having been deemed worthy of enlightenment * 
and the comeliness of those who hold festival; * and thou prayest that those who 
honor thee be saved, ** O Theodotus, thou glory of the martyrs.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same Melody: 
Deliver thou my soul * from condemnation and grievous transgressions, * O most 
holy Bride of God, * and rescue it from death by thy supplications. * Grant that on 
the day of trial * I may receive the justification * which the assemblies of the saints 
have received; * and before the end show me forth as cleansed through repentance ** 
and by the shedding of tears.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee * nailed to the Cross, O Lord, * the ewe-lamb 
Thy Mother marveled * and cried out: “What is this that I see, * O my Son most 
desired? * How hast Thou been rewarded * by the unfaithful and iniquitous assembly 
* which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? ** Yet glory to Thine ineffable condescen-
sion, O Master!”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “A gift of God splendidly 
given wast thou, O blessed one,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
God directed thy movements towards Himself, O martyr, and, having kept His 
precious commandments, thou didst become a hierarch, manifestly illumined with the 
blood of thy martyrdom.  
Having lived in a godly and pious manner, and mortified the movements of the 
flesh with feats of fasting, thou didst receive life, O adornment of the hierarchs, and 
consummation of the martyrs.  
The Holy Spirit, having from thine infancy made its abode in thy most wise heart, 
O venerable martyr Theodotus, showed thee to be a divine hierarch, upright, 
compassionate and mild.  
Theotokion: In the beginning human nature was wickedly enslaved through 
deception, O pure one; but when thou hast given birth unto Christ it obtained its 
freedom, and most wisely glorifieth thee.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
With the streams of thy tears and torrents of thy blood thou didst extinguish the 
cruel embers of deception, O holy hieromartyr Theodotus.  
Thy pure life, having shown thee to be a divine prelate, made thee a true witness to 
the sufferings of Christ.  
Standing in the midst of the tribunal, wounded cruelly, thou didst not deny the 
name of Christ, O martyr Theodotus.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, heal my mind which hath been rendered feeble 
through the attacks of the evil serpent, and which hath become a slave to sin.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”:  
Thou didst make the vesture of thy hierarchy more radiant by the wetness of thy 
blood, O Theodotus, making thine abode in the heavens, where with pure thought 
thou seest Him Whom thou didst desire. Wherefore, we glorify thy most sacred 
memory and cry aloud: Remember us as thou standest with boldness before God.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Who can describe the multitude of mine impure thoughts and the tempests of my 
wicked notions, O all-immaculate one? Who can recount the assaults of mine 
incorporeal foes and their malice? Yet by thine entreaties grant me deliverance from 
them all, O good one.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
Thy body, broken by wounds, O martyr, made thy mind truly more steadfast and 
stronger, chanting: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Aflame with the love of the Master, thou didst endure the most severe pain from 
thy wounds as though it were another who was suffering, remaining among the great-
est of the martyrs, O Theodotus.  
Enduring the wounds inflicted upon thy body, O divinely wise father, with purity 
of mind, thou didst behold the eternal rewards, which lessened thy pain.  
Theotokion: O most holy Theotokos, most splendid palace of the Master, show us 
to be temples of the Holy Spirit, who offer praise unto the Lord in thy holy temple.  
ODE V 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Suspended upon the tree, O wise Theodotus, thou didst steadfastly endure the 
rending of thy flesh, filling all with great awe.  
Hanging, O Theodotus, thou didst endure the convulsions of thy flesh, having the 
Master strengthening thee all the while, and making thee steadfast through faith.  
Empurpled in the streams of thy blood, O blessed Theodotus, thou didst show 
forth thy sacred vesture as most splendid.  
Theotokion: Thou didst conceive God Who had become a man, O Lady! 
Wherefore, we, the generations of generations, unceasingly call thee blessed.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thou wast imprisoned in a dungeon like a malefactor, O glorious Theodotus, 
being a keeper of the commandments of God Who hath made thy divine festival 
radiantly brilliance.  
Thou didst stand condemned before the tribunal of the unjust, counting it a vain 
thing to judge iniquitous men who prefer injustice to righteousness, O divinely wise 
and holy hierarch.  
Thou didst break the waves of savage torments as though thou wast a rock, O all-
blessed one, mounting by the ascent of thy heart to Christ God, the chief 
Cornerstone.  
Theotokion: Christ our God, Who dwelt in thy womb and lived amongst mankind, 
O most pure one, driveth away sin and, in His love for us, hath made human nature 
His own. 
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone III:  
Thou didst denounce the sea of false belief, * and with the faith of correct belief * 
didst wound the delusion of the godlessness of idolatry; * and as a divine immolation 
* thou hast bedewed the ends of the earth with thy wonderworking. * O holy hierarch 
Theodotus our father, ** entreat Christ God to grant us great mercy!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Aflame with the divine love of the Spirit, and laid upon the intensely heated couch, 
thou didst remain unconsumed, crying: Blessed art Thou, O my God and Lord!  
Remaining as though it was not thou thyself, but another who was suffering, thou 
didst pay no heed to thy mutilations and burning, sensing naught, in accordance with 
the will of Christ, having wholly passed on to God in mind.  
Standing in the midst of the tribunal, with the wisdom of thy words thou didst 
denounce those who were full of ignorance, and manifestly afflicted with impiety, 
choosing demonic idols over the Creator.  
Theotokion: With the choirs on high we all cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Mother of 
God, the animate heaven, most glorious palace, and fiery throne upon which Christ 
rested in the flesh!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Opposing the enemy with thy struggles, O martyr Theodotus, thou didst tread the 
heavenly path which leadeth to the kingdom, for with thy feet pierced with nails, O 
glorious one, thou didst chant: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!  
Preaching God Who came to earth and destroyed the most pernicious suffering by 
His sufferings, O Theodotus, thou didst accept divine and blessed suffering, crying 
aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
With the shedding of thy blood and the streams of thy sacred teachings thou didst 
water the hearts of the faithful with grace, O all-wise one, laboring to put forth divine 
wisdom on behalf of the Husbandman of good things. To Him we cry aloud: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Thou hast washed away all defilement from human nature, O most 
pure one, having given birth to the heavenly Rain Who became a man, and O pure 
one, renewing us who have waxed old, wherefore we cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
The divine shrine of the relics of the most sacred pastor poureth forth all manner 
of healings, putting an end to sufferings, and truly freeing the faithful from chronic 
illness through the divine grace of the Savior.  
As a hieromartyr, possessing the authority to loose and to bind, loose thou the 
bonds of my wicked deeds, entreat the most Compassionate One to bedew my soul, 
burning with the fire of sin.  
Today the Church doth faithfully honor thy most sacred memory and thy 
departure to the Lover of mankind, O God-bearer; and, rejoicing, it hath fashioned 
diadems of divine hymns for thee.  
In that we have acquired thee as a star which shineth by day, O divinely eloquent 
Theodotus, we are enlightened with the luminous rays of thy godly sufferings and the 
precious splendors of thy wonders.  
Theotokion: O Virgin who for us hast given birth to the Light Who shone forth from 
the Father before the morning star, thou hast destroyed the darkness of ignorance 
and brought light to those who sleep in the shadow of sin.  
 
 
