--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 8th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH:  
THE COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS 
THEOPHYLACTUS THE CONFESSOR, BISHOP OF NICOMEDIA 
AT VESPERS:  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Watched over by divine guardians, * thou wast preserved unharmed, * O father 
Theophylactus; * and revealed to be an unshaken pillar of the Church, * undaunted 
by the trials * of the snares of the heretics. * And now pray thou, * that peace and 
great mercy ** be granted to our souls.  
O blessed father Theophylactus, * beholding God * accessibly and visibly, * and 
delighting in Him through a better union, * and deified by this partaking, * rejoicing, 
thou didst receive * the Blessed One Whom alone Thou didst desire, * O most 
honored hierarch, ** making thine abode now with the angels.  
Having departed the earth, * O father Theophylactus, * thou didst hasten aloft to 
heaven, O blessed one, * and wast deemed worthy * to live in the heavenly mansions, 
* because of the persecution which thou didst endure for Christ. * Him do thou now 
beseech, * that He grant peace and great mercy ** unto our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Heal thou my soul * which hath been grievously afflicted * by evil passions, * O 
most holy one * who hast given birth unto Christ, * the Healer and Savior of all, * 
Who hath healed every wound * inflicted by the devil’s malice, ** and hath abolished 
death for us.  
Stavrotheotokion: The Sovereign Lady, the unblemished ewe-lamb, * beholding 
her Lamb upon the Cross, * bereft of form and comeliness, * lamenting, said: “Woe 
is me! * Whither hath Thy comeliness gone, * O most Sweet One? * Where is Thy 
splendor? Where is the brilliant grace * of Thine image, ** O my Son most beloved?”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS:  
Canon to the holy hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise the godly 
Theophylactus in hymns,” the composition of St.  
Theophanes the Branded, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
Standing before the throne of the Master, O God-bearing father Theophylactus, 
preserve those who with faith keep thy memory.  
The grace of the Spirit anointed thee as was meet, O all-blessed one, for the sake 
of the truth and the goodness of the manner of thy life.  
That thou mightest receive heavenly things, O blessed one, thou didst trample 
underfoot all things earthly, and didst follow after Christ God.  
Theotokion: All desire, sweetness and unwaning light is He Whose good pleasure 
it was to be born from thy womb, O Bride of God.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Obedient to the laws of thy Master, O glorious high priest, thou didst disdain the 
laws of the most iniquitous emperors.  
With honor didst thou venerate the divine and most pure depiction of Christ, 
shunning the dishonor of the impious.  
At first thou didst endure torment of conscience with fasting, and now thou hast 
been invested with the crown of martyrdom.  
Theotokion: That Thou mightest show us the path which leadeth to holiness, O 
Master, in a most holy manner Thou madest Thine abode in the most pure womb of 
the Virgin.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having fasted, thou wast anointed as a hierarch, O wise and venerable father, to 
perform the divine mysteries for the preservation of souls. And, honoring the icon of 
Christ, thou didst endure exile, tribulation and prolonged imprisonment. Wherefore, 
pouring forth healings after thy repose, healing the suffering, and enlightening, those 
who sing, O holy hierarch Theophylactus, do thou entreat Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, * we have been overcome by the 
storms of our uncountable sins, * and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, * we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. * Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee * to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O most pure one, * 
unto Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, * that those who worthily 
hymn thee ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
 
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
The fire of temptations did not frighten thee, O all-blessed and divinely inspired 
Theophylactus, nor did the sweetness of food diminish thy strength.  
God set a guard over thy mouth and lips, O venerable one; wherefore, thou didst 
remain unshaken when the impious stood up against thee.  
With patience thou didst wait patiently for the Most High Who set thy feet upon a 
rock and was attentive unto thee, when thou didst bow down before His image.  
Theotokion: Delivered from the debt of sin by thy birthgiving, O most immaculate 
Bride of God, we joyfully send up hymnody to thee.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Thine arms, lifted up to the Creator, O venerable and divinely inspired father, 
vanquished the impious.  
Taking thee by the hand, the Most High led thee to the delight of Heaven, O God 
bearing father.  
Having trod the narrow way, O wondrous Theophylactus, thou didst attain unto 
the vastness of paradise.  
Theotokion: They who do not know thee to be the Theotokos will not behold the 
light of Him Who was born of thee, O most pure Mother of God. 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Having mortified the senses with abstinence, thou didst come to rule over the 
passions; and now, O Theophylactus, thou dost delight in the splendors of 
dispassion.  
Thou didst teach all to bow down before the image of the Savior, having shone 
forth in thy works and teachings, O Theophylactus.  
Christ showed thee to be a cloud pouring forth a shower of life, O Theophylactus, 
holy hierarch of God.  
Theotokion: Though He became flesh for our sake, yet in the beauty of His 
divinity thy Son was more comely than all mankind, O most pure one.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Thou wast shown to be a radiant beacon * throughout the ends of the earth, * O 
holy hierarch Theophylactus; * and having preached the Word Who is of one essence 
with the Father and the Spirit, * thou didst enlighten the council of the godly fathers, 
* and wast shown to be a favorite of the Trinity. ** Standing before Him, pray thou 
unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Having finished the divine course and kept the Faith until the end, thou didst 
receive a crown for thy sufferings, O wise one, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God, throughout the ages!  
Riding the chariot of divine virtues, thou wast taken up to the heights of Heaven, 
and dost now stand before God, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, 
throughout the ages!  
The Creator Who in secret knoweth the hearts of men, O God-bearer, set that 
which in thy heart is divine upon the thrones of teaching, O thrice-blessed 
Theophylactus.  
Theotokion: To thee do I now have recourse, and to thy protection and divine 
intercession, O Theotokos; and I pray that I may be delivered from evils, O blessed 
and all-pure one who hast given birth unto God in the flesh.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thou hast now made thine abode wherein the habitation of those who rejoice is, 
O confessor and champion of the Truth; and light hath shone upon thee, O all-wise 
one, as upon a righteous man who suffered the torments of the martyrs. With them 
thou dost also cry aloud: Ye priests bless; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
Thou hast received a crown of endurance, O thou who art pleasing unto God; for 
thou didst dwell in a bitter exile, expecting to receive the reward of thy suffering, and 
wast not mistaken in thy good hope, crying out now to Christ: Ye priests bless; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
With manifest splendor, thy commemoration radiant with the light of confession, 
is now celebrated, O God-bearer; for thou didst honor the images of Christ, of the 
Theotokos and of all the saints, and with them dost thou now cry out: Ye priests 
bless; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Blot out the wounds of my soul and the stripes inflicted upon me by 
sin, O most pure Mother of God who hast given birth unto Him Who is above all 
through thy pure womb, O pure Maiden. Him do the children bless, priests hymn, 
and people supremely exalt throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Great gifts wast thou deemed worthy to receive, having endured misfortune with 
steadfastness of mind, O God-bearing and divinely blessed father.  
Watch over us who hymn thee, O blessed one, delivering us from temptations and 
tribulations, and trampling down the snares of the heretics.  
Manifest as one who lived as a priest chastely and righteously, O martyr, thou 
didst become splendid, having woven for thyself a cloak dyed purple in thine own 
blood.  
Theotokion: Thou didst shine forth like the dawn upon those lost in darkness, O 
Virgin, bearing in thine arms Christ the Son of righteousness.  
