--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 4th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER GERASIMUS  
OF THE JORDAN  
AT VESPERS:  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O divinely wise father Gerasimus, * uniting thyself unto God * through prayer, 
supplication and great abstinence, * thou didst remain impervious to the designs of 
the foe, * and didst show thyself to be a servant of the Almighty. * Hence, we honor 
thee, * and faithfully celebrating * thy divine memory with great joy, ** we praise 
thee.  
O venerable father Gerasimus, * ever abiding in faith, * in deserts, caves and 
mountains, * thou didst seek after God. * And thou didst find Him * as thou didst 
desire. * Ever strengthened with steadfast soul * and good ascents, ** thou hast led 
multitudes of saved monastics unto God.  
Submitting to the will of God * Who beholdeth all things, * thou didst receive the 
grace from Him * to work miracles * and to drive away wicked spirits, * and to tame 
wild beasts by the purity of thy mind. * Wherefore, we honor thee, * and as is meet 
we celebrate with faith ** thy divine memory, O divinely blessed one.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
Troubled and in grief, * we beseech thee, O most pure one, * our intercessor: * 
Permit not thy servants * to utterly perish; * but hasten to rescue us * from this 
present wrath and grief, * O divinely joyous, most holy and pure one. ** For thou art 
our bulwark and unassailable help.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician * and healer of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed of all 
from corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS:  
Canon to the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise Gerasimus, as I weave a 
crown for him,” in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
The glory of immortality and a divine crown of incorruption hath Christ given 
thee who struggled well, O Gerasimus.  
Having the Bestower of light attending to thy supplications, O father Gerasimus, 
thou didst diminish the darkness of the demons.  
Through the streams of thy tears, O father, thou didst bring forth the fruits of 
immortality like a watered tree, O divinely wise Gerasimus.  
Theotokion: Assuage thou the pain of my heart, O most pure Theotokos who, in a 
manner past understanding and all telling, didst give birth unto Christ painlessly.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Following Him that endured crucifixion willingly, O venerable one, thou wast 
wholly crucified to life and to the passions.  
Strengthened by the support of Him Who accomplisheth all things, O wise 
Gerasimus, thou wast able to trample underfoot all the snares of the mighty foe.  
Fortified with a humble mind and a humble spirit, O wise one, thou didst utterly 
lay low the passions which corrupt the soul.  
With the splendors of thy wonders thou dost, like the great sun, enlighten the 
hearts of all who praise thee with faith.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, thou hast given birth to the Son Who is 
enthroned with the Father and of the same essence, and Who showeth the gateway of 
life unto all.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Passing over the wiles of the demons through the activity of the Cross, O 
venerable one, thou didst become a god by adoption. Wherefore, we faithfully honor 
thee, O Gerasimus.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Stretching forth thy most pure arms, * O Virgin and Mother * shelter those who 
put their trust in thee * and who call out to thy Son exclaiming: ** O Christ grant 
unto us all Thy great mercy. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding thy Son lifted up upon the Tree, O most pure one, 
with thy maternal womb wounded with pain, thou didst piteously cry aloud: “Woe is 
me! How is it that Thou hast set, O my timeless Light?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Thine enlightened heart became a temple of the Spirit, O father. Wherefore, it 
poureth forth gifts, healing afflictions by divine grace.  
Submitting to the law of God, thou didst follow the Lord from thy youth, O 
father, embracing the life of the bodiless ones while yet in the body.  
Thy steps were directed to the way of salvation, O venerable one, by the guidance 
of the divine Spirit Who dwelt within thee, O venerable one.  
Theotokion: Jesus, the Lover of mankind, Whom thou didst bear in thy womb, O 
all-immaculate one, do thou beseech, that He save all who hymn thee.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Having received rays of the Holy Spirit with a purified mind, thou didst become a 
light guiding monastics.  
Thy life, shining forth through the constraint of nature, revealed thee to be an 
earthly angel in the flesh.  
Filled with the life-imparting waters of the Spirit, thou didst pour forth rivers of 
wonders, O father Gerasimus.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, the incarnate Word descended upon thee like a gentle 
shower, unto the enlightenment of our souls.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
The weakness of thy flesh, strengthened by the power of Him that hath shone 
forth upon us from the pure Virgin, O venerable father, brought low the power of 
the bodiless foe.  
Having crushed the jaws of the noetic lions by grace, thou didst put down the 
assaults of material senses, O venerable one. Wherefore, a lion submitted to thee, as a 
sheep to a shepherd, dutifully ministering to thee. 
  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Acquiring an angelic life and a mind humble in Christ, O father, thou wast meek. 
And now, having made thine abode in the land of the meek, thou art filled with 
divine joy.  
Theotokion: The Effulgence of the Father dwelt within thee, O pure one, and, 
born in the flesh, He hath enlightened the world and delivered mankind from the 
darkness of polytheism. Wherefore, we hymn thee.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Burning with heavenly love, * thou didst prefer the harshness of the Jordan desert 
* more than all the delights of the world; * hence, a wild beast submitted to thee even 
unto thy death, O father, * dying in obedience and grief on thy grave. * Thus did God 
glorify thee. * And when prayest to Him, * O father Gerasimus, ** be thou mindful 
of us.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Light and its spouse gladness, shone forth upon thee, O father, who dost ever 
abide in the mansions of Heaven, chanting: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, 
throughout all ages!  
Having watered thy heart with showers of tears, O God-bearer, thou hast brought 
forth the fruits of virtue, through which, with all the venerable, thou hast received the 
delight of Heaven, throughout all ages.  
Keeping hymnody unceasingly upon thy lips, in emulation of the angels, O 
Gerasimus, thou didst cry out with watchful mind: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, 
throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: In no wise did the fire of the Godhead burn thee, O Virgin; for the 
bush on the mountain, which once burned without being consumed, prefigured thee. 
O pure one.  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * ‘Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord’. 
Thou didst stand before the Master, illumined with the splendors of fasting. O 
wondrous Gerasimus; and wast numbered among the choirs of the bodiless ones.  
Conducting thy life in guilelessness, thou didst despise the tribunal of the wicked 
one, O divinely wise Gerasimus, adornment of fasters. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 By putting off the passions thou wast vested in a garment of incorruption, O 
divinely wise father Gerasimus; and worthily received a divine dwelling place.  
Theotokion: O all-pure one, He that transcendeth nature found thee in the valleys 
of life like a fragrant lily, and through thee He hath breathed a sweet fragrance upon 
all the world.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: All are awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * for the 
Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man in the 
Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure Theotokos. 
Following the steps of all who walked well upon the earth, O father Gerasimus, 
thou didst acquire love, faith, hope, temperance, wisdom, abundant prayer and 
ineffable abstinence, delighting in pure ascents.  
O the wonder! How hast thou subjected a wild beast to thy command, as though 
he were a rational creature, O venerable Gerasimus, servant of God, Who hath 
glorified thine angelic life with signs, countless wonders and miracles.  
Thou hast been revealed to be the confirmation of monastics and the instruction 
of those who keep silence, O God-bearer; for traversing the most narrow path of 
abstinence, thou didst ever enlarge thy soul with divine hope. Wherefore, thou hast 
found a spacious habitation among the mansions of the elect.  
Flourishing in the courts of our God like a stately palm tree, and like a cypress 
thou hast been exalted by the high praises of God, O father. Wherefore, we all 
faithfully celebrate thy memory, praying: Save us from all temptations!  
Theotokion: Bearing Emmanuel on thine arms as a babe. O pure and divinely 
joyous one, thou didst cry aloud: O my sweetest Child, how can I nourish Thee at my 
breast Who dost sustain all things? How can I wrap in swaddling clothes Thee Who 
wrappest the sea in mist?  
 
 
