--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE FORTY MARTYRS WHO SUFFERED AT SEBASTE 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the day from the Triodion. 
And 4 Stichera of the holy martyrs, by John the Monk, in Tone II: 
Valiantly enduring the present torments, rejoicing in that for which they longed, 
the holy martyrs said one to another: If we do not shed our garments, we shall not 
put off the old man. Winter is cruel, but paradise is sweet; the ice is painful, but the 
acquisition of the Kingdom is delightful. Then, let us not give way, O warriors! Let us 
endure but a little while, that we may be crowned with crowns of victory by Christ 
God, the Savior of our souls. (Once)  
Casting off all their garments and entering the lake with trembling, the holy 
martyrs said one to another: Let us not spare today our corruptible garments, that we 
may attain the paradise which we lost! Having once been clothed because of the 
pernicious serpent, let us now unclothe ourselves for the resurrection of all; let us 
disdain the frigid ice and despise the flesh, that we may be crowned with crowns of 
victory by Christ God, the Savior of our souls! (Twice)  
Seeing tortures as delight, running to the frozen lake as to a warm spring, the holy 
martyrs said: Let us not fear the season of winter, that we may avoid the fearsome fire 
of Gehenna; let our legs be consumed, that they may dance eternally; let our arms be 
cut off, that they may stretch themselves forth unto the Lord; let us not spare our 
mortal nature; let us submit to death, that we may be crowned with crowns of victory 
by Christ God, the Savior of our souls. (Once) 
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Valiantly enduring the present torments, rejoicing in that for which they longed, 
the holy martyrs said one to another: If we do not shed our garments, we shall not 
put off the old man. Winter is cruel, but paradise is sweet; the ice is painful, but the 
acquisition of the Kingdom is delightful. Then, let us not give way, O warriors! Let us 
endure but a little while, that we may be crowned with crowns of victory by Christ 
God, the Savior of our souls.  
Both now ..., Dogmaticon in the same tone:  
The shadow of the law hath passed now that grace hath come, * for as the Bush 
wrapped in flame was not consumed, * so didst thou bear a Child O Virgin * and 
remained a Virgin; * in place of a pillar of fire, the Sun of righteousness hath dawned, 
* instead of Moses, Christ is come, ** the salvation of our souls. 
Entrance. Readings for the day (i.e., from the Triodion),  
 
Prokeimenon of the day, and the Three Lessons for the martyrs: 

--- PAGE 2 ---
READING FROM THE PROPHET ISAIAH (43:9-14) 
Thus saith the Lord: Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be 
assembled: who among them can declare this, and show us former things? let them 
bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, It is 
truth. Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen; that 
ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no 
God formed, neither shall there be after me. I, even I, am the Lord; and beside me 
there is no savior. I have declared, and have saved, and I have showed, when there 
was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, that I 
am God. Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can deliver out of 
my hand: I will work, and who shall let it? Thus saith the Lord, your Redeemer, the 
Holy One of Israel.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (3:1-9) 
But the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
he tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with him: for grace and mercy is to his saints, and he hath 
care for his elect.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (5:15-24; 6:1-3)  
But the righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the 
care of them is with the most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, 
and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall he cover 
them, and with his arm shall he protect them. He shall take to him his jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature his weapon for the revenge of his enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of an 
helmet. He shall take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall he 
sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with him against the unwise. Then shall 
the right aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn 
bow, shall they fly to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a 
stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall 
cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm 

--- PAGE 3 ---
shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill-dealing 
shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty, Hear therefore, O ye kings, and 
understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the 
people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord, and 
sovereignty from the Highest.  
And the rest of the order for the Presanctified Liturgy.  
But if the Presanctified Liturgy be not served, On the Aposticha we chant the 
Stichera from the Triodion, and Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
In hymnody let us praise the forty passion-bearing martyrs, O ye faithful, and with 
sweet singing let us cry out to them, saying: Rejoice, ye athletes of Christ: Hesychius, 
Meliton, Heraclius, Smaragdus and Domnus, Eunoicus, Valens and Vivianus, 
Claudius and Priscus! Rejoice, Theodulus, Eutychius and John, Xanthius, Helianus, 
Sisinnius, Cyrion, Angius, Aetius and Flavius! Rejoice, Acacius, Ecditius, Lysimachus, 
Alexander, Elias and Candidus, Theophilus, Dometian and godly Gaius and 
Gorgonius! Rejoice, Leontius and Athanasius, Cyril and Sacerdon, Nicholas and 
Valerius, Philoctimon, Severian, Chudion and Aglais, for ye have boldness before 
Christ our God, O most honored martyrs! Him do ye earnestly beseech, that those 
who keep your most precious memory with faith may be saved  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: ** Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
After “Now lettest thy servant ...,” the Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone I:  
By the pangs which Thy saints, suffered for Thee, * hearken unto us, O Lord, * 
and heal all our diseases, ** we beseech Thee, O Lover of mankind.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, * the Master of all became 
incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, * at his cry, as the righteous David said. 
Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, * having borne thy Creator. 
* Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! * Glory to Him Who came forth 
from thee! ** Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy birthgiving. 
Ektenias. Dismissal. Three full prostrations.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone I:  
By the pangs which Thy saints, suffered for Thee, * hearken unto us, O Lord, * 
and heal all our diseases, ** we beseech Thee, O Lover of mankind. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, * the Master of all became 
incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, * at his cry, as the righteous David said. 
Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, * having borne thy Creator. 
* Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! * Glory to Him Who came forth 
from thee! ** Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy birthgiving. 
After the 1st and 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns from the Triodion. 
No Ektenia are intoned.
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the priest intoneth the little Ektenia, after which 
we chant the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
O ye forty divine martyrs of Christ, like the greatest of stars ye ever illumine the 
honorable firmament of the Church and enlighten the faithful.  
 
Glory ..., in Tone IV:   
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”:  
O wondrous passion-bearers, passing over torment with most manly intent, ye 
passed through fire and water, and crossed over to the wide spaces of salvation, 
receiving the Kingdom of Heaven as an inheritance. Wherein do ye make divine 
supplication on our behalf, O ye wise forty athletes.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O Theotokos and Sovereign Lady, we, thy servants, thankfully chanting from our 
hearts and earnestly entreating thy mercies, cry out, saying: O most holy Virgin, go 
thou before us and deliver us from our enemies, visible and invisible, and from every 
threat, for thou art our aid.  
But if it be any Saturday other than that of the first week of the Fast, after the 1st 
chanting of the Psalter, we chant the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
O ye forty divine martyrs of Christ, like the greatest of stars ye ever illumine the 
honorable firmament of the Church and enlighten the faithful. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Accepting the entreaty of us * who have recourse to thy protection, O Virgin, * 
cease thou never to make supplication to Him * Who is the Lover of mankind, ** 
that He save thy servants.  
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
And after the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
 
O wondrous passion-bearers, passing over torment with most manly intent, ye 
passed through fire and water, and crossed over to the wide spaces of salvation, 
receiving the Kingdom of Heaven as an inheritance. Wherein do ye make divine 
supplication on our behalf, O ye wise forty athletes. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O Theotokos and Sovereign Lady, we, thy servants, thankfully chanting from our 
hearts and earnestly entreating thy mercies, cry out, saying: O most holy Virgin, go 
thou before us and deliver us from our enemies, visible and invisible, and from every 
threat, for thou art our aid.  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word...”:  
Adornment of the holy martyrs! Lo! the divinely assembled company of the forty 
warriors of four-fold radiance! Tried by fire and intense cold, the wise ones were truly 
revealed to be soldiers of Christ, the King of all, entreating Him that we be saved. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V:  
I weep now before the Judgment, O pure one, mindful of my wicked and evil 
deeds, of the abyss of my transgressions which hath grown from my youth, stifling 
my mind. But by their intercession grant me forgiveness, and grant that I obtain 
salvation.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: We went through fire and water, * and Thou didst 
bring us out into refreshment.  
Verse: Thou tried us even as silver is tried by fire.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE §106 (21:12-19) 
The Lord spake unto His disciples saying: But before all these, they shall lay their 
hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into 
prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name’s sake. And it shall turn 
to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what 
ye shall answer: For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries 
shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and 
brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to 
death. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake. But there shall not an hair 
of your head perish. In your patience possess ye your souls. 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone II:  
Prophetically David cried aloud in the Psalms: We went through fire and water, 
and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment! And ye, O martyrs of Christ, fulfilling 
the word in very deed, passed through fire and water, and entered into the Kingdom 
of Heaven. Wherefore, pray, O ye forty athletes, that we be granted great mercy.  
Two canons to the martyrs, with 8 Troparia:  
ODE I  
Canon I, The acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the divinely-crowned company of 
martyrs,” the composition of John the Monk, in Tone II:  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
With hymns inspired by God I praise the divinely-crowned regiment of the 
martyrs of Christ, radiantly celebrating the annual commemoration of the forty, for 
He hath been glorified!  
Rejecting every title on earth, the forty desired the title of Christian, wherefore 
they now dwell in the Highest.  
Living in Christ and despising the flesh and the world, ye put off the old man and 
this transitory vesture, and clothed yourselves in the garment of incorruption.  
Theotokion: Who is able fittingly to recount thy conceiving which surpasseth 
telling? For thou, O most pure one, hast given birth in the flesh to God, the Savior of 
us all, Who hath revealed Himself unto us.  
Canon II, The acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the divinely-crowned regiment of 
martyrs,” the composition of Theophanes, in the same tone:  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
By your supplication, O ye forty martyrs, render God well-disposed towards us 
who call upon you with the pure love of our hearts.  
Enlightened in the heavens with the rays of the splendor of the three-fold Sun, O 
ye forty martyrs, protect us who hymn you on earth, frozen over by the winter of 
temptations.  
O forty martyrs, invincible and unshaken rampart of piety and the Church: do ye 
now pacify that which doth grievously trouble the Christian calling.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, Mother who hath not known a man, thou hast 
given birth unto the Creator and Lord Who is supra-naturally over all and Who, for 
our sake, took upon Himself our flesh.  
Katavasia: “I shall open my mouth ... 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE III 
Canon I  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Disdaining the army and life, the comeliness of their bodies and wealth, the 
glorious forty martyrs inherited Christ instead of all of these things.  
When the forty martyrs were beaten mercilessly with stones at the command of the 
tormentors, through the Spirit of God the stones were hurled back against those who 
commanded that they be beaten.  
The serpent of him who invented blasphemy spake through the lips of the 
tormentors, but his God-opposing mouth hath been broken by the rocks hurled 
against the martyrs.  
Theotokion: Without seed didst thou conceive God in thy womb, giving birth to 
Him who was ineffably incarnate; upon Whom the hosts of Heaven dare not gaze, O 
pure Ever-virgin.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
O ye martyred company and united chorus of crowned martyrs: standing before 
the Master, ever save us who sing your praises.  
Battered by the lake of the passions and by the waves of grievous temptations, we 
flee to you, Christ’s forty warriors.  
Warmed in the bosom of Abraham and adorned with glorious apparel, pray ye that 
Christ grant forgiveness unto those who are bound by the winter of evil 
circumstances.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Bride of God: be thou the confirmation, refuge and 
protection of those who have recourse unto thee in faith and confess thee to be the 
Mother of God.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having served Christ in martyrdom as warriors, and having cast down the enemy 
through suffering, in your deeds ye fulfilled the words of the Prophet: ye went 
manfully through fire and water, finding refreshment, and life incorruptible. 
Wherefore, adorned with heavenly crowns, ye rejoice with the choirs of the bodiless 
ones, O blessed and all-praised passion-bearers. Entreat Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of sins unto those who honor your holy memory with love. (Twice)  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, * we have been overcome by the 
storms of our innumerable sins, * and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, * we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. * Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee * to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O most pure one, * 
unto Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, * that those who worthily 
hymn thee ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
ODE IV  
Canon I  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
“O ye most iniquitous ones, ye have been made to vainly offer such a poor 
bargain!” said the sufferers.  
Sharpened swords and wild beasts, fire and the cross did the tormentors offer to 
the saints of Christ.  
“The fire of Gehenna is frightful to us, but we are not afraid of any of our fellow 
servants here present,” said the athletes.  
“Let our arms be cut off, let our feet be burned,” the holy ones cried out, “for we 
shall receive them back incorruptible.”  
Theotokion: We beseech thee, O most pure one who didst conceive God without 
seed: ever pray for thy servants.  
Canon II  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
O martyrs, through God ye have become our illumination, for ye have clothed 
yourselves in undimmed splendor.  
O divinely elect and crowned assembly of martyrs, pray that those who hymn you 
be delivered from misfortunes.  
O holy ones, having been deemed worthy to behold the unwaning light of Christ, 
ye shine forth upon those who sit in darkness.  
Shining with the noetic radiance of Christ, O ye glorious ones, guide us to the 
divine illumination.  
Theotokion: Hymning Him Who was incarnate from thy womb, O pure one, we 
glorify thee as the Mother of God.  
ODE V 
 Canon I  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Through the most mindless savagery of the tormentors, the spiritual athletes, 
condemned to spend the night in the open air in the cold, chanted a hymn of 
thanksgiving unto God.  
Rejoicing, the forty martyrs endured the painful ice, standing in the lake, yet were 
strengthened with the hope of divine crowns.  
The serpent which before had made its nest in the waters, and now driven out, 
became an object of scorn for the forty martyrs of Christ, for he was deprived of his 
deadly strength.  
Theotokion: To thee who hast given birth to Christ, the Creator of all, do we cry 
aloud: Rejoice, O pure one! Rejoice, thou who hast shone forth the Light upon us! 
Rejoice, thou who didst contain the infinite God!  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
From the raging of the heretics do ye now deliver the honorable Church of Christ, 
O forty martyrs; for, having been born within Her, ye have passed on to great dignity 
and glory.  
Appearing to us, the forty divinely splendid martyrs of Christ like fiery beacons 
light the salvific way of piety for the faithful.  
Passing over from earth to the shelter of Heaven, where ye stand before Christ, 
the Judge of the contest, O martyrs, deem me worthy to acquire divine joy.  
Theotokion: O Maiden Sovereign Lady, thou didst truly bear God as thy divine 
Offspring, as a mystery inscrutable and incomprehensible to all, passing all 
understanding.  
ODE VI  
Canon I  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
With joy the author of enmity snatched him that fell away from the forty as did the 
wretched Judas from the twelve apostles, and mankind from Eden.  
Being shameless, the devil rageth in vain, for as of old by the thief and Matthias, so 
now by one in the office of guardsman, the tyrant hath also been rent asunder.  
Vain-minded and worthy of lamentation is he who missed both lives, for thawed 
by the fire, he departed into the unquenchable flames.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou hast given birth without knowing a man, and 
remainest forever a virgin, revealing the images of thy Son and God, the true Deity.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
O mighty ones, ye have been revealed to be watchful and vigilant preservers of the 
human race, offering up supplications, and set forth as helpers of the grieving.  
Shining forth in the Church of Christ in your unexcelled beauties, O all-praised 
ones, deliver those who honor you with love from all temptations.  
Of old ye became destroyers of the deception of the demonized persecutors, O 
most eminent ones; and now be our ready help and rampart.  
Theotokion: On thee have I placed my hope of salvation, O Ever-virgin Mother; 
and Thee have I appointed as the steadfast and unshakable intercessor of my life.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone VI: 
Having fully left the army of the world, * ye cleaved unto the Master in the 
heavens, * O forty passion-bearers of the Lord; * for, having passed through fire and 
water, * O blessed ones, * ye received glory from the heavens as is meet ** and a 
multitude of crowns.  
Ikos: Unworthy as I am, I fall down before Christ Almighty, our Creator and God, 
Who sitteth upon an unapproachable throne, Who stretched out the heavens as it 
were a curtain, Who established the earth, Who gathered the waters in the bodies 
thereof, Who created all things out of nothing, Who granteth breath and life unto all, 
Who receiveth hymnody from the archangels, is worshipped by the angels and is 
glorified by all; and offering up entreaty, I beg the grace of eloquence, that even I may 
piously hymn the saints whom He Himself showed forth as victors, granting them 
glory from the heavens and a multitude of crowns.  
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
The guard set over the forty martyrs was struck with awe, beholding their crowns; 
and, rejecting that which bound him to life, taking wing with the love of Thy manifest 
glory, with the martyrs he sang: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Hastening to the soul-destroying bath, he that loved his life died; but he that loved 
Christ, being a most exemplary apprehender of those things which he beheld, sang 
with the martyrs as in a bath of incorruption: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
When the noetic fire flared up in the minds of the forty, the most subtle madness 
of the impious was consumed, as it were melting wax. And to Thee, O Christ, they 
sang: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The power of Thy Cross, as exceeding splendid and magnificent, O Christ, doth 
weave crowns for the forty martyrs with opposites; for, having passed through fire 
and water, they cry out in incorruption: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: On Mount Sinai Moses foresaw thee, O pure one, as a burning bush 
which, without being consumed, bore the unbearable radiance of the ineffable Being, 
Who as One of the holy Hypostases, hath united Himself to the coarseness of our 
flesh.  
Canon II  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Your annual commemoration hath radiantly dawned, O ye spiritually rich martyrs, 
shining far, radiant with the splendor of the Fast. And celebrating it with faith, we 
chant with you: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
To all ye have been revealed to be as ones loosened from the passions and 
beacons shining from afar, the cleansing of the world, the destruction of deception, 
clear-voiced proclaimers of the truth and expellers of falsehood, chanting: O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Ye have been revealed to us as noetic beacons shining forth, O martyrs; for ye save 
the tempest-tossed and guide those who sail and are battered by the storm of life, 
chanting unto Christ: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Beautiful to God and desirable to the angels is the divinely assembled and most 
splendid regiment of the forty martyrs inspired by God, the godly and awesome 
company which crieth out, saying: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: A beacon of light, a luminous cloud and a hallowed place hast thou 
been revealed to be, O thou who knewest not wedlock, for thou didst ineffably 
receive the Word, the Holy One of those who are holy. And chanting unto Him, we 
cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Canon I  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Savagely inciting every creature against the athletes, the enemy hath been put to 
shame by them all, for the forty martyrs unceasingly hymn and supremely exalt the 
Lord throughout all ages.  
Cruelly were the members of your bodies crushed for Christ, and ye were offered 
unto God as a divine holocaust; with the angels ye ever hold chorus, O martyrs, 
hymning Christ throughout all ages.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
With steadfast intent the Christ-loving mother took upon her shoulder him to 
whom she had given birth; and she offered him up as the fruit of piety, a martyr 
among martyrs, emulating the sacred action of Abraham.  
“Make thy journey running straight to everlasting life, O my son,” the Christ-
loving mother cried out to her Christ-loving child, “for I could not bear to see thee 
appear in second place before Christ, the Judge of the contest!”  
Theotokion: The Son Who is not parted from the bosom of the Father, yet made 
His abode in thy maternal womb, O pure Virgin Bride of God, do we hymn and 
supremely exalt throughout all ages!  
Canon II  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Ye steadfastly gave yourselves over to a painful death in the midst of winter, O 
valiant ones; and now, having passed on to the true life which is hidden in Christ, ye 
ask for salvation and forgiveness for us.  
Having passed over from earth to the heavens, O crowned spiritual athletes, ye 
chorus of victorious martyrs of the Church, ask for us salvation and deliverance from 
misfortunes, passions and evil circumstances.  
Rending asunder the bonds of death, the Savior hath given victory over death to 
His martyrs, for, warmed by the cold, the forty sang, asking for salvation for all the 
faithful.  
Through prayer the divine choir of passion-bearers manifestly drive the assaults of 
dangers, the attack of the passions and the temptations of the demons away from 
those who hymn Christ throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: Mortals given over to the dust of mortality and to corruption hast 
thou alone raised up, O pure Lady, Virgin Birthgiver of God, having given birth to 
Christ our God, the Author of life.  
ODE IX  
Canon I  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Stripped naked and beaten with stones for the sake of Christ, ye endured the 
wintry air, icy water and crushing of your limbs; and having been consumed by fire, O 
ye forty martyrs, ye shine forth in the rushing river like beacons.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Having acquired the Cross as a staff of divine power, the forty spiritual athletes 
cried out to Christ: O Master, almighty Conqueror, crown us by Thine own hand, that 
we all may unceasingly magnify Thee with hymns!  
The pain of the ice and boundless cruelty of the cold did ye endure, O forty 
martyrs; but paradise is sweet, for the bosom of the Patriarch Abraham doth warm 
you in the eternal mansions.  
Manifest as conquerors by your sufferings, and having received crowns from the 
divine right hand of the Master, O forty martyrs, pray ye now that peace be granted to 
the world and victory and salvation to us.  
Theotokion: The multitudes of angels entreat thy Son, O Virgin Bride and Mother. 
Accept thou our supplication, O thou who alone art the hope of the faithful; grant 
peace to the world, and victory and salvation unto us who love thee.  
Canon II  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Supra-natural illumination and ineffable joy and glory have ye been deemed worthy 
to receive; and now, O soldiers of Christ, ye forty martyrs, from temptations, misfor-
tunes and the wickedness of the enemy deliver those who honor you with love.  
Having received power and might from the heavens, O ye most noetically rich 
martyrs, fellow prisoners of Christ, in that ye have become dispellers of falsehood, 
drive away all the ephemeral gloom of idolatry and enlighten the world, O ye forty 
martyrs.  
Adorned with the comeliness of an honorable martyrdom, and sharing in divine 
life, O forty martyrs, warriors of Christ, ye truly rejoice, united to the most radiant 
and pure Light.  
Standing now before Christ with the boldness of piety, and illumined with the light 
of the Godhead, O glorious forty martyrs, earnestly beseech Him, that those who 
praise you be illumined with the thrice-luminous radiance.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, portal of divine Light, with the immaterial rays of thy light 
illumine the manifest twilight of my soul, and grant that I who magnify thee faithfully 
and lovingly with hymns, O pure one, be delivered from everlasting fire.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Let us hymn the company of forty as is meet, the victorious regiment, the array of 
the holy martyrs, for by fire, ice and water they have put to shame the regiments of 
the adversary and received crowns of glory from Christ the Savior.  
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Glory ..., another Exapostilarion:  
Let the forty-member choir of the forty who were martyred for the supremely 
divine Trinity and the four-fold virtues, by the four elements: fire, air, water and 
earth, be hymned with divine songs, for they suffered for Christ, the Master of all.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O Virgin Mother who, though a maiden, hast given birth to the Master of all 
things and all creation: rescue me from the passions which torment me, and lead me 
to the radiance of thy tender compassion and to the most beautiful Pascha of thy 
risen Son.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Come ye, O brethren, and with praises let us hymn the regiment of martyrs which 
was consumed by fire and cold, and with burning zeal burned up the winter of 
deception, the most brave army, the most sanctified company, the unvanquished and 
invincible protection, the rampart and protectors of the faith, the divine choir of the 
forty martyrs who mightily entreat Christ, the Mediator of the Church, that He send 
down upon our souls peace and great mercy. (Twice)  
Rejoice, mighty and courageous assembly, victorious regiment, pillars of piety, 
warriors of Christ, steadfast and invincible swordsmen, truly divine, most mighty of 
mind and manly of soul, holy choir desired of God, divinely elect company, O ye 
forty martyrs equal in suffering, equal also in character, and who received equal 
crowns: entreat Christ, that He grant our souls peace and great mercy!  
Rejoice, victorious multitude, who were valorously courageous in battle, ye stars 
who passed through fire and cold, who broke asunder the water’s ice, who have 
rendered the earth heavenly and illumined all, and who are now warmed in the bosom 
of Abraham, having joined chorus with the armies of the angels. O ye forty martyrs, 
flowers emitting the fragrance of spiritual diffusion: entreat Christ, that He grant our 
souls great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone V: the composition of John the Monk:  
O passion-bearers of Christ, ye have rendered the most honorable Fast radiant 
through the commemoration of your glorious suffering; for, being forty in number, 
ye hallow the forty days of Lent, emulating the Savior’s suffering in your own 
suffering for Christ. Wherefore, as ye are possessed of boldness, pray that we in the 
world may attain unto the Resurrection on the third day, of God the Savior of our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V:  
We, the faithful bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, and we glorify thee as is meet, for 
thou art the impregnable city, the impassable rampart, the steadfast intercessor and 
refuge of our souls.  
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Triodion; and Glory ..., in Tone II: 
The forty martyrs, chanting a hymn unto the Savior, have given the faithful to 
drink from the cup of truth which is filled with their blood, with the fire of their 
torments and icy waters; for, though one in mind; they offered themselves to Christ 
in many bodies. And the godly mother of a Christ-loving son, bearing him upon her 
shoulder, said: “Come, O spiritual athlete, and suffer with the rest!”  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
O blessed Theotokos, * thou mystically sealed and impassible gate: * accept our 
entreaties, and bring them unto thy Son and God, ** that through thee He may save 
our souls.  
Then, “It is good to give praise unto the Lord ...,” Trisagion, Troparion, Ektenia, and 
three full prostrations, the First Hour with its Kathisma, and the dismissal.  
The Third, Sixth and Ninth Hours, with their Kathismata, at the proper time, and the  
Beatitudes quickly, and the rest. At each Hour, three full prostrations.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
ON THE SAME DAY, AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera; 6 from the Triodion 
And 4 of the holy martyrs:  
In Tone I: The choir of forty-fold splendor, the whole army assembled by God, 
hath shone forth upon the Fast in their honorable sufferings, illumining and en-
lightening our souls. (Twice)  
In Tone II: The martyrs considered the lake to be as a paradise, and winter to be 
as the heat of day, O Christ God; and thoughts of the tyrants’ threats did not frighten 
them. Valiant, they feared not the increase of tortures, having acquired the weapon of 
the Cross; and therewith, as mighty, they vanquished the foe, for which they have 
received crowns of grace.  
Who will not hymn the choir of the martyrs forty in number? For they entered the 
waters of the lake boldly, and, huddling together in the cold, they chanted a hymn 
unto the Lord: Nay, in the rivers art Thou wroth against us, O Lord? Nay, in the 
rivers art Thou wroth against us, O Lover of mankind? Lighten Thou the oppression 
and bitterness of the wind, for our feet are empurpled with our own blood, and Thou 
has led us into thine everlasting habitations, O God! May the bosom of Abraham 
warm us!  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Prophetically David cried aloud in the Psalms: We went through fire and water, 
and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment! And ye, O martyrs of Christ, fulfilling 
the word in very deed, passed through fire and water and entered into the Kingdom 
of Heaven: Wherefore, pray, O ye forty spiritual athletes, that we be granted great 
mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
All of my hope do I place on thee, * O Mother of God; ** keep me under thy 
protection.  
 
 
 
