--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 3rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS EUTROPIUS, CLEONICUS & 
BASILISCUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
O martyrs three in number, * who contended mightily * against those who cruelly 
condemned you, * and who with faith endured * all manner of pangs most cruel: * ye 
have received the kingdom on high. * Wherefore, pray ye, that God grant unto our 
souls ** peace and great mercy.  
With spiritual songs let us praise * Eutropius, the steadfast Cleonicus and 
Basiliscus; * for they utterly consumed the tinder of ungodliness with fire * by the 
grace of piety. * And now they illumine the ends of the earth * with the divine 
radiance of fire, * like beacons most bright, ** having cast all deception into the dark 
void.  
When your heads were severed, * ye crushed the head of the enemy * under your 
beautiful feet, * O valiant strugglers, * unwavering stars, animate sacrifices, * treasures 
of the temple of heaven. * O glorious Eutropius, Basiliscus and Cleonicus, ** beg 
peace for us all.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O pure one, thou strange report! * Rejoice, holy and divinely planted tree 
of paradise! * Rejoice, destruction of the evil demons! * Rejoice, two-edged sword, * 
which hath cut off the head of the enemy * by thy strange birthgiving! * O all-holy 
and immaculate one, ** call us back who have gone astray.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd * hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly * endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor the sufferings of the three most magnificent 
martyrs”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone I: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it shattered 
the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the deep. 
Illumined with the supernal splendors of the effulgence of the Triune Sun, O all-
praised martyrs, enlighten those who now piously bless you on the radiant day of your 
martyrdom.  
O most wise ones, with your words ye wounded the hearts of the all-iniquitous as 
with arrows; wherefore, ye patiently endured wounds and stripes, confessing the holy 
name of God.  
Having with sacred discourse preached before the tyrant’s tribunal Him Whose 
good pleasure it was to suffer for our sake, O ever-memorable martyrs, ye steadfastly 
endured the tortures to which ye were subjected.  
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, having 
given flesh to Him Who is uncircumscribable. Him do thou entreat, that He deliver 
us all from imprisonment and from everlasting torment, O Virgin Mother.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
Gazing upon divine intelligences through divine visitations, O blessed athletes, 
with manly demeanor ye made haste to the torments, vanquishing the bodiless foe 
with your bodies; wherefore, ye have been glorified.  
Having endured for Christ the severing of your members, O wise ones, ye 
sanctified the earth in a holy manner with the divine outpourings of your blood, 
staunching the blood offered to demons on idolatrous altars, O martyrs.  
Ye were truly set like luminous stars in the heavens of suffering, shedding your 
light upon the whole world with never-waning effulgence, and dispelling the darkness 
of deception, O holy ones; wherefore, with faith we call you blessed.  
Theotokion: In thy womb thou didst receive Christ, Who emptied the womb of 
Hades by His all-accomplishing counsel. Him do thou entreat, O divinely joyous one, 
that He deliver from the bondage of sin all who with faith ever call thee blessed.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Before many people the trinity of martyrs confessed the adored Trinity; and, 
having suffered, they have been numbered among the choirs of the incorporeal ones. 
Let us praise them today with faith, celebrating their sacred memory, which saveth 
the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
O most holy Virgin, thou hope of Christians: with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly entreat God, to Whom thou hast given birth in a manner past 
understanding and all telling, that He grant forgiveness of all sins and amendment of 
life unto those who ever glorify thee with faith and love.  
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb and Shepherd 
hanging dead upon the Tree, said, weeping and bitterly exclaiming: “How can I bear 
Thine ineffable condescension, O my Son, and Thy voluntary suffering, O supremely 
good God?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain overshadowed 
by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy One of Israel * 
would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and restoration. 
Preaching the one Three-Sunned God, the three martyrs stood in the arena, 
mightily enduring wounds of burning; and they were revealed to be fiery pillars of the 
Church, leading those who are pious to Christ.  
Having set your feet upon the rock of faith, ye were not shaken by the wiles of 
many temptations, but showed yourselves to be unshaken, in every way hindering and 
thwarting the impious by grace.  
Hurled like costly stones upon the earth, ye truly demolished the house of 
wickedness, O most wise ones; and ye have made yourselves temples of God and 
have been carried away to the temple of heaven.  
Theotokion: Thy God-bearing womb was shown to be a palace wherein Christ, 
the King of all, did rest, O pure Mother, making the pious radiant habitations of His 
unapproachable divinity.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O Christ, 
* and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * enlighten with the 
light of thine understanding * the hearts of those who with right worship hymn 
Thee.  
Observing the law of God, O right victorious martyrs, ye opposed the iniquitous 
with courage; and, wounded and lacerated in body, ye have won the trophy of 
everlasting victory.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Let us praise Basiliscus, and with faith let us honor Cleonicus and Eutropius, the 
exceedingly wise ones who suffered for their faith in the all-holy Trinity and have 
shone forth more brightly than the sun.  
Working wonders for the glory of our God, ye drew to faith in the Savior those 
who looked on, O much-suffering ones, beauteous flowers of paradise, foundations 
of the Church.  
Theotokion: With the radiance of Him Who shone forth from thee in a manner 
past understanding, O all-immaculate one, illumine our thoughts and cause the 
darkness of soul-destroying thoughts to fade away, that we may hymn thee, O 
Sovereign Lady.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to deliver 
us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save Thy people 
O our God, * for Thou art the strength and restoration of the weak. 
Heaven and earth rejoice; and mankind joins chorus, celebrating the yearly festival 
of those who, with steadfast mind, valiantly endured blessed sufferings for Christ.  
With thy goodly virtues thou didst honor the supremely good God, O Eutropius, 
overcoming the wiles of the enemy. Wherefore, all mankind honors thee, hoping to 
receive through thee forgiveness of sins.  
Pouring forth streams of healings, ye have driven away the burning heat of 
sickness and sorrow, O wise ones, sending forth good health upon all who ever 
piously have recourse to your protection.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, who in the blossoming forth of the Fruit of thy 
womb didst cause the malice of the enemy, which sprouted forth of old through 
transgression, to wither away: uproot the soul-corrupting and thorny thoughts which 
bud in my soul.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; 
* for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so hath 
He wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou praised and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Reckoning the severing of their members, buffetings, convulsions and violent 
death to be divine delight, the martyrs rejoiced, chanting zealously unto God: Praised 
and supremely glorious is the God of our fathers!  
After many tortures of the body, ye mightily endured the cross, in emulation of the 
Redeemer, O glorious Eutropius and great Cleonicus; and having received a blessed 
end, ye hymn our praised and supremely glorious God. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 Christ appeared to you in prison, commanding you to set your sight on immortal 
rewards; and beholding Him, ye were filled with boldness, crying out, O glorious 
martyrs: Praised and supremely glorious is the God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: O most holy Sovereign Lady, from the invasion of the heathen, from 
encounters with evil, and from everlasting damnation deliver us who cry out with 
faith: Praised and supremely glorious is the God of our fathers!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone 
more brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed: 
Bless the Lord all ye his works, * hymn and exalt him supremely throughout 
all ages. 
With minds ever straining toward the one Master, O all-praised ones, ye were 
stretched out, wounded and tortured exceedingly, crying aloud: All ye works of the 
Lord, hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Lifted up on crosses, as the Master was of old, O athletes, ye were counted worthy 
to receive great glory, chanting and saying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, 
hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Strengthened by the power of God, O athletes, ye mightily vanquished hordes of 
the iniquitous, chanting and saying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, hymn 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Triadicon: I hymn Thee, the all-holy Godhead, as a Unity in essence, 
distinguishing three Hypostases without division; and, rejoicing, I cry: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be the temple of Emmanuel and the portal 
through which He entered and issued forth, in a way that He Himself doth know, O 
pure one, saving those who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, hymn and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE XI  
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy 
pure birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * quench 
the raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may unceasingly 
magnify Thee. 
That ye might obtain a portion with Christ, ye reckoned all the things of this 
present life to be but dung, as the divine Paul hath taught; wherefore, having suffered 
well, ye have made your abodes in the heavens, O crowned ones of great renown.  
The divine company of sacred martyrs was shown to be like a three-sided tower; 
and by grace they cast down the ramparts of wicked ungodliness. And now they dwell 
in the city of the living God, in the tabernacles of the first born. 
 Having received from Christ a crown of incorruption and dyed your robes purple 
in the blood of your martyrdom, ye stand before the King of the ages, radiant with 
luminous splendors and most rich gifts.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having already drawn nigh unto God, and celebrating with the assemblies of the 
incorporeal, O martyrs, ask that those who ever bless you on earth and celebrate your 
memory may receive the radiance of heaven.  
Theotokion: The ranks of the angels stand in awe of the One Who shone forth 
from thy womb; Him do thou entreat on our behalf, O Virgin Mother, that He 
deliver all who hymn thee from dread torment and the outermost darkness.  
 
 
