--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 11th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
THE COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, SOPHRONIUS, 
PATRIARCH OF JERUSALEM 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Called, O Sophronius, * the namesake of chastity * by divine foreknowledge, * 
thou wast righteous and chaste in thy deeds, * manly and wise, * being wholly 
crowned with native virtues. * And thou didst remain flourishing in both, * soul and 
body ** as a most eminent arbiter.  
From thy theological mouth, * O all-blessed Sophronius, * thou didst thunder 
forth the teachings of theology, * having clearly expounded the theology of the 
beginningless Father, * and the co-beginningless Son, * and the equally everlasting 
Holy Spirit, * the Trinity in unity, * and the unity in Trinity, ** God One in essence.  
Wisely didst thou teach * the Word co-beginningless with the Father, * Who, 
though incorporeal, united flesh to His Hypostasis * without change or commingling, 
O all-wise one, * whose actions are two-fold, * for both natures, * of which He is 
composed and wherein He is beheld, * being One, undivided in essence, ** 
apprehended in both the one and the other.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Bedew my mind * with showers of the Most holy Spirit, O most pure one, * who 
ineffably gaveth birth unto Christ * the drop Who with His compassions washeth 
away * the countless iniquities of mankind; * do thou dry up the upwelling of my 
passions, * and grant unto me a torrent * of ever-living nourishment, ** by thy 
supplications.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee * nailed to the Cross, O Lord, * the ewe-lamb 
Thy Mother marveled * and cried out: “What is this that I see, * O my Son most 
desired? * How hast Thou been rewarded * by the unfaithful and iniquitous assembly 
* which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? ** Yet glory to Thine ineffable condescen-
sion, O Master!”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the sincere sacrifice of 
the namesake of chastity,” by St. Theophanes the Branded, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
Chastely didst thou sail the deep of chastity, steered by the winds of the Spirit, and 
amassing great noetic riches - the gifts of wisdom, - O father Sophronius.  
Thou wast like the angel of the Resurrection of Christ and the divine president of 
the Tomb of Christ God Who enriched thee with a well-spring of immortality and 
hath raised us up from our fall.  
With the splendor of thy discourses and keenness of mind thou didst make the 
world bright, clearly theologizing concerning the essence of the Godhead in three 
Hypostases, the triple Unity, O father Sophronius.  
Theotokion: He Who is by nature uncreated, co-everlasting with the Father, above 
and beyond time, and eternal, being conceived of thee, O Sovereign Lady, hath come 
under time as a man, thus saving mankind.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Supported by the staff of thy words, O venerable one, the Church of Christ doth 
repel the assaults of the impious, driving away heresies opposed to God.  
Contending through thine honored preaching, O God-bearer, thou wast shown to 
be a victor with the aid of the Spirit, wisely strengthened, O father Sophronius.  
Having mortified all the corrupting pleasures of the flesh, with piety thou didst 
enliven thine incorrupt soul, revealing it to be an instrument of God.  
Thy beautiful tongue, which exudeth honey and theology, wells forth rivers of 
discourse, O thou who art pleasing unto God, pouring forth divine teachings for all.  
Theotokion: We glorify thee, the Theotokos who hast given birth unto God, 
harmonizing the name of thine Offspring and the title which befitteth thee, O most 
pure Sovereign Lady.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go quickly before ...”: 
With thy discourses thou hast adorned the Church of Christ, and by thy words 
thou hast preserved that which is in the image of God, O venerable Sophronius; for 
the chastity which is within thee hath shown forth in the world, irradiating the grace 
of thy teachings upon all who with love celebrate thy holy memory.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
exceedingly glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee suspended upon the Cross, * O Word of 
God, * Thy most pure Mother exclaimed, lamenting maternally: * “What is this new 
and strange wonder, O my Son? * How is it that Thou, the Life of all, hast tasted 
death, * desiring to bring life to mortals, ** in so far as Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Thou, O wise father, didst preach the one beginningless Essence in three 
Hypostases, Each with its own characteristics, separate yet indivisible, unified yet not 
commingled, one in will and divinity.  
Possessed of chaste thought and a mind most chaste, O all-blessed father, thou 
didst not claim any change or commingling of the two immutably united natures in 
the one, only-begotten Christ.  
Divinely illumined by the enlightenment of the Spirit, thou didst set at naught the 
wicked insanity of Nestorius who with his will and reason preached the union into 
one nature of the two natures of Christ.  
With the fire of thy teachings, O divinely wise and venerable father, thou didst 
utterly consume Pyrrhus who denied that there are two active wills in Christ which 
are of themselves of different essences, and likewise that there are two energies.  
Theotokion: Thou art become more comely than all the magnificence of the 
angels, O Maiden, in that thou hast given birth unto their Creator and Lord, Who was 
incarnate of thy most pure blood redeeming all who glorify Him.  
ODE V  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
Gazing upon the site of the honored Resurrection, the tomb of life, with unfeigned 
love, thou didst draw forth therefrom the mystic teachings of the vision of God, 
illumining the faithful, O holy hierarch.  
In every way thou didst love Him Who alone is good, aflame with noetic radiance, 
thou didst also come to love the Well-spring of incorruption, inclining towards Him 
with thy spiritual vision, O all-wise one.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thou wast a living and animate temple of God, having died to all on earth and 
having acquired the abundant table of the Word and the lampstand of grace, O 
venerable one.  
Theotokion: To Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, Who is known in two 
essences, and Who, though beginningless, became flesh, didst thou give birth in a 
manner past all telling, O ever-virgin Mother of God.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Richly did the grace of the all-holy Spirit flow forth from thy lips, O divinely wise 
one; wherefore, the sound of thy words is likened to the rushing torrents of rivers.  
Thou didst flourish like a palm tree in the house of the Lord, O holy hierarch, 
delighting the hearts of those who with faith honor thee, with the fruitfulness of thy 
discourse and thy pure life.  
The council of the heretics hath been slain by the vital broadsword of thy words; 
and the savage array of those who wage war on God hath been cut down, and slain 
by the sword of thy teachings.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, we hymn thy pure birth-giving whereby we have all 
been saved from the snares of death and delivered from grievous sin and the hands of 
Hades.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee the champion leader ...”: 
O Sophronius of Jerusalem, most wise among patriarchs, * who struggled with 
divine zeal, spreading the commandments of truth with thy lips, * setting the 
foundations of the Church in good order, * and there transmitting them to those in 
the monastic ranks: * thou didst bring most wise discourses to light; and, instructed 
thereby, we cry aloud to thee: ** Rejoice, O splendid boast of the Orthodox!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O God of our 
fathers, * supremely praised, and blessed art Thou O Lord.  
O victor, opposing the blasphemy of the heretics with aid from on high, O wise 
one, thou didst cry out in gladness: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Wholly dedicated to God, O wise one, traversing the plantation of the ascetics, 
thou didst plant a meadow with thine instructions in the virtues, consecrating it to 
God Who is in the highest.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Obedient to the law of Christ, thou didst piously distribute the riches of thy 
knowledge to those who asked, crying aloud: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Having sanctified thy soul and wholly purified thy body, thou didst 
give birth seedlessly, having conceived the power of the Most High in thy womb 
through the coming upon thee of the Holy Spirit, O all-immaculate one.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
With the myrrh of the grace of hierarchal service wast thou hallowed; and having 
been bishop in the place where the salvation of the world was revealed, O all-wise 
father Sophronius, thou didst cry out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Honoring the highest wisdom, thou wast crowned with a crown of the graces, 
receiving the gift of wisdom, unfading glory and riches which cannot be taken away, 
O glorious one, crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
Hierarchically vested in divine righteousness, O father, thou initiate of the 
mysteries of God, thou didst govern the flock of the Master with most righteous 
words and deeds, teaching them to sing: Hymn the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Splendidly, in a manner past all telling, the Word Who is co-beginningless with the 
Father bestowed upon thee discourse which turneth away and weakeneth the words 
and blasphemies of heresies, O father who criest out: Hymn the Lord, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be a sacred temple of the Word Who 
sanctifieth all creation, and a holy mountain of richness, a most splendid mountain, O 
blessed Sovereign Lady who alone art all-hymned. Wherefore, we hymn thee, O 
Mother of God, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
The speech which proceedeth from thy divine lips, O divinely eloquent one, 
sweeteneth the thoughts of the pious with grace, like sap exuding the magnificence of 
divine understanding.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou dost dwell now with the Master and King of all, O divinely eloquent one, 
amid the inner sanctuaries of Heaven, where the angelic luminaries and the armies of 
the saints hold chorus.  
Having led an angelic life on earth, O father, thou hast been deemed worthy of the 
blessedness of the angels in the heavens, do thou entreat Christ, that all who hymn 
thee may be saved.  
Thy cheeks were like phials of perfume, filled with precious and pure nard, O 
divinely wise one, and thou wast revealed to be an alabaster box filled with wisdom, 
perfuming the precious body of Christ with thy teachings.  
Theotokion: Isaiah beheld thee as a light cloud, O Virgin, for the Lord, having 
completely humbled himself to a work of His hands, descended upon thee, revealing 
His understanding unto those who hymn thee.  
 
 
 
 
