--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 14th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH 
 THE COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER BENEDICT  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Having from childhood * renounced the world * with true faith and love, O 
father, * rejoicing, thou didst follow after the crucified Christ; * and having mortified 
thy flesh * with many feats of asceticism, * thou didst richly receive the grace of 
healings, * to assuage divers illnesses ** and to expel greatly astonished evil spirits.  
Being the adornment of monastics, * thou didst assemble a countless multitude * 
to hymn the Lord, O venerable Benedict, * guiding to heaven the steps of all who * 
followed well thy divine teachings * and emulated thy virtuous life, O father. * With 
them we honor thee, * rejoicing in thy repose ** in sacred manner.  
Like Elijah of old, O father, * thou didst summon rain from the skies * by thy 
supplication, * and thou didst cause the vessel to pour forth oil, * and resurrect a dead 
man, * and worked many other miracles, * unto the glory of the God and Savior of 
all, O venerable one. * Wherefore, with love we celebrate ** thy glorious memory, O 
Benedict.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
O joy of all who sorrow, intercessor for the oppressed and nurturer of the hungry, 
consolation of wanderers and staff of the blind, visitation of the infirm, protection 
and help of those who labor, help of orphans: Thou art the Mother of God Most 
High, O most pure one. Hasten thou, we beseech thee, to save thy servants!  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Creator of all things * enduring great 
injustice and lifted up upon the Cross, * the most pure one groaned, saying: * “O all-
hymned Lord, my Son and God, * how is it that, desiring to honor Thy creation, * 
Thou dost endure dishonor in the flesh? * Glory to Thy great compassion and Thy 
condescension, ** O Lover of mankind!”  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
The canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “I offer a hymn to the wise 
Benedict,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone II:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
O venerable Benedict, pray thou that God grant deliverance from all trans-
gressions and grace unto me who yearn to hymn thy right laudable memory.  
Taking up thy cross from childhood, in monasticism thou didst follow after the 
Almighty; and having mortified the flesh, thou wast deemed worthy of life, O most 
blessed one.  
Subjecting thyself to the law of God, O right wondrous one, thou didst quell the 
uprisings of the passions with feats of abstinence, and wast enriched by the grace of 
dispassion.  
Theotokion: Enriched with incorruption on account of thee, O all-pure Birthgiver 
of God, we cry out to thee who art full of joy: Rejoice, O adornment of the venerable 
and the righteous!  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Full of the living waters of the divine Spirit, O God-bearer, thy soul poured forth 
rivers of miracles, drying up the flow of ailments.  
Thou didst pass over to abide in the vastness of paradise, O all-blessed one, having 
trodden the narrow path, and didst choke off the wiles of the demons and the ways 
of the disorderly.  
Watered with streams of thy tears, O Benedict, like a fruitful tree thou didst bring 
forth a divine harvest of virtues and miracles, by divine grace.  
Theotokion: He Who alone is good passed, incarnate, through thy womb, O most 
immaculate one, and was seen as a perfect man. Him do thou beseech, that He save 
those who hymn thee.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”:  
Being a monk in a manner pleasing to God, thou didst live virtuously and didst 
receive the grace of healing, O Benedict, working awesome miracles; and having 
assembled a sacred community, thou didst lead to the Lord multitudes of the saved, 
O most spiritually rich father. Glory to God Who enlightened thee! Glory to Him 
Who crowned thee! Glory to Him Who hath glorified thy holy memory!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
Stretching forth thy divine arms, wherewith thou didst bear the Creator Who in 
His goodness hath become incarnate, O most pure virgin, beseech Him to deliver 
from temptations, sufferings and tribulations us who praise thee with love and cry 
aloud: Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! Glory to Him Who issued 
forth from thee! Glory to Him Who hath delivered us by thy birthgiving!  
Stavrotheotokion: In awe of Thy great and dread endurance, O Savior, the most 
pure one lamented bitterly and cried out to Thee Who wast crucified on the Cross by 
the iniquitous ones and whose side was pierced with a spear by the soldiers: Glory to 
Thy love for mankind! Glory to Thy goodness! Glory to Thee Who by Thy death hast 
rendered mankind immortal!  
ODE IV  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.  
Having crucified thyself to the passions and the world, O father Benedict, thou 
didst please Christ Who stretched out His hands on the Cross of His own will. Him 
do thou entreat, that He save our souls.  
With feats of abstinence didst thou mortify thy fleshly members, O venerable one; 
by thy prayer didst thou raise up the dead; thou gavest the paralyzed, who marveled in 
faith, the ability to walk, and didst heal every infirmity, O father.  
By thy vivifying discourse, O venerable one, didst thou render dry and desiccated 
souls fruitful, bringing forth spiritual and divine fruit, in that thou wast advanced by 
God, thou most sacred adornment of monastics.  
Theotokion: The incarnate Word descended upon thine honored womb like rain 
upon the fleece, O pure one, and manifestly halted the rains of polytheism and 
brought an end to the bitter winter, O all-immaculate one.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Entreating the God of mercy, O venerable father, like Elijah thou didst fill a cruse, 
a great vessel, with oil, a thing marveled at by those who watched with faith.  
As one pure of soul, O all-blessed Benedict, in ecstasy, thou didst behold the 
whole earth resplendent as beneath a single light, for God so honoreth thee.  
Working miracles in Christ, O Benedict, by thy supplication thou entreatest the 
Judge of the contest, that water gush forth, which remaineth to this day, proclaiming 
thy wonders.  
Theotokion: He Who dwelleth in the heavens, so desiring, made His abode within 
thy pure womb, that He might make habitations for the Trinity of us who proclaim 
thee to be the Theotokos, O pure one.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Illumined by the effulgence of the Spirit, thou didst dispel the darkness of evil 
demons, O wonder-worker Benedict, most radiant lamp of monastics.  
How glorious was thy life, O blessed one! How splendid thine honored life 
whereby thou didst draw the flock of monastics to knowledge of the Savior!  
As a resident of the kingdom of heaven, O divinely wise Benedict, pray thou, that 
we who ever faithfully bless thee may also attain it.  
Theotokion: The never-setting Sun of righteousness shone forth from thy holy 
womb and enlightened the faithful, O all-hymned virgin Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
Thou wast enriched by the grace of God, * and by thy deeds proclaimed thy name. 
* In prayer and fasting thou wast revealed to be * full of the gifts of the Spirit of God, 
* O Benedict, favorite of Christ God, * shown to be a healer of the infirm, ** as one 
who repulses the enemy, the ready helper of our souls.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: Of old the youths revealed themselves to be rhetors * with a love for 
supreme wisdom, * for from the depths of their God-pleasing souls, * they 
theologized with their lips as they sang: * O supremely divine God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst acquire life-bearing mortality by laying aside pleasures; wherefore, thou 
wast deemed worthy to resurrect the dead, O blessed Benedict, crying out: O 
supremely divine God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Astonishing a multitude of the faithful, thou didst do as did the great Elijah, raising 
up a garden for monks by thy venerable labors, and it remaineth ever walled about by 
thy supplications, O blessed one.  
The mindless ones who sought to murder thee with evil sorcery were put to 
shame, O father Benedict, denounced by the foreknowledge in thee, for thou wast 
preserved by the hand of Almighty God.  
Theotokion: Heal thou the passions of my soul, O Virgin who ineffably conceived 
the Well-spring of dispassion, and grant me a shower of compunction to bring me 
consolation there, O holy Theotokos.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Reigning in Christ over corrupting passions, O divinely wise father, thou wast 
deemed worthy to dwell in the heavenly kingdom with all who lived righteously and 
loved God Who seest all things.  
Accepting thy holy supplications, through thee God bestowed the means to live 
upon those in want, glorifying thee exceedingly with miracles on earth, O thrice--
blessed Benedict.  
Adorned with the beauties of godly virtues, thou didst pass on to the beautiful 
mansions to abide with God, O father, and to enjoy His divine beauties for ages 
without end.  
Theotokion: Behold, a Babe, the Son of the Most High, is born of thee, O pure 
one, as Isaiah crieth out, and He is seen to be thy Son also, O Virgin, making those 
who honor thee children of the heavenly Father.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Thou wast shown to be like the great sun, illumining creation with awesome signs 
and rays of the virtues; wherefore, celebrating thy truly luminous memory, we are 
enlightened with compunctionate thoughts, O father.  
The flock of monastics assembled by thee giveth praise day and night, having in 
their midst thy body which poureth forth rivers of miracles abundantly and unceas-
ingly enlighteneth their steps, O wise father.  
Thou didst emit a radiance greater than that of the Sun, O father, fulfilling the 
commandments of God; and thou hast passed into never-waning light, praying that 
forgiveness of sins be granted to those who faithfully honor thee; O ever-memorable 
Benedict.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, bearer of the Light, drive thou the passions from my soul, 
and grant that I may behold, in pure manner, the beauty of the Savior Who shone 
forth ineffably from thy most pure womb, as a light to the nations, O all-hymned one.  
