--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER SYMEON THE NEW 
THEOLOGIAN  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O venerable father Symeon, * having abandoned the things of life as of no 
account, * thou didst desire Christ alone, and Him alone didst thou acquire: * thou 
didst cleave unto Him, serving Him alone. * Wherefore, thou hast been illumined 
with ineffable light * and, ever delighting in Him, thou hast shone forth in the virtues. 
* O beacon for monks, lamp of beaten gold, * lightning illumining men’s souls, ** 
entreat Christ God, that we be saved!  
O father Symeon, thou peer of the angels, * standing continually before the joyous 
Light, * thou dost behold what the angels see, * delighting in the never-waning 
effulgence which on Tabor once shone forth upon the three disciples. * Thou hast 
illumined the ends of the earth like the sun * with the splendor of thy corrections, * 
warming thy children with beams of Orthodoxy, * and removing the darkness of the 
defilement of sin. ** O fervent advocate, entreat Christ God, that we be saved!  
O blessed father Symeon, * leaning noetically against the breast of the lord, * thou 
didst receive the treasures of theology * and wast yoked with the first among 
theologians, * the great Apostle John, being also an emulator of the holy hierarch 
Gregory; * for thou didst receive their title. O great father and theologian, * 
expounder of the ineffable mysteries of God, * thou radiant model of virtue, ** pray 
thou ever, that we be saved!  
Glory ..., in Tone III: 
Come, O brethren, let us magnify the initiate of the mysteries of theology! For, lo! 
proclaiming ineffable things, he hath made clear for us the dogmas of the mystery of 
salvation. For, pouring forth springs of tears, he cleansed the eye of his soul; and 
gazing upon the never-setting Light, he was filled with the waters of heavenly 
theology, like a river overflowing with the waters of grace, gladdening the souls of the 
divinely wise, who cry out to him with love: Cleanse us of the mire of many sins, O 
venerable father, and give us that water to drink which floweth unto the life of 
everlasting gladness!  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III, or this Stavrotheotokion:  
Beholding Him Who was born of thee hanging upon the Tree, the all-immaculate 
one exclaimed, crying aloud: “O my sweet Child, where hath the radiant beauty gone 
of Thee Who hath done good to the human race?”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
If a Troparion need be chanted, we use the following, in Tone VIII:  
With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, * and with sighs 
from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, * 
becoming a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. ** O Symeon our 
father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “I, Ambrose, hymn the glorious 
Symeon in song”, in Tone V: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Unto God the Savior Who made His people pass dryshod through the 
sea, * but drowned Pharaoh with all his host, * unto Him alone let us sing: * 
For He is glorified. 
Standing ever before God the Savior, O most honored one, remember us, thy 
children, whom thou hast caused to bud forth by thy discourses.  
Purifying thy noetic eye with streams of tears, thou didst behold the great light; 
and delighting therein, ask for us divine effulgence.  
Having disdained the darkness of sin and rejected the gloom of the passions, thou 
wast enlightened by lightning-flashes of theology, speaking and revealing ineffable 
things.  
Theotokion: Let the pure Sovereign Lady, who alone hath delivered us from the 
curse and death, be hymned as the glory and adornment of mortals.  
ODE III  
Irmos: By the power of Thy cross, O Christ, * strengthen my mind * that I 
may hymn and glorify Thee * and Thy salvific ascension. 
Having furnished thy mind with wings by fasting, vigil and prayer, thou didst soar 
high above the heavens, O Symeon, thou model for life.  
Having achieved control over the passions, thou wast adorned on earth with rich 
poverty, having in thy heart a treasure: the grace of the Spirit.  
Emulating the life of the angels, thou wast deemed worthy of angelic light, and 
illumined thereby, as with a token of splendor to come, thou wast pure in all thy life.  
Theotokion: With glorification we ever bless thee, the joy and glory of the people 
who are saved; for through thee have we again been clothed in glory.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Forsaking the glory of an earthly king, thou didst close thyself in a narrow cell. 
Instead of glorious vesture thou didst clothe thyself in the robe of immortality, and 
instead of sweet foods didst ever abide in fasting. Wherefore, thou wast a guide to 
salvation for mankind, and didst direct assemblies of monks, edifying them with 
discourses, and all the more being a model for them in thy manner of life, teaching 
and instructing them in the blameless monastic life. O venerable Symeon our father, 
ever pray for us who celebrate thy most honored memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
As thou art truly the Theotokos and Mother, pray thou with boldness to thy Son 
and our God, that He especially preserve this city, which fleeth to thy protection, 
which hath its dominion in thee, having recourse to thee, its refuge and bulwark, the 
only intercessor of the human race.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The Virgin and ewe-lamb, beholding on the Cross the Lamb 
Who was born of her without seed, His side pierced by a spear, was wounded and 
with grief and cried aloud, exclaiming amid her pain: “What is this new mystery? How 
is it that Thou diest Who alone art Lord of life? Wherefore, arise, raising up our fallen 
forefather!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: I heard report of the power of the cross * that paradise hath been 
opened thereby * and I cried aloud: * Glory to Thy power, * O Lord. 
Utterly having spurned the flattery of the world, thou didst richly receive the grace 
of the Comforter, O Symeon, boast of the fathers.  
Even if the enemy assailed thee, bringing many temptations to bear upon thee, yet 
did he not break the firmness of thy faith, O venerable one.  
Grinding down thy body with great struggles, thou didst render thy soul mighty 
against the passions, accustomed to obedience and prayer.  
Theotokion: Declaring beforehand the sign of thine ineffable birth giving, O 
blessed one, the prophet cried aloud: “Behold, a Virgin shall conceive in her womb, 
and shall bear a Son: Emmanuel!”  
ODE V  
Irmos: Having arisen early we cry unto Thee O Lord, * do Thou save us, * for 
Thou art our God, * and we know no other besides Thee. 
Emulating the life of the angels, thou didst show forth a wondrous manner of life, 
and divine light illumined thee when celebrating the divine liturgy.  
Casting off pleasure in bitter sin, on earth thou didst reveal thyself to be a resident 
of paradise; and while yet walking among mortals, thou didst mystically enjoy 
incorrupt effulgence.  
O venerable father, peer of the angels, standing before the throne of the King of 
glory, remember those here who joyfully celebrate thy most honored memory.  
Theotokion: O most pure Sovereign Lady, save us, thy servants, for we flee to 
thee, O intercessor and defender of the faithful. Help thou us!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: An Abyss hath encompassed me, and the sea monster hath become my 
grave, * but I cried out unto Thee, * O Lover of mankind, * and Thy right 
hand saved me O Lord.  
Desiring Christ alone, thou didst depart from the imperial palace, and instead of 
imperial secretaries didst have angels sharing in thy supplications.  
O Symeon the New Theologian and Symeon the pious: make entreaty for us, your 
children, who praise you with love!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Accustomed to ready obedience, thou didst in nowise pay heed to thyself; and on 
the gentle ocean of thy tears thou didst sail to the calm haven of the Author of 
ineffable tranquility.  
Theotokion: O Mary, thou glory of mankind and joy of angels, we ever glorify 
thee, for thou hast magnified our race and united us in immortality with the hosts on 
high.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
The Church of Christ rejoiceth today, * celebrating thy memory with splendor. * 
Thou hast adorned it with thy discourses and prayers, * guiding the children of faith 
to the mansions of heaven, * and shining forth with ineffable light, * thou hast 
received radiance from Christ God, our Sun, ** O Symeon, our venerable father.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: O Thou Who didst save the Children * who praised Thee in the fiery 
furnace, * blessed art Thou, * O God of our fathers.  
With the streams of thy tears thou didst extinguish the furnace of sin, crying out: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
As thou wast a standard of theology and a teacher of chastity, thou hast taught us 
to chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Thou wast an instrument of the Holy Spirit, ever chanting the divine hymn: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: He whom the angels and the souls of the righteous hymn let us 
mortals ever bless in song.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Son of God who before all ages * was begotten of the Father * hath 
in these last times * become incarnate of the Virgin-Mother, * O ye priests 
hymn, * and ye peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Ever mindful of Hades and death, O father, thou didst abstain from sin in every 
way; and now thou dwellest in the kingdom of heaven throughout all ages.  
Thou didst easily navigate the briny sea of life with the sail of abstinence, and thou 
dost now rejoice in the calm harbor of paradise throughout all ages.  
All the days of thy life thou didst have streams of tears pouring from thine eyes, O 
venerable one, and now ineffable light doth illumine thee throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! Rejoice, O Ever-virgin! Rejoice, 
O Mother of God! Rejoice, O Queen of heaven, throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Thee the true Mother of God, * who in a manner past all understanding 
* and beyond all telling, * ineffably brought forth in time * the Eternal One, * 
with one mind do we the faithful magnify. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
As a model for thy disciples during thy lifetime, thou dost now nurture our souls 
with thy discourses, ever teaching us even after thy repose.  
O Symeon our father, accept our praise and the lifting up of our hands with thy 
wonted kindness, entreating God Who is the Lover of mankind, that our souls be 
saved.  
Emulating the fasting of John the Baptist, thou didst lay waste to thy body with 
many struggles; wherefore, thou hast now received the rich reward of thy labors, thy 
body remaining on earth as incorrupt.  
Theotokion: Seeing thee who alone art pure in these earthly vales, the Creator 
received flesh from thee; and, deifying man, He hath given him life eternal.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, * and with sighs 
from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, * 
becoming a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. ** O Symeon our 
father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
The Church of Christ rejoiceth today, * celebrating thy memory with splendor. * 
Thou hast adorned it with thy discourses and prayers, * guiding the children of faith 
to the mansions of heaven, * and shining forth with ineffable light, * thou hast 
received radiance from Christ God, our Sun, ** O Symeon, our venerable father.  
 
 
