--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 15th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR AGAPIUS AND THE SIX 
MARTYRS WITH HIM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O ye seven martyrs of Christ, * ye counted as naught the assaults of the torturers * 
and a violent death, * having readily and valiantly * hastened to battle and covered 
yourselves * with the glory of victory, * ye were numbered among all the righteous; * 
and glorifying you with them throughout the ages, ** we call you blessed.  
O martyred athlete Agapius, * having loved the Well-spring of good things, * the 
Summit of desires, * thou didst make haste to drain the cup of martyrdom, * calling 
upon the divine name * of the living God. * O, thy courage! O, thine endurance, * 
whereby thou hast been manifestly deemed worthy ** to receive glory and splendor!  
O most blessed martyrs, * ye gave yourselves over * to voluntary slaughter, * 
sanctifying the earth with your blood, * and enlightening the air with your passing. * 
And now ye live in the heavens, * ever praying for us * to the never-waning Light, ** 
O ye who are in the image of God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Troubled and in grief, * we beseech thee, O most pure one, * our intercessor: * 
Permit not thy servants to utterly perish; * but hasten to rescue us * from this present 
wrath and grief, * O divinely joyous, most holy and pure one. ** For thou art our 
bulwark and unassailable help.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician * and healer of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
The Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “I offer hymnody to the 
seven martyrs,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us sing a song unto the Lord, * who led His people through the 
Red Sea: * for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
Dwelling in the habitations of heaven, O martyrs, grant enlightenment unto those 
who praise you on earth.  
Ye were shown to be pillars of the Church, breaking down the ramparts of the 
madness of idolatry, O most valiant spiritual athletes of Christ.  
Thou wast wounded with the love of the Master of all, for Whose sake thou didst 
go forth to die, O right wondrous martyr Agapius.  
Theotokion: With the most dazzling Radiance which shone forth from thee, O 
Virgin, enlighten the eyes of my soul, that I may glorify thee.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as our God, 
* Whom the whole of creation hymns: * There is none more righteous than 
Thee, O Lord. 
Kindled by the fire of the love of Christ, thou didst extinguish the burning of the 
madness of idolatry with the streams of thy blood, O martyr Agapius. Wherefore, we 
call thee blessed.  
Ye were shown to be swords cutting down myriads of demons with grace, O 
blessed ones; and now, rejoicing, ye have been united to the myriads of the noetic 
hosts.  
Manfully completing the course of martyrdom, in setting aside the body ye 
attained the kingdom on high, wherein ye acquired life, O godly martyrs.  
Theotokion: O Ever-virgin Mother, we have come to know the Creator Who 
manifested Himself in fleshly form through thy radiant womb, in the tender 
compassion of His mercy, unto us who hymn thee.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “He arose ...”: 
The seven-member choir of holy martyrs suffered mightily for the divine Trinity 
and destroyed multitudes of the noetic foe with grace; and they have been united to 
the myriads of the heavenly intelligences by the Spirit. By their supplications have pity 
on us, O Thou Who lovest mankind.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
O most holy Virgin, save us from every threat and wickedness of men; for thee do 
we have as our protection and aid, fleeing to thee, O Mother of God, and to our God 
Who was born of thee, entreat Him, that He deliver us from tribulations and sorrows.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb and Shepherd suspended upon the 
Cross, the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud: “O my Child, what is this strange and 
unexpected sight? How can the Life of all be condemned to death like mortals? But 
rise Thou from the dead on the third day, O Word, as Thou didst say, that, rejoicing, 
I may glorify Thee!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Loving Christ greatly, O Agapius, thou didst manfully emulate His sufferings, 
slaughtered voluntarily, like a lamb, O right wondrous great martyr.  
Having given yourselves willingly over to the sword, O wise martyrs, with the 
sprinkling of your blood ye dyed your vesture, and therein arrayed, ye dwell in the 
heavens.  
O, your fervent love for God, for the sake of which ye utterly denied yourselves! 
Accepting a violent death, ye have been deemed worthy of immortality.  
Theotokion: O undefiled and pure one, thou didst receive Myrrh in thy womb: the 
Word Who purifieth the whole world of the stench of all sins. Wherefore, with faith 
we call thee blessed.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
Loving in thine activity as well as in thy name, O glorious one, thou didst suffer 
for the love of Christ our God, the King of all.  
Recruited into Christ’s army, ye trampled underfoot the edict of the cruel tyrant, O 
holy martyrs, destroying legions of demons.  
Casting down the audacity of the iniquitous with sacred struggles, O martyrs of 
Christ, ye were crowned with a wreath of immortality.  
Theotokion: O ye faithful, with divine hymnody let us bless the Theotokos, saying: 
Rejoice, O portal through which the Lord alone hath passed!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Let us hymn the two Alexanders, the two Dionysiuses, the glorious Agapius, 
Timolaus and Romulus, who suffered mightily and waged war upon myriads of the 
enemy.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Pouring forth rivers of healings, O martyrs, in a godly manner ye cleanse mortals 
of the passions; wherefore, rejoicing, with faith we praise your valiant deeds.  
Having completed the sacred contest lawfully, ye were lawfully crowned by the 
hand of the Omnipotent One, O ye seven martyrs, citizens of heaven, peers of the 
angels.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Bride of God, who hast caused the gardens of 
ungodliness to wither up by thy birthgiving, uproot the enmity of the enemy which 
ever springeth up within me.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Willingly ye gave yourselves over to the slaughter, like lambs, undaunted by 
tortures, O all-praised passion-bearers, crying out with the spirit: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Illumined by the love of the Master of all, O martyr Agapius, thou didst bend thy 
neck beneath the sword and wast enrolled among the army of the martyrs, crying 
aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Ye are seen to be a lamp with seven wicks in the house of the Lord, O glorious 
martyrs, illumining the world with the radiance of grace, and crying aloud: O God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, loose me, who am bound by the bonds of 
unutterable transgressions, and grant showers of tears to me who chant unto Him 
Who shone forth from thee: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the mystery of the 
Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning bush: * praise ye and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
O physicians of divers infirmities, who were shown by the indication of the Spirit, 
heal ye all our infirmities, that we may praise and glorify your divine memory.  
Thou didst love God by Whom thou wast loved, O martyr; wherefore, O Agapius, 
He led thee, who finished the divine contest, into the mansions of heaven with thy 
fellow zealots.  
Strengthened by the love of the Master, ye set at naught the oppression of the 
deceiver; and right gloriously adorned with trophies, O martyrs of the Lord, ye dwell 
in the resting-places of heaven.  
Theotokion: Cure thou the passions of my heart, O thou who hast given birth 
unto the Well-spring of dispassion, and guide me to divine life, that I may glorify 
thee, the Mother of the Savior, throughout all ages.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Comely in the divine magnificence of martyrdom, ye stand before the Lord, and 
with Him, O passion-bearers, ye are ever glad.  
Having parted from your bodies, O martyrs, the army of the angels have received 
you into the heavenly fold, unto the Light that waneth not.  
O glorious martyrs, cease ye never to remind God of us who keep your sacred 
memory today.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, illumine with the light of repentance me who 
am darkened by negligence, that I may hymn and glorify thy mighty works.  
 
 
!  
