--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 19th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS CHRYSANTHUS & DARIA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Having received the effulgence * of the knowledge of God, * thou didst illumine 
thy heart, O most wise father, * expelling the gloom of the mind’s deception, * and 
didst confess Christ, * the Lord of all Who assumed our flesh. * Hence, O all-praised 
Chrysanthus, * made strong by the power of the Spirit, ** thou wast shown to be 
stronger than thy tortures.  
Thou didst reckon the deceits of the enemy * and the burning of pleasures to be 
like a spider’s web. * And standing in thy gloomy dungeon * thou wast illumined with 
divine effulgence * and wast filled with noetic fragrance * while surrounded by the 
fetid stench; * and as a most excellent escort * thou didst bring to Christ as an 
undefiled bride ** the woman who sought to defile thee.  
Wounded by the most sweet love of the Creator, * thou didst utterly spurn all 
ungodliness; * and having betrothed thyself to Christ * by the many torments of thy 
body, * thou didst find within thyself a divine bridal chamber, * Daria of great 
renown, * thou divine receptacle of the Spirit, * adornment of athletes ** and 
ornament of virgins.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O all-immaculate Virgin Mother, * transform the infirmity and impotence of my 
soul * into might and power, * that with fear and love * I may keep and observe the 
statutes of Christ, * that I may avoid the unbearable fire, * and, ever rejoicing, * may 
inherit through thee ** the kingdom of heaven and life unsurpassed.  
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of mankind, 
crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What is this, O my 
Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou 
hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** I 
marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor thee, the golden flower 
of the martyrs” the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Adorned with a crown brighter than any gold, O martyr, and shining with the 
beauties of martyrdom, thou standest before the Master, praying for us who honor 
thee, O right wondrous one.  
Thou wast wounded with sweet desire for thy Creator, O martyr Chrysanthus, and 
disdaining the beautiful things of the world, thou didst give all the power of thy heart 
to Him Whom thou didst earnestly desire.  
Armed with faith, thou didst cast down the crafty one who tried to lead thee into 
deception through the pleasures of a woman; and didst remain a precious vessel of 
purity, O Chrysanthus.  
Theotokion: He Who is unapproachable in His divine essence showed Himself to 
be approachable, taking flesh from thee, O Virgin. And desiring Him, Daria suffered 
patiently, and hath been brought to Him as a bride.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Thou wast gold tried by the fire of the emperor’s tortures, O Chrysanthus, bearing 
the image of the sufferings of Christ.  
Abandoning the fables of the rhetors, thou didst fish with the nets of the disciples 
of Him who manifestly madeth thee wise, O Chrysanthus.  
Thou didst submit to thy spouse, who escorted thee to Christ as a bride, O all- 
wise Daria, forsaking a fleshly lover for the sake of the precious Faith.  
Theotokion: Jesus, Who was born of thy womb in the flesh, O Virgin, hath 
betrothed to Himself Daria, the pure martyr, as a bride.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
Thou didst desire most comely beauty and didst pass beyond visible beauty; and 
by thy truly golden words, O blessed Chrysanthus, thou didst lead to Christ the 
glorious Daria, who endured sufferings and put the torturer to shame. With her, be 
thou mindful of all of us who keep your memory with faith.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Beyond understanding and unapproachable is the dread mystery of God wrought 
in thee, O divinely joyous Sovereign Lady; for having conceived the Infinite One, 
thou didst give birth to Him, clad in the flesh taken from thy most pure blood. Him 
do thou ever entreat as thy Son, O pure one, that our souls be saved.  
Stavrotheotokion: Thou didst willingly endure a violent death in crucifixion, O 
Compassionate One. And she who gaveth birth to Thee was wounded, beholding 
Thee. By her supplications, take pity and save the world, O supremely good Lord and 
only Lover of mankind, Who takest away the sins of the world.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
The luminous rays of the Spirit and thy pure heart made thee wholly radiant, O 
martyr, who earnestly cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
The Creator arrayed thee in a garment of incorruption woven of divine grace from 
on high, O blessed one, and He kept thy body undefiled, and crowned thee as victor.  
With courage of heart thou didst shake off carnal pleasures, delighting in the 
incomparable beauty of God; and didst complete the contest of thy martyrdom.  
Thou wast deified by partaking of a divinely wrought unity, O passion-bearer 
Daria, and, rejoicing, thou hast made thine abode in the mansions of heaven, as an 
undefiled bride of the Master of creation.  
Theotokion: The Inconceivable One Who was incarnate of thee, O most pure one, 
preserved thee a virgin even after birth giving, as thou wast before giving birth; and 
He led the martyr Daria to Himself.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Bound, thou didst destroy the malice of the enemy, O blessed one, holding thy 
mind above material things.  
As a most sacred lover of purity, O all-famed one, thou didst transform the ardent 
love of the maiden into love for the Lord.  
Beholding the tyrant cast down and trampled underfoot, O most blessed one, thou 
didst magnify the Master with joyous thought.  
Theotokion: Who can describe thy mystery, O all-pure one? For, in a manner past 
understanding and all telling, thou hast given birth to God the Word in two essences.  
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Light from heaven, that surrounded thee, wholly illumined thee as thou didst 
hymn the Master of all when imprisoned in the darkest prison-cell, O ever-
memorable Chrysanthus.  
Having acquired thee, the glorious one, as a golden star by thine honored 
martyrdom, Rome hath been adorned with thy struggles and divine miracles, O 
martyr Chrysanthus.  
Having shown thyself to the most comely Word as beautiful, all-comely and most 
glorious, O martyr Daria, thou didst wed thyself to Him by all manner of bodily 
sufferings.  
Theotokion: The Virgin gaveth birth unto Thee, the timeless Word, as a little 
Babe; and the maidens who follow after her, desiring Thee, have been brought to 
Thee, the King of all, as brides.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Thou wast the golden flower of the martyrs, and the assembly of athletes hath 
brought thee to Christ by thy divine words and miracles, O God-pleasing martyr. 
With them do we now faithfully call thee blessed.  
With radiant glory Jesus illumined thee with divine fragrance, when thou hadst 
been imprisoned, naked, in a vile cell, O blessed one; Him didst thou all-wisely love 
with pure thought.  
Christ sent to thee a wild beast to be the protector of thy virginity; and it 
manifestly warded off the destruction of the impious when thou didst chant, O all-
praised Daria: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: He who, in His divine essence, is uncircumscribable became 
circumscribed in the flesh, like us, within thy womb, O Virgin. Blessed art thou 
among women, O most immaculate Lady.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Opposing the vain-minded one with steadfast thought, O blessed one, thou didst 
endure the laceration of thy body; and though burned with torches, remained 
unconsumed, O Chrysanthus, chanting with the three youths: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Adorned with the wisdom of Christ, thou didst expose the insolence of the 
mindless as foolish. And thou didst put to shame the mind of the deceiver who led 
Eve astray, O wise one, ensnaring his instrument by thy piety; leading her to God as a 
bride chosen for her faith.  
With oneness of soul ye avoided carnal intercourse and revealed yourselves to be 
pure vessels of the Almighty; and borne now into the temple of heaven, O spiritual 
athletes, ye chant unto Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Having mastered the carnal passions by the will of God, Chrysanthus and Daria 
reduced the fire of torments to ashes by the dew of the Spirit, and having received 
crowns of life, chant aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: God found thee, the undefiled one, like a rose amid the thorns of life, 
O most pure one; and He made His abode within thy pure womb, filling the world 
with a mystical fragrance, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
When thou didst utter divine discourse, the army of God appeared before thee, 
delivering thee from vile deception. Slain by the sword, the martyrs offered 
themselves as unblemished sacrifices unto Him who, for our sake, was slaughtered 
like a Lamb.  
Ye were seen to be like lambs in the midst of wild beasts, O spiritual athletes, 
preaching the incarnation of God Who condescended to take our flesh upon Himself; 
and in a godly manner ye inherited a painless end through your sufferings.  
Today the city of Rome doth splendidly summon every city and land to celebrate 
your divine sufferings and struggles, O holy ones, offering them forth as a complete 
and immaterial banquet.  
Ye were bound to immeasurable glory, O martyrs Chrysanthus and Daria; and ye 
stand before the almighty Word as ones crowned, praying on behalf of us who ever 
call you blessed.  
Theotokion: Every mind and heart that pondereth thine incomprehensible 
birthgiving doth tremble, O Maiden; for thou didst bear God the Word within thy 
womb, Who through thee delivereth those who honor thee from all necessity.  
