--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 17th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIERARCH PATRICK, ENLIGHTENER OF THE 
IRISH LANDS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: 
Rejoice, ye hills and groves of the Irish land! Leap up, ye lakes and rivers! For, lo! 
through the grace of God, blessing and strengthening have come upon you from on 
high, for your enlightener and spiritual father cometh unto you: Patrick, glorious 
among hierarchs, zealot of the Orthodox Faith, chosen by God for the apostolate.  
To the newly-enlightened Christians the holy Patrick crieth out: Attend, O my 
spiritual children: I have begotten you, as saith the Gospel; I have betrothed you as a 
bride to Christ God. Stand fast, therefore, in the Faith, and confess it fearlessly; be 
not afraid of the opposition of the pagans, that God may manifest Himself unto you 
as a great Helper and Protector!  
Great is thy faith, O holy hierarch Patrick; for, lo! having left thy homeland and 
lands enlightened by Christ, thou didst journey to a land languishing in heathen 
darkness, bearing the Gospel of Christ unto the lost; departing not from there, till 
thou hadst converted the whole land to the Orthodox Faith. Wherefore, we praise 
thee as is meet.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Who can describe the sufferings and struggles which thou didst endure, O Patrick, 
in preaching the Word of God unto those who sat in pagan darkness? Who can give 
account of the tears which thou didst shed at night, praying in the solitude of the 
wilderness, fending off the fear of wild beasts and the assaults of the demons by the 
power of the Cross of Christ, which thou didst plant triumphantly over all the Irish 
land?  
Both now ..., Theotokion; or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all?” thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, and this Doxasticon,  
Glory ..., in Tone III: 
Loving the heavenly homeland and desiring to attain thereto, thou didst forsake 
thy native land on earth; and in a foreign land beget new people in the Spirit, showing 
thyself to be a true father to them, and crying aloud unto the Lord. Here am I, and 
the children whom Thou hast given me!  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III, or this Stavrotheotokion: 
When the unblemished Ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb led to the slaughter as a man 
of His own will, weeping, she said: “O Christ, wilt Thou now leave me childless Who 
gaveth Thee birth? What is this Thou hast done, O Redeemer of all? Yet I hymn and 
glorify Thine extreme goodness which transcendeth comprehension and all telling, O 
Lover of mankind!”  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
O holy hierarch Patrick, wonderworker equal to the apostles, * enlightener of the 
Irish lands; * entreat the merciful God, * that He grant our souls ** the remission of 
sins!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS:  
Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is:  
“The seal of thine apostolate is the Irish people,” in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: I will sing unto Thee, O Lord my God, * for Thou hast led Thy people 
out of the bondage of Egypt, * and hast drowned in the waters * the chariots 
and the might of Pharaoh. 
O preacher equal to the apostles, with divinely inspired discourse and a life which 
confirmed thy words, thou didst lead the people of Ireland out of the darkness of 
paganism into the light of the Christian Faith, as Moses led the children of Israel out 
of Egypt.  
Manfully opposing the heresy of Pelagius, thou didst manifest the power of the 
grace of Christ to the people, enlightening kings and princes and those of every age 
and station, leading them into the fold of the Church.  
What, therefore, shall we who commemorate the holy Patrick say? Shall we praise 
his apostolic zeal? Shall we marvel at the tribulations and threats which he endured? 
Shall we hymn his labors and struggles and the depths of his humility? Let us then 
glorify God Who hath given power to His chosen one to accomplish all of these 
things.  
Theotokion: The rod of Aaron, which budded forth leaves, and the unburnt bush, 
prefigured thee, O unwedded Bride, Virgin Theotokos, who served for the 
incarnation of the pre-eternal Word.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ God, Thou confirmation of those that hope in Thee: * confirm 
us in the Orthodox Faith, * in that Thou lovest mankind.  
With much patience thou didst acquire the virtues, confirming the word of thy 
preaching by thy deeds, unto the glory of God.  
Enduring bodily affliction, all manner of temptations and abasement, O Patrick, 
thou didst unceasingly labor in the field of Christ, neither departing nor becoming 
troubled, but being made steadfast in the Faith, trusting in the aid of God.  
Thou gavest neither slumber to thine eye-lids nor rest to thy body, O holy 
hierarch, tirelessly traversing the mountains and valleys of the Irish land, planting the 
true Faith and instructing the newly-converted people  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, thou art the joy and consolation of the struggling 
and the ever-sounding voice of the apostles. Grant that we, the poor and wretched, 
may instead of gifts worthy of thee, offer thee heartfelt hymnody.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
O lover of the sacred Scriptures, eagerly didst thou learn the Word of God, giving 
drink unto thy soul from that divine well-spring and nurturing thine understanding 
with heavenly wisdom. Wherefore, thou didst transmit to thy disciples the divinely-
revealed Truth, which thou didst seal in thy writings.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VII:  
O Mother of God and Mother of Christians, take pity on thy children; for even 
though we sin, we cry out in repentance: Leave us not orphaned, but stretch forth thy 
hands to us, and guide us on the path of salvation.  
Or this Stavrotheotokion: Preserved by the Cross of Thy Son, O Virgin, we escape 
the assaults of the demons. Wherefore, hymning thee as is meet, we glorify thee, O 
most hymned Theotokos.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Proclaiming the advent of Thine appearance on earth, O Christ God, * 
the prophet cried aloud with gladness: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Likening thyself to a hart upon the mountains of spices, thou didst go round the 
mountains and hills, erecting churches and instructing Christians in the Orthodox 
Faith; and retiring to desolate places thou didst make unceasing supplications, that thy 
new flock be saved.  
Having forsaken the sin-loving world from thy youth and been nurtured in the 
monasteries of the glorious Martin and his disciples, and having tarried many years in 
study, thou didst humbly accept the pastoral staff, exclaiming: Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
Thou didst summon the sheep of thy pasture with the voice of the Gospel, and 
didst lead them to the courts of the Church, showing thyself to be a true shepherd 
who laid down his life for his sheep.  
Theotokion: O blessed Theotokos, we offer thee the angel’s salutation: Rejoice, O 
thou who art full of grace, the Lord is with thee!  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Thou Who hast caused the light to shine, * who hast made bright the 
dawn and revealed the day; * glory be to Thee, * glory be to Thee, O Jesus the 
Son of God. 
With the light of the teaching of Christ thou didst illumine the Irish land, O 
Patrick, rejoicing in thy newly chosen flock and rendering glory unto God.  
Thou didst open the noetic eyes of those who before were blinded with unbelief 
and languished in the darkness of ignorance; and didst move them to glorify Christ 
the Savior with all the faithful.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Insatiably didst thou preach the Orthodox Faith, standing and teaching in season 
and out of season, weeping copiously and crying out to Christ God Who rendered 
thee aid: Glory to Thy power, O Son of God!  
Theotokion: O Mary Theotokos, who shone forth the Sun of righteousness upon 
the world and dispelled the darkness of ignorance, drive away the night of wicked 
belief from the world!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
When offended, thou didst not protest; when abased, thou didst humble thyself, 
showing thyself to be a model for thy disciples. Wherefore, the Lord hath exalted 
thee, O Patrick.  
Battling against the deceptive wiles of the devil, thou didst not fear the threats of 
the impious sorcerers, fearlessly preaching and crying aloud: Deliver me from their 
snares, O Jesus, King of the hosts of heaven!  
Having endured sorrow, imprisonment and bitter enslavement in thy youth, thou 
wast made captive, O Patrick, thou didst receive freedom when the Lord spake unto 
thee, and didst cry out: Glory to Thee, O Jesus, King of the hosts of heaven!  
Theotokion: Thou art the helper of the oppressed; thou art the liberation of 
captives, for thy Son and our God doth ever accept thine entreaties, O Ever-virgin 
Sovereign Lady.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Thou wast shown to be a true fisher of men, * for, spreading out the nets of the 
good news of the Gospel, * thou didst draw the heathen into the kingdom of Christ, 
* enlightening with baptism those who languished in the darkness of idolatry, * 
making them children of the living God. * Wherefore, we beseech thee, O holy 
hierarch Patrick our father; ** intercede on behalf of us who honor thy holy memory.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
O holy hierarch Patrick, beholder of divinely revealed visions, thou didst follow 
the voice of God which summoned thee and sent thee to convert a new people to the 
true Faith.  
Receiving the angelic habit in thy youth, thou wast zealous in planting the 
monastic life in the newly-enlightened land, founding many monastic communities, in 
every place, and chanting unto the Lord: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
In thee doth the Irish land boast, O Patrick, and it honoreth thy memory; and we 
also, who are from the East, earnestly call upon thee in our prayers, thanking the 
Lord for thee and crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O God!  
Theotokion: Accept now the entreaties of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, as of 
old thou didst hearken unto the supplications of those who had recourse unto thee; 
for yesterday, today and in the age to come, thou art our only merciful helper.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Those who confessed Christ the King, * the Children prisoners, in the 
furnace * cried with a loud voice, saying: * O all ye works of the Lord, praise 
ye the Lord. 
Thou wast shown to be a good sower, having grown a fertile meadow for Christ, 
O holy hierarch Patrick, teaching the newly-illumined people of Ireland to cry aloud: 
Hymn the Lord, all ye works!  
Having laid the firm foundation of the Faith of Christ, thou didst erect countless 
churches and monastic habitations, exhorting those who struggled therein to cry: 
Hymn the Lord, all ye works!  
Thou didst ordain priests of God and didst dispatch them over all the land to 
exercise their ministry that they might confirm in the Faith which thou didst preach, 
the newly-enlightened people, who cried out in thanksgiving: Hymn the Lord, all ye 
works!  
Theotokion: Render vain the errors of other religions and the arrogance of heresy, 
and establish the faithful in the Truth, O Sovereign Lady, mystically teaching them to 
hymn God in an Orthodox manner.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: O pure Theotokos, thou art our boast, * thou who wast born of mortals 
* yet hast given birth unto the Creator: * we magnify thee as the Sovereign 
Lady * of all of created animate beings.  
Celebrating thine annual commemoration, and praising thine apostolic labors, 
assembling from the East and from the West we magnify thee with one soul.  
Thou didst offer Christ thy youth as a sacrifice, serving Him until thou hadst 
grown old, O holy hierarch, emulating the apostles and imitating the venerable. 
Wherefore, we magnify thee.  
Thou didst hallow the groves and hills of the Irish land with thy prayer, bedewing 
the newly-planted meadow of Christ with copious tears, that it might grow and bring 
forth fruit a hundredfold. Wherefore, after God, we magnify thy labors and zeal.  
Theotokion: Withdraw not thy care from Ireland or any Christian land, O 
Theotokos, entreating thy divine Son, with the holy Patrick, that He have mercy and 
save those who unceasingly magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Exapostilarion: 
Having illumined the heathen night with the light of Christ, O Patrick, thou dost 
now abide in never-waning light, gazing upon the Sun of righteousness, and praying 
unceasingly, that the noetic light of Orthodoxy shine forth throughout all the world.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Theotokos, ray of the Sun of righteousness which 
eternally radiates with the Light of the threefold Sun into the darkness: illumine thou 
our souls!  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
O holy hierarch Patrick, wonderworker equal to the apostles, * enlightener of the 
Irish lands; * entreat the merciful God, * that He grant our souls ** the remission of 
sins!  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Thou wast shown to be a true fisher of men, * for, spreading out the nets of the 
good news of the Gospel, * thou didst draw the heathen into the kingdom of Christ, 
* enlightening with baptism those who languished in the darkness of idolatry, * 
making them children of the living God. * Wherefore, we beseech thee, O holy 
hierarch Patrick our father; ** intercede on behalf of us who honor thy holy memory.  
 
 
