--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 16th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR SABINAS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you ...”: 
What shall we call thee, O glorious one? * Warrior of the mighty King and God, * 
who hast manfully set at naught * the impiety of the incorporeal ones, * beacon who 
shinest forth the noetic Light, * all-powerful destroyer of idols, * most fervent athlete 
* and most lawful sufferer. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
What now shall we call thee, O Sabinas? * River of living water, * pouring forth 
breadth of spirit upon us * who are oppressed amid cruelties, * inexhaustible flood of 
healings, * cup which pourest out a holy draught, * and wonderworker most true, * 
equal in honor to the incorporeal ones. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
What shall we call thee, O holy one? * Guide of the erring, * or intercessor for 
sinners, * true physician for those storm-tossed amid evils, * precious and fragrant lily 
of paradise, * first-fruit among martyrs * and their confirmation, * ever-flowing fount 
of miracles, valiant struggler. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Whom hast thou emulated, O wretched soul, * who in no wise dost rouse thyself 
to repentance * nor fearest the fire * which awaiteth the wicked? * Arise, and cry 
aloud, * calling upon her who alone is quick to help: * O Virgin Mother, * entreat thy 
Son and our God, ** to deliver me from the snares of the deceiver!  
Stavrotheotokion: The ewe-lamb, as she beheld the Lamb * stretched out of His 
own will * upon the Tree of the Cross, * cried out maternally, in pain with her 
weeping: * O my Son, what is this strange sight? * O Longsuffering One, how is it 
that Thou art slain, * Who, as Lord, bestoweth life upon all, * granting resurrection to 
mortals? ** I glorify Thy great condescension, O my God!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS:  
Canon of the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “with love I praise Sabinas as an 
athlete”, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Delighting now with the martyrs in thine incorruptible and godly sojourn in 
heaven and in unattainable blessings, O divinely wise Sabinas, save those who praise 
thee.  
Dedicating thyself to the sacrifice of praise to Christ, O Sabinas, thou didst 
resolutely depart unto contests in the deserts, being taught through struggles of 
fasting.  
Taking pleasure in spiritual flowers, thou wast shown to be a garden of paradise 
adorned with the virtues, gathered in by the sword of martyrdom, and known as fruit 
for God.  
Theotokion: Thou didst escape the grief of death, for God Who is life in 
hypostasis issued forth from thy womb ineffably, O Virgin Theotokos, renewing our 
nature.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Having made thy pure soul a temple, thou didst admit God thereto, and didst cast 
down the temples of the demons, O Sabinas. (Twice)  
Having found God merciful for the sake of His mercy, thou didst become an 
emulator of His sufferings when thy disciple betrayed thee.  
Theotokion: O Lady who hast given birth unto God, as thou alone art the 
Theotokos, thou hast been shown to transcend all creation.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Bound by the love of the Redeemer, with manly wisdom thou didst endure 
multifarious wounds and lacerations, O holy one; and cast into the river, thou didst 
receive a holy end therein; and thou hast been given unto all as a treasure of great 
value, pouring forth healings and giving release from afflictions unto those who with 
faith have recourse unto thee, O blessed Sabinas. Entreat Christ God to grant 
forgiveness of transgressions unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Led like a lamb to the slaughter, O martyr, thou didst in no wise cry out, emulating 
thy Master, for Whose sake thou didst spurn even death.  
Adorned with chastity, and living therewith, thou didst set at naught the enemy, O 
Sabinas, enduring convulsions and wounds with thy steadfast mind.  
Having glorified Christ with thy fleshly members, O martyr, thou didst receive a 
divine and imperishable habitation with the souls of the righteous.  
Theotokion: Delighting in thy most pure gifts, we chant unto thee a hymn of 
thanksgiving, acknowledging thee to be the Theotokos.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
Having shed the weight of thy flesh by thy convulsions and illumined thy soul, O 
godly Sabinas, thou didst take wing to divine and true delight. (Twice)  
That thou mightest find the torrent of sweetness and the beauty of incorruption, 
O glorious one, thou didst manifestly spit upon the fleeting beauty of the world.  
Theotokion: Mortify the uprisings of my passions, O pure one, delivering me from 
corruption and granting me the salvation of dispassion.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
In no wise didst thou endure wounds, bindings, laceration and burning, as though 
in another’s body, for things that pass away; but, receiving a blessed end, thou didst 
obtain crowns of glory from Christ, O Sabinas. (Twice)  
The Church of Christ hath truly been filled with living waters, having been 
enriched by thee, the fount of miracles who camest forth from the depths of the 
river’s waters, for it found within itself a pearl of great price, O Sabinas.  
Theotokion: By thy birth giving thou hast set aright our fallen essence, O Virgin 
Theotokos, who hast given birth unto the Creator and Master Who took upon 
Himself our weakness and hath saved us from the corruption of death by His 
sufferings.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”: 
O God-bearing Sabinas, * thou divine scion, unfading bloom, * branch heavy-
laden with fruit, * with thy gladness fill those who with faith honor thy memory, ** 
and pray thou unceasingly for us all.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
That thou mightest receive incorruptible glory, thou didst spurn the glory of life 
for the sake of the glory of God, O Sabinas, taking delight in thy torments and crying 
out unceasingly: Blessed art Thou, O God! (Twice)  
At the divine behest of the Master thou didst reject the abomination of the 
godless, having manifestly chosen godly wisdom, O Sabinas, unceasingly chanting: 
Blessed art Thou, O God!  
Theotokion: The Word of God Who became incarnate of thy womb, O 
Theotokos, hath saved the world. And honoring Him, we hymn thee, crying aloud: 
Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O most pure one!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The instruments of music sounded out in harmony, * and countless 
multitudes worshipped the image in Dura; * but the three Children, refusing 
to bow in obeisance, * hymn and glorify the Lord throughout all ages. 
Bent by the savageries of the tormenters, yet straightened out by the love of 
Christ, thou didst therein obtain a dispassion which could not be taken away, O 
Sabinas, chanting to God the hymn: Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages! 
(Twice)  
With abstinence wast thou adorned, O martyr; thou wast made brilliant with the 
splendor of thy sufferings; and hast shone forth like a star upon those who cry out: 
Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: Thou didst shine forth in the radiance of thy virginity, for thou, O 
Mother of God, wast the cloud of the Sun Who hath extinguished the furnace of the 
insanity of idolatry. Him do we supremely exalt throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Spurred on by the love of the God of all, thou didst trample underfoot the river’s 
waves, reaching the haven of incorruption, O glorious martyr. (Twice) 
Possessing faith in the Savior as thy foundation, thou didst not fear the assaults of 
the godless, but didst hasten from the river’s depths to the serenity of life.  
Theotokion: Having thee as a rampart, a shelter, our only intercessor and 
salvation, we are ever delivered from misfortunes and transgressions.  
 
 
