--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
THE COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER THEOPHANES THE 
CONFESSOR OF MOUNT SIGRIANA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O divinely wise father Theophanes, * called the namesake of the Theophany of 
Christ, * thou didst follow in His life-bearing steps, * and forsaking all the beauties of 
life, * directed thy gaze towards Him * Whom thou didst desire, * O thou of great 
renown, being deified by beauty * and divine inclinations towards Him ** and 
excellent perfections.  
O divinely wise father Theophanes, * abiding in affliction of flesh, * thou didst 
steadfastly endure bitter exiles, * taking no pity on thy body, * for the sake of the 
precious icons, O all-praised one, * banished by the wrath of Leo; * and mocking him 
thou didst make foolish his counsels * and his vain thoughts ** and his pernicious 
mind.  
Truly the Bestower of good things hath richly granted thee * rewards for thy 
pangs: * to expel demons * and to heal afflictions, * imparting power, O all-blessed 
one, * and vouchsafing thee ineffable joys * where the angelic ranks hold chorus, * 
gazing continually upon ** the countenance of the Almighty.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Rejoice, bearer of the divine Light, * most bright star, * and tabernacle of sanctity! 
* From thy most pure womb * Light hath shone upon us, * illumining the ends of the 
earth, * and enlightening them with His grace. * Rejoice, O most pure one, origin of 
salvation! ** Rejoice, report and saying awesome to those who trust in thee!  
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all?” * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “Theophanes hymneth thee, 
Theophanes” the composition of Theophanes the Branded, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Aflame with piety, O father, thou didst follow in the steps of God Who revealed 
Himself in the flesh; for in receiving a name derived from His revelation which was 
truly fitting for thee, thou wast prefigured as though by Providence.  
Delighting in the most desired love of thy Master, thou didst disdain earthly love; 
and, united to divine Love, thou didst count the beauty of life but naught, O all-
blessed one.  
Savagely rushing, the tyrant Leo persecuted the elect, unable to endure the sight of 
Christ’s icon being honored; and he condemned thee to exile with them, O 
Theophanes.  
Theotokion: O Lord, our gate of condescension, Thee Who art mystically called 
the Orient, the Sun and the Light, the God-man in two natures, hath supra-naturally 
shone forth.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Thou wast seen to be full of divine light, O blessed Theophanes, having united 
thyself in love to Him Whom thou didst desire. Wherefore, we honor thy glorious 
memory.  
Denouncing the commands of the impious Leo, thou didst piously hold to the 
traditions of the Church. Wherefore, Christ glorified thee with miracles.  
Strengthened by hope and love, the weakness of thy flesh, having been made firm 
for God through strength of spirit, O venerable one, became thy friend and fellow 
slave.  
Theotokion: He Who in the beginning fashioned me a man out of dust hath for 
my sake been conceived in thy womb, setting aright the ancient fall, O all-immaculate 
one.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
A lover of the love of Jesus, thou didst fend off pleasures and the tumult of life, 
and becoming a monk, live on earth as an angel of Heaven, pouring forth gifts of 

--- PAGE 3 ---
wonders, O venerable one. Wherefore, we faithfully praise thee on the day of thy 
radiant and holy memory, and cry aloud to thee in unison: O God-bearing 
Theophanes, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of transgressions unto 
those who with love honor thy holy memory!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord. 
A dwelling-place hath been prepared in Heaven for thee as a spiritual athlete of 
Christ, O glorious one; for rejoicing, thou didst pass from the tabernacle of earth, 
crying out to thy Master: Glory be to Thy power, O Lord!  
Thou wast shown to be a crown-bearer, O God-bearing and blessed Theophanes; 
for thou didst not refuse to show honor to the precious depiction of Christ. 
Wherefore, thou didst also cry aloud: Glory be to Thy power, O Lord!  
Opposing the command of the impious tyrant, O venerable one, thou didst in no 
wise pay heed to the affliction of thy flesh, crying aloud to the Creator: Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Thou hast been magnified by miracles, O God-bearer; for Christ hath rewarded 
thee for thine endurance. Wherefore, thou pourest forth healings as from a well-
spring upon those who ask, O most sacred one.  
Theotokion: Thou alone art shown to be more exalted than the angels; for thou 
hast given birth to the Angel of great counsel, the Word Who enlighteneth all that cry 
out with faith: Glory be to Thy power, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
With most pious discourse didst thou proclaim the commandments of Faith, O 
venerable Theophanes, shining with the Spirit.  
In accordance with the Master’s command, with divine wisdom thou didst most 
abundantly distribute thy wealth, O all-praised one, following those who lived in 
poverty.  
Possessing a soul in the image of its Creator, thou didst bow down before the 
most pure icon of the Master, venerating it with love.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth unto the timeless Light Who came under time, 
O Mother of God, enlightening the world.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Guide my life toward virtue, O venerable one; and, smoothing the path of 
asceticism with thy supplications, grant me to tread it rightly and with strength, O 
blessed father.  
Thou hast entered into the glory of the martyrs, O father Theophanes, for, 
opposing the persecutors, thou didst honor the icons of the Mother of God and the 
martyrs.  
Thou didst conclude thy life with chastity, and didst possess wisdom, courage and 
righteousness, O venerable one, and wast revealed to be adorned with the fullness of 
virtues.  
Theotokion: By an ineffable word, the holy Word wholly sanctified thee, O 
Theotokos, having made His abode in thy sanctified womb. Him do thou entreat, 
that thy servants be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Receiving divine revelation from on high, * with diligence thou didst depart from 
the midst of the tumult of life; * and, having become a solitary, O venerable one, * 
thou didst receive the power to work wonders and the dignity of prophecy, ** having 
deprived thyself of wealth and wife.  
Ikos: Preferring naught on earth, rejoicing thou didst follow after Christ Who cried 
out to take His yoke zealously upon thy shoulder, and thou didst obtain peace within 
thy soul, which do thou likewise send down upon me, who am poor and slothful, as 
one who talks yet accomplishes naught, who still revels in the things of this life, and 
marvels at how thou hast escaped them all, having deprived thyself of wealth and 
wife.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Having acquired and received that which is in the image and likeness of God, thou 
wast adorned with them both through thy most radiant life, O father, crying out: 
Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Thou wast adorned with a crown of confession, O father, and by thy deeds didst 
denounce the words of the impious; and thou didst proclaim to the faithful, crying 
aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
With most steadfast love of mind thou didst patiently endure the sufferings of thy 
body, O father, giving thanks unto thy Master, and crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in 
the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: All of us, the faithful, hymn thee as the pure Theotokos and Queen 
of all creation, and we cry aloud to thee: Rejoice! Blessed art thou among women, O 
all-immaculate Sovereign Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Seeing the steadfastness of thine opposition, O blessed one, the most wicked 
tyrant Leo yet more cruelly condemned thee to exile; and with gladness thou didst 
endure this, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Perceiving that honor rendered to icons passes through to their Prototype, like a 
most lawful athlete thou didst run with haste to the arena; and, revealed to be a victor, 
thou didst receive a crown, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The Lord of all gave thee a heavenly tabernacle in place of an earthly one, for 
instead of imprisonment thou didst discover the vastness of joy in the sweetness of 
Paradise, crying out with the martyrs: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thou wast radiant with the noetic light of the divine Spirit, O blessed Theophanes; 
wherefore, thou dost now pour forth healings upon those who have recourse to thee 
in faith, and who venerate thy holy shrine with love, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: He Who manifestly upholdeth and sustaineth all creation by divine 
power, the pre-eternal Son Who is co-enthroned with the Father and the divine Spirit, 
and hath been held in thine arms as a babe, O most pure one. To Him we cry aloud: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
All of thy riches thou didst shower upon the poor, O God-bearer, and manifestly 
receiving the righteousness which shineth forth within thee, thou hast reaped that 
which abideth eternally instead of that which corrupteth.  
With the power of the Comforter thou healest infirmities, O all-blessed one, and 
through His activity thou dost manifestly drive away demons. Wherefore, beholding 
this, we, the faithful, bless thee, O most blessed God-bearer.  
The splendid day of thy repose doth summon all the faithful to partake of 
sanctification, O divinely wise one; and, rejoicing, we now celebrate it, O most sacred 
one.  
Thou givest a bounteous gift unto me who have zealously woven words in praise 
of thee, O divinely wise one, showing me to share thy way of life as I share thy name, 
through thy God-pleasing entreaties, O all-blessed one.  
Theotokion: The law of praises is vanquished by thy divine glory, O Virgin; but as 
thou art good and kind-hearted, accept the praise of us who hymn thee, bestowing 
upon us cleansing of sins, O Bride of God.  
 
 
 
 
