--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 10th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH 
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR CODRATUS 
AT VESPERS: 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of Heaven ...”: 
With the all-praised Codratus let a song be faithfully raised with splendor * to the 
great Cyprian, the two Dionysiuses and Anectus as is meet, * together with Crescens, 
and the glorious Paul, * as divinely spiritual crowned athletes of the Lord ** and our 
most fervent intercessors.  
Today another choir hath appeared * of sacred martyrs, victorious and triumphant, 
* a brilliant assembly of divine passion-bearers, * a steadfast company, a chosen army, 
* whereof Codratus holds the captaincy, ** who hath been revealed to be a right 
glorious conqueror.  
O all-praised Codratus, with thine incisive discourse * thou didst cut through the 
greatly elaborate webs of the rhetors’ wisdom * as though they were darkness. * 
Faithfully didst thou teach, and with patience suffered for Christ; * and being well 
adorned in both teaching and suffering, ** thou hast been crowned together with the 
passion-bearers.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
Held fast by hopeless transgressions, O pure Virgin, * we cry out in thanksgiving, 
* having acquired thee as our sole intercessor: * Cleanse us, O most holy Bride of 
God, * for thou art the refuge of the world ** and the help of our race.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb lifted up upon the Cross, * the 
immaculate Virgin cried aloud, weeping: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this 
new and most glorious sight? * How is it that Thou Who holdest all things in Thy 
hand ** hast been nailed to the Tree in the flesh?”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS: 
Canon of the holy martyrs, the composition  
of St. Joseph the Hymnographer, in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
The sacred and wondrous feast of the sacred martyrs, who suffered in a sacred 
manner, hath dawned! O ye who love the feasts of the Church, assembling and 
guiding all with the radiance of the Spirit, let us call them blessed as is meet.  
Like the radiant sun hast thou shone upon us in the splendor of the virtues, O 
blessed athlete Codratus, driving away the darkness of polytheism with the rays of thy 
light, and illumining the assemblies of the faithful.  
Proclaiming Jesus our Savior to be God, the Rock of life, O glorious martyrs, ye 
suffered with steadfastness; and, stoned, ye made the outpourings of your blood into 
a fountain of sanctity.  
Theotokion: From the mire of the passions, from the three-fold waves of evil 
thoughts, from the darts of the enemy, and from every assault of the adversary, save 
the souls of those who hymn thine ineffable birthgiving, O pure and all-immaculate 
Birthgiver of God.  
ODE III 
Irmos: Likened to a barren woman * the Church from among the nations hath 
given birth, * and the assembly abundant in children, hath grown weak. * Let 
us cry out to our wondrous God: * Holy art Thou, O Lord!  
The firm and adamant ones, while slain by the sword and steadfastly being 
subjected to all manner of sufferings, cried out to our wondrous God: Holy art Thou, 
O Lord!  
With wisdom granted him by God, Codratus set at naught the wisdom of the 
Hellenes, enduring mockery and adorned with his own blood by the divine Spirit.  
O ye faithful, with hymns let us with honor and wisdom rightly crown those who 
suffered with faith: Anectus and Codratus, Crescens and Paul, the godly Cyprian and 
Dionysius.  
Theotokion: Even a celestial intelligence is unable to describe thy birthgiving 
which surpasseth understanding, O Maiden; for in thy womb thou didst conceive the 
Word, the primal intelligence, Who by His word created all things, O pure one.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
By enduring evils, thou didst slay the proud enemy, O passion-bearer; and thou 
didst endure death by the sword with the all-wise ones who suffered with thee, O 
Codratus. Wherefore, we celebrate your honored memory, crying aloud: Remember 
us before the Master, O unvanquished martyrs!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Who can describe the multitude of mine impure thoughts and the tempests of my 
wicked notions, O all-immaculate one? Who can recount the assaults of mine 
incorporeal foes and their malice? Yet by thine entreaties grant me deliverance from 
them all, O good one.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee 
O Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee 
hanging upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * 
How is it that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be 
crucified by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering 
One!” 
ODE IV 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
By the wisdom of thy words thou didst put the foolish to shame, and by the 
instruction of thy doctrines of belief, O martyr Codratus, thou didst attract the godly 
Anectus; bringing the steadfast martyr to thy Master.  
From thy swaddling bands thou didst become wholly the possession of thy 
Creator, and from childhood, having chosen the sense of a mature man and desired 
wisdom, thou didst wholly become a most pure habitation of Christ, O martyr.  
Having fed the six-branched lampstand of Thy martyrs with mystic oil, O Lord, 
thou hast dispelled the night of polytheism and illumined those who cry out: Glory to 
Thy power, O Christ!  
Theotokion: The holy Theotokos, in whom the consubstantial Word of the Father 
was well-pleased to make His abode, as a fragrant temple did not burn her womb, nor 
did she suffer pain, for she hath given birth to Emmanuel: God and man.  
ODE V 
Irmos: Do Thou O Lord send down upon us * Thine enlightenment, and free 
us * from the gloom of transgression, O Good One, * granting us Thy peace. 
Driving away the gloom of ignorance with the enlightenment of reason, thou didst 
lead a company of athletes to the Lord, O wise Codratus, being crowned with them.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Having first put down the revolt of the passions through fasting, thou didst then 
destroy the might of the impious, having suffered most mightily, O martyr Codratus.  
The dry rock hath been filled by the shedding of thy precious blood, shedding 
forth splendid streams unto the faithful, sanctifying them with its divine down--
pouring.  
Theotokion: He Who fashioned Eve out of Adam’s rib, O most pure one, hath 
been conceived from thy pure womb in His tender compassion, wishing to save 
Adam, in that He is the Lover of mankind.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
The choir of passion-bearers six in number hath shone upon us like stars in the 
honored firmament of the Church, illumining the faithful and dispelling the darkness 
of deception.  
Without being battered by waves, the martyrs traversed the deep of torments and 
received the calm of the Most High, being themselves a haven for the faithful and 
most fervent intercessors.  
Let us praise the glorious Codratus with Anectus, Dionysius and Paul, Crescens 
and Cyprian, the right faithful branches of the vineyard of Christ.  
Theotokion: Thou didst render the earthly nature of men heavenly, and fashion 
anew that which had corrupted. Wherefore, O Maiden, with unceasing cries we all 
glorify thee.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O God of our 
fathers, * supremely praised above all, and blessed art Thou O Lord.  
Receiving the dew of endurance from on high amid the fire of torments, with the 
children the valiant martyrs cried aloud: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
The stone which before was dry hath been filled with the rain of your precious 
blood, O passion-bearers, pouring forth streams of healing upon those who chant: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
As a noetic ointment jar the shrine of thy relics doth exude the myrrh of healings, 
O Codratus, dispersing the stench of the passions and burning the regiments of the 
demons with divine power.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: Blessed is the fruit of thy blessed womb Whom the hosts of Heaven 
and the assemblies of mankind bless, and Who hath delivered us from the ancient 
curse, O blessed one.  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
Illumined with the splendor of sufferings, O glorious Codratus, thou dost stand as 
a crown-bearer with those who suffered with thee, crying aloud: All ye works, bless 
and hymn the Lord!  
Made comely by the light of the virtues, O all-wise Codratus, in thine end thou 
didst inherit the splendor of martyrdom, raising the hymn: All ye works, bless and 
hymn the Lord!  
Corinth hath acquired as fortifications the precious relics of the saints, and their 
temple as a source of healing for which no payment is exacted, where everyone who 
hath recourse thereto is freed from pangs and passions.  
Theotokion: Delivered from the curse of our foremother by thee, O pure Mother 
of God, blessed Sovereign Lady, we bless thee with faith and chant hymns to thee, O 
most holy Virgin Bride of God.  
ODE IX 
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
The sores inflicted during your martyrdom emit a fragrance full of grace, and the 
blood therefrom poureth forth torrents of healings through the divine Spirit, healing 
soul-destroying passions. Let us bless them as is meet.  
Comely in the beauty of thy wounds, thou didst become like unto the angels, O 
Codratus; and seated upon thy blood which thou hadst shed as upon a chariot, thou 
didst fly aloft to the Kingdom on high, receiving honors for thy sufferings.  
Pouring forth divine sweetness from thy mouth, O martyr Codratus, thou didst 
exhort the company of athletes to suffer with thee: Anectus and Paul, Crescens, 
Cyprian and the godly Dionysius; and with them thou dost join chorus, O right 
wondrous one. 
 We all honor the day of the celebration of your suffering, O passion-bearers; for 
thereon, having taken up the crown of incorruption, ye became sons of the light and 
the day, forming a choir around the throne of the King of all.  
Theotokion: Shown to be the bearer of the Creator of all in a manner past all 
understanding, O all-immaculate one, thou wast shown to be more exalted than the 
heavens and as having dominion over all, O undefiled Virgin Birthgiver of God. 
Wherefore, we all unceasingly magnify thee.  
