--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 20th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHERS SLAIN IN THE MONASTERY OF ST. SABBAS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Utterly loving the ultimate Goal of thy desire, * O venerable ones, * ye accounted 
the beauties of life to be but dung; * and through vigil and prayer, * through rain and 
burning heat, * ye acquired those things which alone are lasting; * and having dwelt 
together as one, * by grace ye were shown to be ** dwellers with the angels.  
Beaten with staves, * stoned with rocks, * cut down with swords, * ye did not 
break your oneness of mind, O martyrs, * bound together by love and fraternal 
desire; * yet, slain together, * your members cut off, O passion-bearers, * ye have set 
yourselves upon the altar of God ** as unblemished sacrifices.  
Consumed by fire, * laid waste by suffocation, * ye committed your souls into the 
hands of the King of all * as unblemished sacrifices, O glorious martyrs; * having 
joined yourselves to the choirs of the incorporeal powers, * and inherited everlasting 
glory, * pray ye unceasingly, * that those who praise you ** may also have a share 
therein.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O Virgin who hast given birth * unto my God and Savior, * grant me the choice 
and saving remedy of repentance: * a torrent of tears, * and the thought of the dread 
and awesome hour * of the impartial judgment; * that by thy supplications * I may 
escape fearsome torment ** and receive divine grace.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee * nailed to the Cross, O Lord, * the ewe-lamb 
Thy Mother marveled * and cried out: “What is this that I see, * O my Son most 
desired? * How hast Thou been rewarded * by the unfaithful and iniquitous assembly 
* which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? ** Yet glory to Thine ineffable condescen-
sion, O Master!”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon to the venerable martyrs, the acrostic  
whereof is: “With hymns I glorify the martyrs who shared one way of life,” the 
composition of Stephen the Sabbaite, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
Grant me to hymn and praise the divinely crowned multitude of Thy sacred 
martyrs, O Christ, that by their entreaties I may be granted light from Heaven, and 
thereby raise a divinely crowned hymn to them.  
Having fled the world of deadly pleasures, O ye spiritually rich confessors, ye cast 
off the defilement of the flesh and spirit; and lived angelic lives, passing on to the 
dwelling places on high.  
Manifestly ordering your members and senses in accordance with the law of the 
Spirit, ye showed yourselves to be temples dedicated to God, O God-bearing martyrs; 
for Christ made His abode within you.  
Having left corruptible wealth behind on earth and disdained the beautiful things 
of life like a dream, O saints, pleasing Christ ye have now received the unshakable 
kingdom.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be the noetic ladder which Jacob, the 
chosen one of God, beheld, and from whence by His ineffable Word the Incorporeal 
One passed Who, in a manner past all telling, became flesh through thee without 
change, O Theotokos.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Having sanctified your whole blameless life, O martyrs, ye truly offered yourselves 
up to the all-seeing God as divine immolations, receiving perfect crowns.  
As dedicated disciples of the God-bearing Sabbas, desiring to withdraw from the 
tumults of the world, ye attained unto everlasting life, unerringly traversing the path 
of tribulation.  
Having cultivated the seed which was the word of God sown within you, and 
watered it abundantly with streams of tears, O venerable ones, bearing fruit ye have 
offered grain unto God an hundredfold.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Theotokion: Having dwelt in the Virgin in the flesh, O Lord, Thou didst appear as 
a man, as it was fitting for Thee to be seen; and Thou hast shown her to be the true 
Theotokos and help of the faithful, O Thou only Lover of mankind.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically ordered ...”: 
Having mortified the fiery assaults and movements of the passions, O God-
pleasing fasters, following the steps of God Who alone hath wrought all things, ye 
were beaten, slain and cut down with violence by slaughter at the hands of barbarians, 
offering yourselves up to Him as living and hallowed sacrifices.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
O divinely joyous, pure and blessed one, with the powers on High, the archangels 
and all the incorporeal ones, beseech Him Who was born of thee out of the loving-
kindness of His compassions; that before the end He grant us forgiveness, the 
cleansing of our sins and amendment of life, that we may find mercy. 
Stavrotheotokion: Ever protected by the Cross of thy Son and God, O Virgin, we 
vanquish the assaults and wiles of the demons, hymning thee who art truly the 
Theotokos; and all generations bless thee with love, O most pure one, as thou didst 
foretell. Wherefore, by thy supplications grant us forgiveness of sins.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou didst mount Thy steeds O Lord, * Thine apostles, * and taking 
their bridles in Thy hands, * Thy chariot became salvation unto those who 
sing with faith: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Beholding the invincible martyrs, adorned with divers virtues, persevering in the 
waterless desert, the enemy became inflamed with wickedness, and, imbued with 
hatred, prepared himself for an assault upon you.  
The evil serpent, having rooted deception for this purpose within his disciples, 
instructed the barbarian tribes in the slaying of one another, and to thereby drive the 
venerable from the desert.  
The enemy of the righteous, having savagely gathered to him those who were 
round about him, was unable to drive the invincible ones away; and, invisibly 
vanquished, he arrayed himself against them visibly.  
Full of poison and rage, the prince of wickedness and his warriors launched 
themselves, descended like wild beasts upon the blessed ones, and spilled torrents of 
their blood by inflicting upon them unbearable wounds.  
Those whose hope was earthly sought for transitory things: a treasure of 
corruptible gold; but, rendered steadfast, the valorous ones, placing their trust in 
heaven, cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Mercilessly, like wild beasts, they tortured the venerable ones with staves, swords 
and stoning, commanding them to tell where their choice treasures were hid; but they 
all remained steadfast through the law of love.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: O Virgin and Mother, thou art the adornment of the apostles, the 
confirmation of the holy martyrs, the boast of the venerable, and the salvation of 
those who sweetly chant with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
The venerable ones, having learned the union of the perfection of love, laid down 
their lives for their friends, and taught by Thee, O Savior, emulated Thy voluntary 
passion more than others.  
O Christ Who wast willingly born in the flesh in a supra-natural manner, at Thy 
command the martyrs showed themselves to be mightier than death; for, having been 
brought together by Thy law, the divinely-wise right laudably hastened to die for their 
friends.  
Having sprinkled your souls with the noetic hyssop of baptism, ye were 
straightway sprinkled with your blood, O venerable ones; and tried like gold in the 
fire, ye became a pleasing and sweet-smelling sacrifice unto God.  
Theotokion: Having acquired maternal boldness before thy Son, O most pure one, 
disdain not forethought for thy kin, we pray, that we may set thee alone before the 
Master as the merciful cleansing of Christians.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: From the depths of sin I cried unto the Lord, * Who is able to save me? 
* and He led my life out of corruption, * in that He is the Lover of mankind.  
The favored ones of Christ did not fear the threats of the barbarians; for they 
continually made their life a training ground for death.  
Thinking to enrich themselves, the impious mercilessly tortured the non-
acquisitive ones; but they, having cast aside corruptible things, acquired incorruptible 
things.  
Invested with invincible power, the athletes of Christ vanquished the noetic 
destroyers and the insolence of the barbarians.  
Theotokion: As on a light cloud the reigning Lord came upon thee, O all-
immaculate one, to cast down the works of the hands of the Egyptians.  
Kontakion of the venerable martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Having manifestly disdained the pleasure of earthly and corruptible things, * and 
chosen a life in the desert, * despising the most beautiful things of this world * and 
food which passeth away, O most blessed ones, * ye hence were accounted worthy of 

--- PAGE 5 ---
the kingdom of heaven * and are gladdened with the choirs of martyrs and fasters. * 
Wherefore, honoring your memory, * we earnestly cry out to you: ** Deliver us from 
tribulations, O fathers!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Having quenched the all-consuming power of the Chaldean furnace * 
with the form of the Angel, that had descended therein, * the children cried 
out to the Creator: * Blessed and praised art Thou, O God of our fathers!  
The hostility of the hordes of the adversaries, visible and invisible, grew weak at 
the sight of the wounded martyrs who chanted: Blessed and praised art Thou, O God 
of our fathers!  
Having wed themselves to Thee, O Christ, casting aside kin and homeland and 
wealth, wounded with desire for Thee, they that fled to Thee for refuge loved Thee 
Who alone existest, O our Redeemer, the God of our fathers!  
The bloodlust of the barbarians did not alter Thy lovers of desert service, O 
Christ; for they did not fear those who slay the body, holding fast to Thy 
commandment as an unshakable foundation.  
Having turned their desire from the world towards Thee and armed themselves 
solely against the spirit of sin, Thy favored ones pleased Thee, embraced by divinely 
wise thought, O Lord Christ.  
O martyrs, receiving within you the law written upon the tablets of your hearts, ye 
preached the One God in Trinity, crying out to Him: Blessed and praised art Thou, O 
God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: O ye that walk in the light of the Lord, come, let us hymn the divine 
gateway of the King of kings, pure Mary who is truly the Theotokos, for she is the 
hope of our souls.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The divinely plucked harp of piety * played a different hymn than the 
instruments of impiety: * O ye works of the Lord, bless Christ throughout the 
ages!  
The equals of the angels, vying with the ranks of heaven, standing all night in 
vigils, sang: All ye works of the Lord, bless Christ throughout the ages!  
Taking up their cross, with all their heart the martyrs followed after Thee, the 
Master, chanting: All ye works of the Lord, bless Christ throughout the ages!  
Having purified body, soul and spirit equally, consumed in the fire, O fathers, ye 
offered yourselves up as whole-burnt offerings to God, supremely exalting Christ 
throughout all ages.  
Trinitarian: Let those who utter blasphemy, saying that Thou Who art indivisible 
art in two hypostases, be put to shame as ones who honor a godhead of four persons; 
for we worship Thee alone as One of the divine Trinity.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Having trained themselves in divers ways and overcome the machinations of the 
ruler of this world, the fasters, like athletes, put to shame the malice of the barbarians, 
enduring their assaults. Wherefore, they received twofold crowns from the just Judge 
of the contest.  
Leading a life of fasting in caves and caverns, O blessed ones, ye were confined 
within a narrow cave in a lightless defile; and dyed with your own blood, consumed 
by fire and cruelly suffocated by smoke admixed with steam, ye were shown to be 
victorious.  
We hymn your feats which transcend nature, whereby ye contended against sin, 
youthfully opposing it as warriors of Christ, O glorious ones; for right gloriously did 
ye overcome it. And now, standing before the Most High with the ranks of the saints, 
remember us.  
Arrayed in the heavens with thrice-radiant splendor, as dutiful children of Sabbas 
your father and instructor, O blessed ones, pray on behalf of us your fellow disciples 
and chanters, that communal peace be granted to the Churches and salvation to our 
souls.  
Theotokion: As the Mother of the Redeemer, O most pure one, thou hast once 
more summoned us who have rejected the life of heaven and wretchedly fallen into 
death; and thou hast deemed us worthy to hasten again to our first homeland. 
Wherefore, we unceasingly magnify thee, O Mother of God.  
 
 
 
