--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR BASIL, PRIEST OF THE 
CHURCH OF ANCYRA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
Adorned with the vesture of the priesthood, * thou didst serve God like an angel, * 
offering sacrifice unto Him Who appeared in material flesh for our sake, * O Basil of 
great renown, * wherefore, thou wast slaughtered like a perfect lamb, * and a pure 
sacrifice, * and now, offered up upon the altar of heaven. * For which cause, with 
joyful voices * we ever call thee blessed, crying out to thee: * Pray thou unceasingly, 
** that our souls be saved!  
When thy skin was flayed off * by the unjust judge, * thou didst endure pangs, * 
looking forward to an end without pain, O glorious one, * and to the honors 
prepared for those who suffer; * and, tempered in fire like steel, * thou didst become 
a well-forged sword of heaven, O all-blessed one, * cutting down all the hosts of the 
enemy. * Wherefore, rejoicing, every nation of the pious doth honor thee today, * O 
valiant minded athlete, ** right glorious Basil.  
Adorned with divine wounds, * bound, thou didst hasten from city to city, * 
thereby binding the tyrant * and setting aright the steps of thy feet; * and when thou 
didst enter the city of Caesarea, * wherein thou didst receive thy blessed end, * thou 
didst straightway ascend, crowned, * to the city of heaven. * And now thou standest * 
before God the King. * Him do thou entreat, ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
In that I have fallen, accursed, * into the abyss of many falls * through my 
despondency and slothfulness, wretch that I am, * I am now held fast by doubt and 
despair. * Be a help and cleansing to me * and salvation, O most pure one, * 
bestowing upon me thy most compassionate consolation. * Thee do I beseech, and to 
thee do I pray; * and I fall down and cry out to thee with faith: * Let me not utterly 
become ** a joy to the deceiver!  
Stavrotheotokion: “Lament not for Me, O Mother, * beholding Me thy Son and 
God hanging upon the Tree, * Who hath suspended the earth upon the waters 
unsupported, * and hath fashioned all creation; * for I shall arise and be glorified, * 
and shall crush the kingdoms of Hades with strength; * destroying its power and 
delivering those in bondage * from its wickedness, * for I am compassionate; * and I 
shall bring them to My Father, ** in that I am the Lover of mankind.”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise thy pangs, O great 
martyr”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VI:  
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
The glorious Basil, ardently loving the glory of Thy kingdom, O King of all, 
suffered on earth. Through him grant us the kingdom of heaven.  
Thy praiseworthy life, honorable manner of living, and the steps of thy struggle 
showed thee to be an heir of God and made thee a citizen of heaven, O glorious one.  
Having made thyself subject to the Lord, O most wise one, thou didst subdue the 
enemy by thy good life and trample him underfoot, having splendidly battled with 
him, O martyr Basil.  
With the outpouring of thy blood thou didst truly drown the whole army of the 
noetic Pharaoh; and thou hasten to the land where the cloud of spiritual athletes ever 
rejoiceth, O wise one.  
Theotokion: He Who is the only-begotten Son of the Father made His abode 
within thy most pure womb as He willed; and became a man, wishing to save 
mankind in His goodness.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Suspended aloft like a lamb upon a tree, O all-blessed one, with steadfast intent 
thou didst endure laceration, and lay low the assaults of the enemy by the power of 
the divine Spirit.  
Thou wast revealed to be most comely of soul and body with the beauties of thy 
wounds, O martyr, with a pure mind uttering cries of thanksgiving to the Judge of thy 
contest.  
Seeking great renown, O wise one, thou didst endure great struggles with most 
wise demeanor, and didst bring down him who doth ever greatly vaunt himself.  
Imprisoned in a dungeon as a godly observer of the precepts of God, O divinely 
wise one, thou hast opened the path of doctrine unto the faithful, which leadeth to 
the broad plain of understanding.  
Theotokion: Isaiah, perceiving thy conception from afar, O Maiden, declared it, 
crying out: Lo! a Virgin shall conceive God in her womb!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Thou wast the adornment of the Church, the might of piety and the destroyer of 
impiety, O Basil; and, having endured tortures like one of the bodiless ones, thou 
didst join them, rejoicing, O glorious martyr. Entreat Christ God, that He grant our 
souls great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III:  
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence, * when taking flesh in thy 
womb, * He remained God though He had became a man; * and even after thy 
birthgiving, preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, * as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. * Him do thou earnestly beseech, ** that He grant us great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Beholding thy divine countenance luminous with spiritual radiance, O martyr, the 
ungodly one marveled; but as a servant of darkness he was mindlessly insane.  
Adorned with higher wisdom, thou didst make fools of the pagan sages by the 
power of God; and having suffered patiently, thou didst receive a crown of victory.  
The Word Who was stretched out upon the Cross and bestoweth dispassion upon 
the faithful by His sufferings, O Basil, strengthened thee when thou wast stretched 
out and all thy members were severed.  
“I will not sacrifice to demons; neither do I fear death nor any form of torment! I 
confess the one God Who is known in the Trinity!” the sacred Basil cried out.  
Theotokion: I hymn thee, the greatly hymned one, O Sovereign Lady; and I bless 
thee, O Virgin, because of whom all mankind hath been blessed and truly delivered 
from the ancient curse.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Desiring to bear the yoke of the most radiant Lord, thou wast bowed down 
beneath the weight of irons, O martyr, yet didst humble the neck of the proud enemy 
who raged against the Creator.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Gladly loaded down with iron chains, O martyr Basil, thou didst hasten from place 
to place, adorned with them as with jewelry, gladdening the Judge of thy contest.  
With the streams of thy blood thou didst truly dye for thyself a robe of royal 
purple, O glorious martyr; and adorned with the crown of victory, thou reignest with 
Christ, rejoicing, O Basil.  
Made steadfast by the grace of the Cross, savagely persecuted thou didst endure 
the long and cruel road, chanting: “Adorned and rejoicing, O Word, I tread the path 
of thy testimonies!” 
Theotokion: With hymns let us honor the only Theotokos, who is more exalted 
than the cherubim, higher than the heavens, greater than creation, the protection of 
the wise martyrs.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Elevated by thy sufferings, thou didst cast down the enemy, O great and glorious 
martyr; and crowned with the wreath of victory, thou didst pass over to God at the 
end of thy sufferings, O right praiseworthy one.  
Emulating Him Who stretched out His hands on the Cross for thy sake, O wise 
martyr, thou didst patiently endure laceration, lifted up upon a tree, wounding the 
deceiver with thy wounds.  
Bound for Christ, O Basil, thou didst bind the bodiless enemies; and loosed from 
the flesh, thou didst utterly destroy their evil works with divine grace.  
Theotokion: I hymn thee, O all-hymned one, whom the armies of the ranks of 
heaven do hymn; and I beseech thee: heal thou the sufferings of my soul, O pure one, 
and free me from everlasting fire.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “To the chosen ...”: 
Running thy race lawfully, thou didst keep the Faith, O hieromartyr Basil; * 
wherefore, thou hast been deemed worthy of crowns of martyrdom * and hast shown 
thyself to be an unshakable pillar of the Church, * confessing the Son as co-
beginningless with the Father and the Trinity as indivisible, * Whom do thou entreat, 
that those who honor thee be delivered from misfortunes, ** that we may cry out to 
thee: Rejoice, O divinely wise Basil!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Shining with the radiance of divine grace, thou didst pass through the darkness of 
torments as one who shareth in the never-waning day, O wise one; crying aloud: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thy heart, founded firmly upon the rock of divine understanding, O wise athlete, 
was not shaken by the winds of temptations, crying out to the Redeemer of all: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Foolishly, the tyrant commanded the soles of thy feet to be flayed, O glorious one, 
yet, seeing thee enduring like one of the bodiless ones, he in no wise understood how 
to cry: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Burning in the furnace of torments, thou didst shine like gold; and as a model of 
the divine sufferings, O wise Basil, thou didst cry aloud: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Knowing thy virginity to remain incorrupt after giving birth, O Virgin, 
thou didst cry out to our Savior and God Who was born of thee in a manner past 
understanding: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Wholly intent upon union with God, thou didst account the pangs of the body to 
be as a dream; and hence, rejoicing, thou didst pass over to the blessed life without 
pain, O martyred athlete.  
Strengthened by the love of the Almighty, thou didst mightily endure the laceration 
of thy body, and choke him who is mighty in malice with the streams of thy blood, O 
thrice-blessed Basil.  
With hymns let the great Basil be praised: the royal adornment of the Church of 
Christ, the steadfast martyr, the model of the sufferings of the Savior, the 
confirmation of the faithful.  
At thine end, O martyr, thou wast deemed worthy to obtain supra-natural glory 
and never-waning light, the kingdom of heaven, an imperishable crown, life free of 
grief and filled with ineffable joy.  
Theotokion: Through thee, O most pure and divinely joyous maiden, mankind 
hath been deemed worthy of salvation; for thou alone hast given birth to the Savior 
on our behalf, Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Released from the flesh, O most noetically rich hieromartyr, thou wast deemed 
worthy to behold the beauteous splendors of the saints; and didst join the angelic 
armies, ever chanting with them: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O all-accomplishing and 
omnipotent Trinity!  
Seen as a light, as a great sun in the sky of the Church of Christ, O all-blessed one, 
thou dost illumine the souls of all who praise thee with the radiant effulgence of thy 
sufferings and the divine splendors of thy miracles.  
Thou didst adorn thyself most gloriously with the beauties of sufferings, O 
divinely wise spiritual athlete, and standing before our comely Christ, wearing now a 
crown of righteousness, thou dost ever rejoice, wherefore we the faithful honor thee.  
The earth hath been hallowed by the divine burial of thy sacred and divine body, 
O Basil; and the souls of the righteous leap with joy, having thy spirit in their midst, 
O blessed one. Be thou mindful of us who remember thee with them.  
Theotokion: Awesome is the image of thy birthgiving, O Virgin, for God, having 
been being born, became incarnate. Him do thou entreat, that He deliver from dread 
torment all who with sure faith honor thee, O pure Mother who knewest not 
wedlock.  
 
 
 
