--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
SYNAXIS OF THE ARCHANGEL GABRIEL  
[The materials for Vespers, and those for Matins particular to the Feast, are to be found at the end 
of the service for the feast on the previous day.)  
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” on certain days, according to the Typicon, there is chanted 
along with the Troparion of the Feast that of the Archangel, in Tone IV: 
O supreme commander of the armies of heaven, * we ever entreat thee, unworthy 
though we are, * that by thy supplications thou mayest guard us with the shelter of 
the wings * of thine immaterial glory, * preserving us who fall down and earnestly cry 
aloud: * Deliver us from misfortunes, ** in that thou art the leader of the ranks of the 
powers on high.  
The appointed Kathismata, and the Sessional Hymns from the Triodion.  
Psalm 50  
Canon of the Theotokos, with 4 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the 
archangel, with 6 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is the alphabet, in Tone VI:  
ODE I  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Today Gabriel, the radiant leader of the heavenly ranks, hath been sent to the 
Virgin, crying out: “Rejoice, O immaculate Bride, for through thee is come the 
Creator and Lord of all!”  
The Theotokos: “I wish to understand thy strange salutation,” the Virgin said, “for 
the joy which thou hast uttered is a saying strange to mankind. Speak thou clearly, 
teaching me.”  
The Angel: “I shall speak most clearly, standing before thee with all reverence, O 
most pure one; and do thou incline thine ear, for the power of the Most High shall 
come upon thee, and thou shalt be inhabited by the all-accomplishing Spirit.”  
Canon of the Archangel, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
I beseech thee, O archangel of the Lord, as thou art divine and immaterial light 
through sharing immaterially in the uttermost Light: illumine my mind by thy 
supplications, that I may hymn thee.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
In gladness let us form a divine choir today, honoring the first among the 
incorporeal intelligences, who hath announced the ineffable Joy Who, in His 
goodness, hath come into the world.  
Having thee, O Gabriel, as an intercessor most great, a helper before God, a 
rampart and confirmation, we who love and praise thee are delivered from 
misfortunes and the evil of the serpent.  
Theotokion: When Gabriel beheld thee, the pure and all-immaculate one, he cried 
out to thee with splendor: “Rejoice, O Sovereign Lady, thou salvation of mankind 
who knewest not wedlock, boast and pride of the angels!”  
ODE III  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
The Theotokos: “I see now that thou speakest falsely, O angel, for how can a 
nature which is material, corruptible and earthly contain the Immaterial One Who is 
clothed in the light of incorruption?”  
The Angel: “Sensibly hast thou accused me, O pure one, yet such is His good 
pleasure. But be thou convinced by the bush which, burning, was in no wise 
consumed by the fire, prefiguring thine ineffable birthgiving. “ 
The Theotokos: “Thou criest out to me words of life; yet the smoking mountain 
of old, which received God, persuadeth me that material nature is unable to receive 
the Immaterial One.”  
Canon of the archangel  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Thou wast seen to be a secondary luminary, O Gabriel, illumined immaterially by 
partaking of the most immaterial Light, as one truly immaterial, ever illumining the 
material mortals who hymn thee.  
Having revealed to us the great mystery, thou wast deemed worthy of the greatest 
of fame, O greatest of the angels, whereby we who honor thee greatly have been 
caught up from the earth to the greatest of heights.  
From heaven hast thou manifested thyself unto all who ever seek thee with love; 
and thou hast stilled the tempest of the passions and tribulations which beset us, O 
Gabriel, supreme commander.  
Theotokion: Relating the mystery hidden from of old, O Maiden, Gabriel once 
cried out to thee: “Rejoice, O palace of God wherein, making His abode, he hath 
deified all mankind, in that He is compassionate!”  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
To thee alone, O glorious Gabriel who hast the primacy among the incorporeal 
ministers of God, was entrusted the awesome mystery which was appointed before 
time began: the ineffable birthgiving of the holy Virgin. And thou didst proclaim to 
her: “Rejoice, O thou who art full of joy!” Wherefore with gladness we, the faithful, 
ever call thee blessed, as is fitting.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
The Angel: “Thy womb is become the chariot of the Sun, O most pure one; and 
for mortals hast thou given birth to the never-waning Light,” Gabriel proclaimed to 
the Virgin with all joy.  
The Theotokos: “Depart from my doors, and speak not words whose fulfillment 
thou canst in nowise demonstrate, O supreme commander! Why dost thou trouble 
my mind and soul, saying these things to me?”  
The Angel: “The trumpets of the prophets were deemed worthy to perceive the 
depth of the mystery from afar, O all-immaculate one. I am the minister thereof, and 
I stand at thy doors.”  
Canon of the archangel  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Of old, O right wondrous Gabriel, thou didst stand, illumining the Prophet Daniel 
with divine communion, through the Spirit expounding the manifestation of 
incomprehensible things.  
With lips of clay we joyfully praise thee who art fiery by nature. By thy divine 
mediations, O Gabriel, rescue us from the ever-burning fire.  
Arrayed in divine vesture brighter than the sun in unapproachable glory, O 
supreme commander of the servants of God, thou standest in gladness before the 
King of heaven.  
Theotokion: Understanding thee to be wholly purified by the Spirit, O all-
immaculate one, Gabriel openly crieth out to thee: Rejoice, O deliverance from the 
curse and restoration of the ancestors of mankind!  
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE V  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
The Theotokos: “I behold thee radiant with angelic splendor, O angel,” said the 
most immaculate one, “yet I am reluctant to believe without hesitation, not knowing 
first every particular.”  
The Angel: “The Creator, seeing human nature corrupted, hath been well-pleased 
to make His abode within thee, O pure one, revealing now in awesome manner the 
mystery which hath been hidden from before time began.”  
The Theotokos: “I have been betrothed unto Joseph, but hitherto have not united 
with him, O archangel. Therefore, not having known a man, how can I give birth? 
The words thou speakest unto me are contrary to nature.” 
Canon of the archangel  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Made luminous through communing with the primal Mind, thou wast revealed to 
be a secondary luminary crying out with the countless ranks of angels: Holy is God 
the Creator of all, the co-beginningless Son, and the Spirit Who is co-enthroned with 
them.  
Thine aspect is fiery, thy beauty most wondrous, striking every thought with awe, 
O Gabriel most great. Great is thy glory, O leader of the divine incorporeal ones, 
adornment of all who hymn thee with faith.  
Of old, when the godly Zachariah beheld thee as he stood during the time of 
censing, he was struck mute; for he did not believe the dread announcement which 
thou didst proclaim, O Gabriel, thou supreme commander.  
Theotokion: As a temple of sanctity, O all-immaculate one, at the cry of the 
Archangel Gabriel thou didst give birth to the all-holy God Who resteth in His saints, 
Who sanctifieth all and rescueth us from evils.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
The Angel: “Jesus, the Creator of being, doth not hold beings in slavery to laws, O 
Maiden. May the rod of Aaron, which grew without water, and hath prefigured that 
thou wilt give birth without knowing a man, convince thee.”  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
The Theotokos: “Contemplating these thine awesome and honorable words, I 
marvel; and desiring to believe, I ponder the greatness of their eminence and am 
wholly dismayed, O supreme commander.”  
The Angel: “Wilt thou not submit to my words? Thee, O pure one, did Daniel 
foresee as the mountain from whence, without human hands, would be cut the Stone 
which will most mightily break down the temples of the idols.”  
Canon of the archangel  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
The nations of the earth are unable to honor thee, the radiant and heavenly 
intelligence who art most splendidly and ineffably illumined with divine effulgence 
which surpasseth understanding.  
By thy radiant entreaties to the Theotokos rescue those who hymn thee from the 
darkness of the passions, O supreme commander of the fiery servants of God, thou 
ray far brighter than the sun.  
By thy supplications to the Creator of all, O archangel, confound the counsels of 
the Pagans, make firm the Orthodox Faith, and bring an end to schisms within the 
Church.  
Theotokion: Thou wast obedient to the divine words of Gabriel, O pure one, and 
didst give birth in the flesh unto the beginningless Word Who hath delivered the 
world from folly.  
Kontakion of the archangel, in Tone VIII: 
O supreme commander, thou glorious intercessor and servant * of the most 
radiant, adored, all-accomplishing, infinite and awesome Trinity: * do thou now 
unceasingly pray that we be delivered from all tribulations and torments, * that we 
may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O protection of thy servants!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
The Angel: “I shall recount to thee. Understand, O all-immaculate one: How did 
the tent of Abraham once receive and contain God, O most pure one? Wherefore, be 
not doubtful now, but accept my salutation lovingly, in that thou art the joy of 
mankind.”  
The Theotokos: “The magnitude of this matter troubleth me; but since it is the 
good pleasure of the Supremely good One to make His abode within me in a manner 
past understanding, behold! I am preserved for Him as a temple pure in soul and 
body.”  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the archangel  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Once, in the midst of the temple, thou didst announce the birth of John to 
Zachariah, who stood chanting before God the Redeemer: O all-hymned Lord and 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The most glorious magnificence of thy temple most radiantly illumineth the souls 
of the faithful, O Gabriel, and compelleth them to cry aloud: O all-hymned Lord and 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Illumined by mystically partaking of the primal Light, O supreme commander, 
thou hast been truly seen to be a secondary luminary, ever enlightening those who 
chant: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Gabriel the supreme commander was sent to announce joy unto thee, 
O pure Virgin Mother, because of whom grief hath ceased, the curse hath truly 
withered away, and blessing hath blossomed forth for the faithful throughout all ages.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
At the cry of the angel thou didst conceive the Light. Wherefore, to thee do we all 
cry out: Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, thou portal of the Light, vision hard to see, 
throne of the Most High!  
Rejoice, perfection of the exalted mystery! Rejoice, manifestation of things hard to 
comprehend! Rejoice, unification of mortals to God! Rejoice, O Virgin, thou 
restoration of the fallen!  
Rejoice, O mother of the Master, the Bestower of light! Rejoice, O haven for the 
storm-tossed! Rejoice, O all-immaculate one, true and fruitful vine! Rejoice, thou who 
hast put forth the Grapes of immortality!  
Canon of the archangel  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
In gladness the sacred people hymn thee with sacred voices; for thou dost 
announce to the Virgin, who is one of us, the all-accomplishing Word Who becometh 
incarnate as we are, in a manner beyond understanding and all telling. Wherefore, we 
honor thee throughout all ages.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Uniting thyself immaterially to the great and primal Mind, O archangel, with thy 
fiery mouth thou dost chant the awesome hymns which all the choirs of the angels 
sing: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Manifestly adorned with divine glories, thou dost pass over those of heaven and of 
earth, accomplishing the divine desires of Christ the God of all, O Gabriel, leader of 
the angels and adornment of those who ever praise thee with faith.  
The Word, desiring to mingle with mankind in a fleshly hypostasis, had thee go 
before Him and prepare a sacred palace, O sacred Gabriel, singing: Hymn the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Let us hymn the blessed Virgin as the beautiful throne of the King, as 
the one exalted above all created beings, as the one who gaveth being to Him Who is 
above being, Who hath deified mankind by the higher unification of her ineffable and 
awesome birthgiving.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Rejoice, O honored and most blessed one, thou cause of joy and furrow of goodly 
growth who bearest the Nourisher of all! Rejoice, O most pure one, wellspring of 
living water, thou jar and garden of God! Rejoice, O all-immaculate one!  
Rejoice, O cleansing of souls and bodies, through whom better things flow forth 
upon mankind, thou cause of the deification of all! Rejoice, O light cloud who bearest 
the Sun Who illumineth the world with radiant effulgence!  
We cry out to thee a hymn of joy: Rejoice, O pure one, boast of the martyrs and 
the apostles, most glorious utterance of the prophets! Rejoice, thou adornment of 
hierarchs and the venerable, for whose sake the inhabitants of heaven rejoice with 
those of earth!  
Canon of the archangel  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Illumined with effulgence past understanding and deified in a sacred manner, thou 
standest in awe before the throne of grace, ministering thereunto, and, seen as light, 
thou dost illumine those who honor thee with faith, O sacred Gabriel, thou supreme 
commander.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou art seen to be like the sky, adorned with divine radiances as with stars, and as 
a commander thou holdest a most radiant scepter in thy hands; and dost pass over 
the whole earth, ever doing the will of the Master and rescuing the faithful from evils.  
Still thou the cruel tempests of the barbarians which ever assail thy servants; cause 
schisms to cease within the Church; and grant deliverance from transgressions to 
those who hymn thee and victories to our civil authorities through thine intercession, 
O Gabriel.  
O all-comely and most glorious twain, Michael and Gabriel: standing before the 
throne of divine glory, ask on behalf of all for forgiveness of sins and release from 
evils, in that ye are intercessors and emulate the goodness of the Master.  
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving thou hast shone forth the Light of effulgence and 
illumined the whole world, and destroying the prince of darkness, O all-pure 
Birthgiver of God, thou boast of the angels and salvation of all mortals who praise 
thee with unceasing voices.  
On certain days, according to the prescriptions of the Typicon, the Exapostilarion of 
the archangel is chanted:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast enlightened us ...”:  
O supreme commander of God, who hast arrayed thyself in the shelter of thy 
wings: protect me who have recourse unto thee; at my departure from this life, deliver 
me from the bitter tormentors, and save me by thine entreaties.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the archangel, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
The pre-eternal Mind * made thee, O Gabriel, a secondary luminary * through 
divine fellowship, * illumining the whole universe * and revealing unto us * the great 
and truly divine mystery from of old * of Him Who is incarnate in the Virgin’s womb, 
* and Who, though incorporeal, ** became a man to save mankind. (Twice)  
Standing before the throne of the three-sunned Godhead, * richly shining forth * 
with the divine effulgence unceasingly emitted thereby, * O Gabriel, supreme 
commander, * from the darkness of the passions deliver those on earth * who join 
chorus joyfully * and praise thee; * and illumine them with enlightenment, ** O thou 
who dost pray for our souls.  
Bring low the arrogance of the Moslems * who so often assail thy flock; * bring an 
end to the schisms of the Church; * still the tempest of countless temptations; * 
deliver from tribulations and evil circumstances * those who honor thee with love * 
and have recourse to thy protection, * O Gabriel, supreme commander, ** who dost 
pray for our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II:  
Today Gabriel announceth to her who is full of grace: “Rejoice, O mother who 
knewest not wedlock! Be not amazed by my strange appearance, neither be afraid; for 
I am an archangel! The serpent once deceived Eve; but now I announce joy unto 
thee: thou wilt remain incorrupt and wilt give birth to the Lord, O most holy one!  
On the Aposticha, the Automelon of the Triodion, (Twice); the Martyricon;  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion.  
  
