--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 25th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH  
FEAST OF THE ANNUNCIATION OF OUR MOST HOLY LADY, THE THEOTOKOS & 
EVER-VIRGIN MARY  
If the feast falls on a fast day, we begin vespers without a Kathisma and without prostrations. 
If the eve of the feast fall on a Saturday or Sunday, we chant:  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”:  
Taking pity on His creation, * and bowing down in his loving-kindness, * the 
Creator hasteneth to make His abode * in the womb of the divine Virgin Maiden. * 
And the great archangel came to her, exclaiming: * “Rejoice, O divinely joyous one! * 
Our God is now with thee! * Be not afraid of me, the supreme commander of the 
King, * for thou hast found the grace * which Eve, thy first mother, lost of old. * 
Thou shalt conceive and give birth ** to Him Who is consubstantial with the Father.” 
(Twice)  
“Thy speech and the sight of thee are strange, * and strange are thy words and 
thine announcement,” * Mary said to the angel. * “Deceive me not, * for I am a virgin 
who hath not known wedlock. * Thou sayest that I shall conceive the Uncontainable 
One. * But how can my womb hold Him * Whom the vast spaces of heaven cannot 
contain?” * “Let the tent of Abraham teach thee now, O Virgin, * for it contained 
God, * prefiguring from afar ** thy God-receiving womb.”  
Arriving now in the city of Nazareth, * Gabriel saluteth thee, * the animate city of 
Christ the King, * crying out to thee: * “Rejoice, O blessed and divinely joyous one, * 
for thou shalt receive in thy womb the incarnate God, * Who through thee calleth 
mankind * to its ancient blessedness * in His compassion! * Blessed is the divine and 
immortal Fruit of thy womb, * Who granteth to the world ** cleansing and great 
mercy!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
In the sixth month the supreme commander was sent to thee, the pure Virgin, to 
announce to thee the word of salvation, and to cry out to thee: “Rejoice, O joyous 
one! The Lord is with thee! Thou shalt give birth to the pre-eternal Son of the Father, 
and He shall save His people from their sins!”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
The leader of the hosts on high, * flying down from the heavens to Nazareth, * 
saluteth the Virgin, saying: * “Rejoice, O pure chariot of the Godhead! * God hath 
loved thee from ages past, * and hath chosen thee for his dwelling-place! * I am the 
servant of the Master, who hath come to thee to cry aloud: * Thou shalt give birth to 
the Lord, ** yet shalt remain incorrupt!”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Proclaim from day to day the good tidings * of the salvation of our God.  
“Wherefore is thy visage fiery?” * the pure one said to Gabriel in amazement; * 
“What is thy dignity, and what the power of thy words? * Thou declarest that I shall 
conceive a Son, * yet have I not known a man. * Get thee far away, and deceive me 
not, O man, ** as once the false serpent did to my first mother Eve!”  
Verse: O sing unto the Lord a new song, * sing unto the Lord all the earth.  
“The most holy Spirit of God * will come upon thee, O most pure one, * O 
Sovereign Lady who shall contain God, * and the power of the Most High will 
overshadow thee, * and thou shalt bear a Son * Who shall preserve thy virginity 
intact. * He is the Son without lineage! * And having appeared, He will save His 
people, ** as is His good pleasure!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
During the sixth month the archangel was sent to the pure Virgin, and having 
pronounced a salutation to her, announced that the Redeemer would come forth 
from her. Wherefore, having accepted the salutation, she conceived Thee, the pre-
eternal God, Who hath been well pleased to become ineffably incarnate for the 
salvation of our souls 
Troparion, in Tone IV:  
Today is the crown of our salvation * and the revelation of the mystery which is 
from before all ages! * The Son of God becometh the Son of the Virgin, * and 
Gabriel announceth the glad tidings of grace. * Wherefore, with him let us cry aloud 
to the Theotokos: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! ** The Lord is with thee!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” when the Liturgy of St. Gregory is served, 10 Stichera: 
From the Triodion, the Idiomelon of the day, (Twice), and the 3 Stichera from the 
Triodion; then 6 Stichera of the feast, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”: 
Gabriel stood before thee, * O Maiden, * revealing the pre-eternal counsel, * 
saluting thee and exclaiming: * “Rejoice, O earth unsown! * Rejoice, O bush unburnt! 
* Rejoice, O depth hard to fathom! * Rejoice, O bridge leading to the heavens * and 
lofty ladder, which Jacob beheld! * Rejoice, O divine jar of Manna! * Rejoice, 
annulment of the curse! ** Rejoice, restoration of Adam: the Lord is with thee! 
(Twice)  
“Thou appearest to me as a man,” * the incorrupt Maiden saith to the supreme 
commander; * “yet how is it that thou announcest words which are beyond mankind? 
* For thou hast said that God is with me, * and that He will dwell within my womb. * 
Tell me, how shall I become * so spacious a dwelling * and a place of sanctity * which 
surpasseth the cherubim? * Deceive me no more with falsehoods, * for I have not 
known carnal lust, * I have not partaken of marriage, ** how then shall I give birth to 
a Child?” (Twice)  
“When God desireth, * the order of nature is overcome,” * said the incorporeal 
one; * “and things beyond man are wrought. * Believe thou my true words, * O most 
holy and immaculate one!” * And she cried aloud: * “Be it now with me according to 
thy words: * I shall give birth to the Incorporeal One, * Who will borrow flesh from 
me, * that through this union He might lead mankind up * to his primal dignity, ** in 
that He alone is mighty!” (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of John the Monk:  
Idiomelon, in the same tone:  
The Archangel Gabriel was sent from heaven to announce the conception to the 
Virgin. And, arriving in Nazareth, he pondered within himself, marveling at the 
wonder: “How is it that He Who in the highest is unapproachable is born of the 
Virgin; that He Who hath heaven for His throne and the earth for His footstool is 
contained within the Virgin’s womb; that He upon Whom the six-winged and many-
eyed beings cannot gaze hath been well pleased to become incarnate of her by His 
word alone? This is God’s word. Why, therefore, do I stand and not say to the Virgin: 
“Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee! Rejoice, O pure Virgin! 
Rejoice, O unwedded Bride! Rejoice, O Mother of Life! Blessed is the Fruit of thy 
womb!?”  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Readings of the day from the Triodion, and Three 
Lessons for the feast:  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
A READING FROM GENESIS  
Jacob went forth from the well of the oath, and departed into Haran. And he came 
to a certain place, and slept there, for the sun had gone down; and he took one of the 
stones of the place, and put it at his head, and lay down to sleep in that place, and 
dreamed: and behold a ladder fixed on the earth, whose top reached to heaven, and 
the angels of God ascended and descended on it. And the Lord stood upon it, and 
said: “I am the God of thy father Abraham, and the God of Isaac. Fear not; the land 
on which thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And thy seed shall be like 
the sand of the earth; and it shall spread abroad to the sea, and the south, and the 
north, and the east; and in thee and in thy seed shall all tribes of the earth be blessed. 
And behold I am with thee to preserve thee continually in all the way wherein thou 
shalt go; and I will bring thee back to this land; for I will not desert thee, until I have 
done all that I have said to thee.” And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said: “The 
Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.” And he was afraid, and said: “How fearful is 
this place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!”  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF EZEKIEL  
Thus saith the Lord: “It shall come to pass from the eighth day and onward, that 
the priests shall offer your whole-burnt offerings on the altar, and your peace-
offerings; and I will accept you,” saith the Lord. Then He brought me back by the 
way of the outer gate of the sanctuary that faceth eastward; .and it was shut. And the 
Lord said to me: “This gate shall be shut; it shall not be opened, and no one shall pass 
through it; for the Lord God of Israel shall enter by it, and it shall be shut. For the 
Prince, He shall sit in it, to eat bread before the Lord; He shall go in by the way of the 
porch of the gate, and shall go forth by the way of the same.” And He brought me in 
by the way of the gate that faceth northward, in front of the house: and I looked, and, 
behold! the house was full of the glory of the Lord.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
Wisdom hath built a house for herself and set up seven pillars. She hath killed her 
beasts; she hath mingled her wine in a bowl and prepared her table. She hath sent 
forth her servants, calling with a loud proclamation to the feast, saying: “Whoso is 
foolish, let him turn aside to me.” And to those who want understanding, she saith: 
“Come, eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you. Leave folly, 
that ye may reign forever; and seek wisdom, and improve understanding by 
knowledge.” He that reproveth evil men shall get dishonor to himself; and he that 
rebuketh an ungodly man shall disgrace himself. Rebuke not evil men, lest they 
should hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. Give an opportunity to a 
wise man, and he will be wiser: instruct a just man, and he will receive more 
instruction. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the counsel of the 
law is the character of a sound mind. For in this way thou shalt live long, and years of 
thy life shall be added to thee.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Then, “Let my prayer be set forth ...,” and three prostrations, and the rest of the 
Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts.  
But if the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts is not celebrated, then on “Lord, I 
have cried ...,” we appoint 8 Stichera: 3 Stichera from the Triodion, and 5 of the feast; 
Glory ..., Both now ..., “The Archangel Gabriel was sent from heaven ...” Entrance. 
Prokeimenon. The readings for the day from the Triodion, and Three Lessons of the 
feast.  
Then, “Vouchsafe, O Lord ...,” On the Aposticha, the Sticheron Idiomelon of the 
day, from the Triodion (Twice); and the Sticheron of the martyrs; Glory ..., Both now 
..., “Today the joy of the annunciation is come! ...,” After “Now lettest Thou Thy 
servant depart ...,” the Troparion of the feast. Litany. 3 prostrations. Dismissal.  
At meals we are permitted wine and oil, on whatever day the feast may fall, in 
honor of the most holy Theotokos.  
Be it known that if the feast of the Annunciation fall on any of the Saturdays or 
Sundays of the Fast, we read first the readings of the day, and after them 5 readings of 
the feast, as follows:  
A READING FROM EXODUS  
Moses was tending the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian; and 
he brought the sheep nigh to the wilderness, and came to the Mount of Horeb. And 
an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the bush, and he saw 
that the bush was burning with fire, but the bush was not consumed. And Moses said: 
“I will go near and see this great sight, why the bush is not consumed.” And when the 
Lord saw that he drew nigh to see, the Lord called him out of the bush, saying: 
“Moses, Moses!” And he said: “What is it?” And He said: “Draw not nigh hither: 
loose thy sandals from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy 
ground.” And He said: “I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, and the 
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” And Moses turned away his face, for he was 
afraid to gaze at God. And the Lord said to Moses: “I have surely seen the affliction 
of My people that is in Egypt, and I have heard their cry caused by their taskmasters; 
for I know their affliction. And I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of 
the Egyptians, and to bring them out of that land, and to bring them into a good and 
wide land, into a land flowing with milk and honey.”  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The Lord hath made me the beginning of His ways for His works. He established 
me before time was in the beginning, before He made the earth: even before He 
made the depths; before the fountains of water came forth; before the mountains 
were settled, and all the hills, He begetteth me. The Lord made countries and deserts, 
and the highest inhabited parts under the heavens. When He prepared heaven, I was 
present with Him; and when He prepared His throne upon the winds, and when He 
strengthened the clouds above, and when He secured the fountains of the earth, and 
when He strengthened the foundations of the earth: I was by Him, arranging all 

--- PAGE 6 ---
things. I was that in which He took delight; and daily I rejoiced in His presence 
continually.  
Then, the three Lessons from Genesis, Ezekiel and Proverbs, as set forth above. 
But if the feast falls on a weekday, the three Lessons are read at vespers on the eve of 
the feast, while the 2 readings are read at the Liturgy on the feast itself.  
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT GREAT COMPLINE 
At the first hour of the night (i.e., about 7 o’clock, in the evening), the great bell is 
rung for a time, and then all the bells are rung. And when all are assembled in the 
church, and the priest intoneth the blessing and censeth, we chant Great Compline, 
singing “God is with us! ...,” in Tone VIII, antiphonally, and the usual Troparia: “Day 
is passed ...”  
After the first Trisagion, the Troparion of the feast: “Today is the crown of our 
salvation ...,” After the second Trisagion. the Kontakion of the feast: “To thee, the 
champion leader ...,” And after “Glory to God in the highest ...,” we go forth to the 
Exonarthex, where we perform the Litiya as usual.  
At Litiya, these Stichera, in Tone I:  
The composition of Byzantius: In the sixth month the supreme commander was 
sent to thee, the pure Virgin, to announce to thee the word of salvation, and to cry 
out to thee: “Rejoice, O divinely joyous one! The Lord is with thee! Thou shalt give 
birth to the pre-eternal Son of the Father, and He shall save His people from their 
sins!”  
The composition of Anatolius: During the sixth month the Archangel Gabriel was 
sent from heaven to the city of Nazareth of Galilee, to convey to the Maiden the joy 
of the annunciation. And, approaching her, he cried aloud, saying: “Rejoice, O joyous 
one! The Lord is with thee! Rejoice, O receptacle of the uncontainable Essence! For 
Him Whom the heavens cannot contain doth thy womb hold, O blessed one! Rejoice, 
O honored restoration of Adam and deliverance of Eve, thou joy of the world and 
gladness of our race!”  
The Archangel Gabriel was sent by God from heaven to the undefiled Virgin, to 
the city of Nazareth of Galilee, to announce to her a conception strange in manner. 
The incorporeal servant was sent to the animate city and noetic gate, to declare the 
descent and arrival of the Master. The heavenly warrior was sent to the most holy 
palace of glory, to prepare for the Creator a dwelling-place which cannot be taken 
away. And, approaching her, he cried: “Rejoice, O fiery throne, far more glorious 
than the creatures with four faces! Rejoice, O throne of the King of heaven! Rejoice, 
O unquarried mountain, most precious receptacle, for in thee hath all the fullness of 
the Godhead dwelt bodily, at the good pleasure of the everlasting Father and through 
the cooperation of the most Holy Spirit! Rejoice, O joyous one! The Lord is with 
thee!”  
If it be Saturday or Sunday, Glory ...,  
The composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII:  
Let the heavens be glad and let the earth rejoice! For He Who with the Father is 
equally everlasting, co-beginningless and co-enthroned, taking unto Himself His 
loving mercy toward mankind, hath appointed for Himself an abasement, by the good 
pleasure and counsel of the Father, and hath made His abode within the Virgin’s 

--- PAGE 8 ---
womb, which was wholly purified by the Spirit. O the wonder! God is among 
mankind, the Infinite One is contained in a womb, the Timeless One hath entered 
into time! And what is more glorious: that His conception is seedless, His abasement 
is ineffable. So great is this mystery! For God doth empty Himself and becometh 
incarnate, He took on this form when the angel spake of His conception to the pure 
one, saying: “Rejoice, O joyous one, the Lord is with thee, Who hath great mercy!”  
Both now ..., in Tone II:  
Today Gabriel announceth the glad tidings to her who is full of grace, saying: 
“Rejoice, O Mother unwedded, who knoweth not wedlock! Marvel not at my strange 
appearance, neither be thou afraid, for I am an archangel. The serpent once deceived 
Eve, but now I announce joy to thee: thou shalt remain incorrupt and shalt give birth 
to the Lord, O most pure one!”  
But if the feast fall on a weekday, then we chant:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., “Today Gabriel announceth ...” 
Then the usual prayers of the Litiya at vigil. And on reentering the church we chant 
the following: 
 On the Aposticha, the Stichera, in Tone IV: 
During the sixth month the archangel was sent to the pure Virgin, and having 
pronounced a salutation to her, he announced that the Redeemer would come forth 
from her. Wherefore, having accepted the salutation, she conceived Thee, the pre-
eternal God, Who wast well pleased to become ineffably incarnate for the salvation of 
our souls.  
Verse: Proclaim from day to day the good tidings * of the salvation of our God.  
The Theotokos heard a tongue which she did not know, for the archangel spake to 
her words of annunciation. And accepting his salutation with faith, she conceived 
Thee, the pre-eternal God. Wherefore, rejoicing, we cry out to Thee: O God Who 
wast immutably incarnate from her, grant peace to the world and great mercy to our 
souls!  
Verse: O sing unto the Lord a new song, * sing unto the Lord all the earth.  
Behold, our restoration hath now been revealed to us! God uniteth Himself to me, 
in a manner past all telling! Delusion is dispelled by the voice of the archangel! For 
the Virgin receiveth joy, an earthly woman hath become heaven! The world is 
released from the primal curse! Let creation rejoice and chant aloud: O Lord, our 
Creator and Redeemer, glory be to Thee!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Andrew of Jerusalem, in Tone IV: 
Today is the joy of the annunciation, the triumph of virginity! Those below are 
united to those above! Adam is restored, and Eve is freed from her primal grief. The 
tabernacle of our nature, mingled with divinity, hath become the temple of God! O 

--- PAGE 9 ---
the mystery! Incomprehensible is the image of His abasement, and ineffable the 
richness of His goodness! An angel serveth the miracle, and the Virgin’s womb 
receiveth the Son. The Holy Spirit is sent down from on high, and the Father is well 
pleased. The covenant is enacted by common consent. Saved thereby, let us cry out 
together with Gabriel to the Virgin: Rejoice, O joyous one, from whom Christ God, 
our salvation, is come, assuming our nature and elevating it in Himself! Him do thou 
entreat, that our souls be saved.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” and after Our Father ...,  
The Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Today is the crown of our salvation * and the revelation of the mystery which is 
from before all ages! * The Son of God becometh the Son of the Virgin, * and 
Gabriel announceth the glad tidings of grace. * Wherefore, with him let us cry aloud 
to the Theotokos: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! ** The Lord is with thee! 
(Thrice)  
Then, “Blessed be the name of the Lord ...,” (Thrice); and the Synaxarion reading of 
the feast.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Today is the crown of our salvation * and the revelation of the mystery which is 
from before all ages! * The Son of God becometh the Son of the Virgin, * and 
Gabriel announceth the glad tidings of grace. * Wherefore, with him let us cry aloud 
to the Theotokos: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! ** The Lord is with thee! 
(Thrice)  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns of the Triodion, without 
Ectinias. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
The great commander of the immaterial angels, standing forth in the city of 
Nazareth, proclaimeth to thee the King and Lord of the ages, O most pure one, 
saying to thee: Rejoice, O blessed Mary, thou unapproachable and ineffable mystery, 
thou restoration of mankind!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
Today all creation rejoiceth as the archangel saith to thee “Rejoice!”, O blessed, 
honored and most pure Mother of Christ God. Today the arrogance of the serpent is 
cast into darkness; for the bond of our forefather’s curse is annulled. Wherefore, we 
cry out to thee unceasingly: Rejoice, O joyous one!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We cry out to thee with the voice of the 
archangel, O pure one: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with 
thee!  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: O God, give Thy judgment to the king, and Thy righteousness to the son of 
the King. 
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Gabriel from heaven crieth out “Rejoice!” to the honored one; for she conceiveth 
in her womb the pre-eternal God Who formed the ends of the earth by His word. 
Wherefore, Mary replied: “I know not a man: how then shall I give birth to a Son? 
Who hath ever seen a seedless birthgiving?” And the angel, all-telling, said to the 
Virgin Theotokos: “The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most 
High shall overshadow thee!”  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Another Sessional Hymn, in the same melody:  
Gabriel was sent to the Virgin Mary and announced to her ineffable joy; for she 
would conceive without seed and not suffer corruption. “For thou shalt give birth to 
a Son, the pre-eternal God, and He will save His people from their sins. And He Who 
sent me beareth witness, telling me to cry to thee: Rejoice, O blessed one! O Virgin, 
thou shalt give birth, and shalt remain a virgin even after giving birth!”  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Proclaim from day to day the good tidings * of the 
salvation of our God.  
Verse: O sing unto the Lord a new song, sing unto the Lord all the earth.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §4 (LK 1: 39-49, 56)  
And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city 
of Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came 
to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her 
womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost: and she spake out with a loud 
voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 
And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo! as 
soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my 
womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of 
those things which were told her from the Lord. And Mary said, My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath re-
garded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all 
generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; 
and holy is His name. And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to 
her own house.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone II: 
Today Gabriel announceth to her who is full of grace: “Rejoice, O Mother unwed, 
who knewest not wedlock! Be not amazed by my strange appearance, neither be thou 
afraid; for I am an archangel! The serpent once deceived Eve; but now I announce joy 
unto thee: thou wilt remain incorrupt and wilt give birth to the Lord, O most holy 
one!”  
Canon of the feast, the Irmoi repeated twice, and the Troparia repeated to make up 
12. In odes in which an ode from Triodion occureth, canon of the feast, with 6 
Troparia, including the Irmos, and Triodion, with 8 Troparia.  
Canon of the feast, the acrostic whereof is the (Greek) alphabet (up to Ode VIII),  
The composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O Sovereign Lady, let David thy forefather chant to thee, striking his spiritual 
harp: “Pay heed, O daughter, to the joyful voice of the angel; for he announceth to 
thee ineffable joy!”  
The Angel: “I cry to thee in gladness: Incline thine ear, and hearken unto me, who 
doth announce the seedless conception of God; for thou hast found before God 
favor which no one else hath ever found, O all-pure one!”  
The Theotokos: “That I may understand the power of thy words, O angel, how 
shall what thou hast said come to pass? Speak more plainly: How shall I conceive, 
who am a virgin maiden? How shall I become the Mother of my Creator?”  
The Angel: “Thou thinkest, I suppose, that I am making a false declaration. I 
rejoice, beholding thy steadfastness. Yet be thou of good cheer, O Sovereign Lady, 
for, God willing, most glorious things will easily come to pass!”  
Katavasia: The Irmoi of the feast, except for those odes which conclude with a 
Triodion, when the Katavasia is prescribed by the Triodion.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
The Theotokos: “A ruler hath failed from Judah! The following time hath come, 
wherein Christ, the hope of the nations, shall appear! But tell me: how shall I, who am 
a virgin, give birth to Him?”  
The Angel: “O Virgin, thou seekest to learn from me the manner of thy 
conceiving; yet it is indescribable. The Holy Spirit, overshadowing thee, shall 
accomplish it with His creative power.”  
The Theotokos: “My first mother, accepting the serpent’s knowledge, was driven 
away from divine sustenance; wherefore, I fear thy strange salutation, wary lest I 
stumble.”  
The Angel: “I am sent as a divine intercessor to convey to thee the divine counsel. 
Wherefore fearest thou me who am even more in fear of thee, O all-immaculate one? 
Why dost thou render homage to me who render homage to thee with honor, O 
Lady?”  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the shepherds’ pipes ...”:  
The Word of God hath now come down to the earth, and the angel stood forth, 
crying out to the Virgin: “Rejoice, O blessed one, receiving the pre-eternal Word and 
Lord in thy womb, that, as God, He might save the human race from deception!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Another Sessional Hymn, in the same tone: 
 Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded ...”: 
Gabriel, the supreme commander, was sent from heaven by God; and he quickly 
presented himself before the animate city, manifestly saying to her: “Thou shalt 
receive the Creator in thy womb, O Virgin, and shalt immutably give birth to Him in 
the flesh! Wherefore, I am sent to announce to thee thy strange birth-giving, O pure 
one, and stand here, crying aloud to thee: Rejoice, O bride unwedded!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
The Theotokos: “I have heard the prophet who of old prophesied that Emmanuel 
would come when a certain sanctified virgin giveth birth. Yet I wish to understand 
how human nature will endure mingling with the divinity?”  
The Angel: “O joyous and most hymned one, the bush which was unconsumed 
when it received the flame revealed the most glorious mystery which will be wrought 
in thee, for thou shalt remain a pure Ever-virgin even after giving birth.”  
The Theotokos: “Illumined with the radiance of God Almighty, O Gabriel, thou 
herald of the Truth, speak thou things most true: How shall I give birth to the 
incorporeal Word in the flesh, while remaining in mine incorrupt purity?”  
The Angel: “As a servant I stand with awe and fear before thee, my Maiden Lady, 
and I am abashed to look upon thee; for as the rain descended upon the fleece, so will 
the Word of the Father descend upon thee, as is His good pleasure.”  
ODE V  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
The Theotokos: “I cannot understand the claim of thy words; for there have been 
miracles in great numbers, wrought by divine power, and the signs and images of the 
law; yet never hath a virgin given birth without knowing a man!”  
The Angel: “Thou dost marvel, O all-immaculate one, for strange is the miracle 
wrought in thee; for thou alone shalt receive the King of all incarnate in thy womb. 
Yea, the sayings and indistinct images of the prophets and the types of the law have 
prefigured thee.”  

--- PAGE 14 ---
The Theotokos: “How can He, Whom naught can contain and is visible to no one, 
make His abode in a virgin’s womb, which He Himself created? How shall I conceive 
God the Word, Who with the Father and the Spirit is co-beginningless?”  
The Angel: “A promise was given to David, thine ancestor, that the Fruit of thy 
loins would sit upon the throne of his kingdom. And God hath chosen thee alone, 
the beauty of Jacob, to be His reason-endowed habitation.”  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
The Theotokos: “Accepting the joyous sound of thy words, O Gabriel, I have 
been filled with divine gladness! For thou tellest of joy, and dost announce gladness 
without end!”  
The Angel: “To thee hath divine joy been given, O Mother of God! To thee doth 
all creation cry out “Rejoice!”, O Bride of God! For thou alone hath been called 
beforehand the Mother of the Son of God, O pure one!”  
The Theotokos: “Let the condemnation of Eve now be annulled! Let her debt 
now be repaid by me! Through me let the ancient loan be paid in full!”  
The Angel: “God promised to thine ancestor Abraham that the nations would be 
blessed in his seed, O pure one; and through thee hath this promise found its 
fulfillment this day!”  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we thy flock dedicate a feast of victory and of 
thanksgiving as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: but as Thou art one 
with might which is invincible, from all dangers that can be do Thou deliver us, that 
we may cry to Thee: Rejoice, Thou Bride Unwedded! 
Ikos: An angelic chieftain was sent from heaven to cry to the Mother of God: 
Rejoice! with his incorporeal voice. And, beholding Thee incarnate, O Lord, he was 
filled with awe and stood, crying to her such things as these: Rejoice, thou through 
whom Joy shineth forth! Rejoice, thou through whom the curse will cease! Rejoice, 
restoration of fallen Adam! Rejoice, deliverance from tears for Eve! Rejoice, height 
hard to climb for human thoughts! Rejoice, depth hard to contemplate even for the 
eyes of angels! Rejoice, for thou art the throne of the King! Rejoice, thou who didst 
bear Him Who beareth all! Rejoice, star heralding the Sun! Rejoice, womb of the 
divine incarnation! Rejoice, thou through whom creation is made new! Rejoice, thou 
through whom we worship the Creator! Rejoice, thou Bride unwedded!  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
The Theotokos: “Declaring the radiant tidings, the divine announcement, that the 
immaterial Light Who, in His great loving-kindness, is uniting Himself to a material 
body, thou criest to me: “Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O all-pure one!”  
The Angel: “Rejoice, O Virgin Sovereign Lady! Rejoice, O most pure one! Rejoice, 
O receptacle of God! Rejoice, O lamp-stand of the Light, restoration of Adam, 
deliverance of Eve, holy mountain, manifest sanctuary and bridal-chamber of 
immortality!”  
The Theotokos: “My soul hath been cleansed, my body sanctified; I am made a 
temple fit to hold God, a divinely adorned tabernacle, a temple rendered animate 
through the visitation of the most holy Spirit, and am the pure Mother of the Life!”  
The Angel: “I see thee now as a lamp of surpassing radiance, a bridal-chamber 
made by God, a golden ark. O Bride of God, receive the Giver of the law, Whose 
good pleasure it is to deliver corrupt human nature through thee!”  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Hearken, O pure Virgin Maiden, * that Gabriel may tell thee the true 
counsel of the Most High of old. * Make ready to receive the Godhead; * for 
through thee the Infinite One hath come to dwell among mankind. * 
Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The Theotokos: “Every earthly mind is vanquished, pondering the most glorious 
things thou declarest unto me,” answered the Virgin; “I have heard thy words, yet am 
in fear and terror, lest through deception thou send me far away from God. Yet, 
behold! I cry out: “Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!”  
The Angel: “Behold, thy perplexity hath been resolved,” Gabriel said to this; “for 
thou hast said well that this is a matter hard to comprehend. Yet, submitting to the 
words of thy mouth, doubt not that this is true, but believe it. For, rejoicing, I cry: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!”  
The Theotokos: “This is God’s law for mankind,” the immaculate one straightway 
said, “Birthgiving cometh from common love. I am utterly ignorant of the pleasure of 
a spouse. How then sayest thou that I will give birth? I fear that thou speakest 
delusion. Yet do I cry out: “Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!”  

--- PAGE 16 ---
The Angel: “The words thou declarest to me, O pure one, apply in general to the 
birthgiving of mortals,” the angel said again; “I promise thee that the true God, 
incarnate in a manner beyond all telling and comprehension, as He knoweth, will 
come forth from thee. Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry aloud: “Bless the Lord, all ye works 
of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!”  
The Theotokos: “Thou showest thyself to me as a herald of the truth,” the Virgin 
said, “for thou hast come as a harbinger of common joy. I have therefore cleansed 
soul and body. Be it unto me according to thy word, that God may dwell in me, to 
Whom I cry out with thee: “Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!”  
At Ode IX, the faithful again light their candles. We do not chant the 
Magnificat; rather, the right choir chanteth instead the refrain of the feast and 
the Irmos, and then the left choir doeth the same. The refrain is also used to 
introduce each of the Troparia of Ode IX of the festal canon, but for the 
Troparia of the Triodion, we use the refrain: “Glory to Thee, our God, glory to 
Thee!”, and for the Theotokion of the Triodion we use the festal refrain.  
Refrain: O earth, announce glad tidings of great joy! Ye heavens, praise the 
glory of God!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: In nowise may the hand of the defiled * touch the animate ark of God; 
* and let the lips of the faithful * never-silently cry out with joy to the 
Theotokos, * chanting the words of the angel: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of 
grace! * The Lord is with thee!  
Refrain: O earth, announce glad tidings of great joy! Ye heavens, praise the 
glory of God!  
Conceiving God in a manner past understanding, O Sovereign Lady, thou didst 
elude the order of nature; for in giving birth thou didst escape corrupt maternal 
nature, transcending it. Wherefore, thou hearest as is meet: Rejoice, O thou who art 
full of grace! The Lord is with thee!  
Refrain: O earth, announce glad tidings of great joy! Ye heavens, praise the 
glory of God!  
No earthly tongue can explain how thou pourest forth milk, O pure Virgin; for 
thou showest forth a thing strange to nature and dost transcend the rule of lawful 
birthgiving. Wherefore, thou hearest as is meet: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! 
The Lord is with thee!  
Refrain: O earth, announce glad tidings of great joy! Ye heavens, praise the 
glory of God!  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Mystically wast thou spoken of in the sacred Scriptures, O Mother of the Most 
High; for Jacob of old, seeing thee in a vision as a ladder, said: “This is the ladder of 
God!” Wherefore, thou hearest as is meet: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The 
Lord is with thee!  
Refrain: O earth, announce glad tidings of great joy! Ye heavens, praise the 
glory of God!  
The bush and the fire showed forth a wondrous miracle to Moses, who was 
manifest in sanctity; and seeking the end thereof in the passage of time, he said: “I 
perceive it in the pure Maiden!” To her, as to the Theotokos, let it be said: Rejoice, O 
thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee!  
Refrain: O earth, announce glad tidings of great joy! Ye heavens, praise the 
glory of God!  
Daniel called thee the mystical mountain, and Isaiah called thee the birth-giver of 
God. Gideon saw thee as a fleece, David called thee a sanctuary, and another called 
thee a door. But Gabriel crieth out to thee: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The 
Lord is with thee!  
Then the Irmos of the Triodion (as Katavasia), and the refrain and Irmos of 
the feast, both choirs together. 
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples ...”: 
The supreme commander of the angelic hosts was sent by God Almighty to the 
pure Virgin, to announce a strange and ineffable wonder; for God, Who watcheth 
over the whole human race, became a babe through her without seed. O ye people, 
tell forth the glad tidings of the restoration of the world! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., another Exapostilarion:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
The mystery of God which was from before time is made known today: God the 
Word becometh the Son of the Virgin Mary in His loving-kindness, and Gabriel 
proclaimeth the joy of the annunciation. And with him we cry aloud to her: Rejoice, 
O Mother of the Lord!  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Flying down to Nazareth from the circles of heaven, * Gabriel came to the Virgin 
Mary, * crying to her: “Rejoice! * Thou shalt conceive a Son Who is older than Adam, 
* the Creator of the ages * and the Redeemer of those who cry to thee: ** “Rejoice, O 
pure one!”  
The Word Who with the Father is equally eternal and beginningless, * without 
separating Himself from those on high, * hath now come before those below in His 
extreme tender compassion, * taking pity on us for our stumbling; * and, accepting 
the poverty of Adam, ** He hath assumed a form alien to Himself.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Bearing glad tidings to the Virgin from heaven, * Gabriel cried aloud: “Rejoice! * 
Thou shalt conceive in thy womb * Him Who will be contained by thee, * though He 
cannot be contained by anything; * and in giving birth thou shalt show forth ** Him 
Who shone forth from the Father before the day-star!”  
The transcendent Word * hath made His abode within thee in the flesh * at the 
counsel of the Father, O Virgin Theotokos; * becoming like us, He hath built up the 
race of mankind * which fell through the ancient curse. * Wherefore, with the angel 
we all cry out to thee with faith: ** Rejoice, O Mother of Christ!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Theophanes, in Tone II:  
Today the mystery is revealed which was hidden from before time began, and the 
Son of God becometh the Son of man, that, taking upon Him that which is worse, 
He might grant me that which is higher. Of old Adam was deceived, and though he 
desired to become a god, he could not; yet God becometh a man that He might make 
Adam a god. Let creation be glad, let nature dance! For the archangel standeth with 
fear before the Virgin and offereth her “Rejoice!”, as an antidote to grief. O our God 
Who hast become a man in the tender compassion of Thy mercy, glory be to Thee!  
If it be Saturday or Sunday, the Great Doxology, litanies and dismissal.  
But if it be a weekday, we chant at the Aposticha the Idiomelon of the day from the 
Triodion, (Twice), and the Sticheron of the martyrs;  
Then: Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
Let the heavens be glad and let the earth rejoice! For He Who with the Father is 
equally everlasting, co-beginningless and co-enthroned, taking unto Himself His 
loving mercy toward mankind, hath appointed for Himself an abasement, by the good 
pleasure and counsel of the Father, and hath made His abode within the Virgin’s 
womb, which was wholly purified by the Spirit. O the wonder! God is among 
mankind, the Infinite One is contained in a womb, the Timeless One hath entered 
into time! And what is more glorious: His conception is seedless, His abasement is 
ineffable. So great is this mystery! For God doth empty Himself and becometh 
incarnate, He took on form when the angel spoke of His conception to the pure one, 
saying: “Rejoice, O joyous one, the Lord is with thee, Who hath great mercy!”  
Then, “It is good to give praise unto the Lord ...” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparion of the feast, litanies, and three final full prostrations, 
without the dismissal of matins. Then the holy oil is given to the brethren, and 
the Stichera from the Triodion are chanted. Then: First Hour (with Kathisma), 
with the Troparion and Kontakion of the feast; and at the end, three full 
prostrations, and the prayer: “O Christ, Thou true Light ...,”and the dismissal.  
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
At the third hour of the day (i.e., about 9 o’clock A.M.), we go forth with the 
cross in a procession around the church, and on returning we enter the 
refectory, where the Third and Sixth Hours are read. with Kathismata, but 
without prostrations, during which the Troparion and Kontakion of the feast 
are read. We do not ring the bells for the Hours.  
 
During the Sixth Hour we chant the Troparion of the prophecy from the 
Triodion, and the rest in order. We also add the Ninth Hour, with its Kathisma. 
Then, the Beatitudes are read quickly, not chanted, and without prostrations at 
the end. “Remember us, O Lord ...”; “The angelic choir ...”; Glory ...,”The 
choir of holy angels ...”; Both now ...,”Absolve, remit ...” After “Our Father ...” 
the Kontakion of the feast. Lord. have mercy! (40 times). Glory ..., Both now 
..., More honorable than the cherubim ..., 3 full prostrations, and the prayer: “O 
most holy Trinity ...,” Dismissal, and we chant vespers, without a Kathisma and 
without prostrations.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 11 Stichera  
(but beginning with the usual Stichera as done for ten Stichera): the Idiomelon 
of the day from the Triodion (Twice). 
 Note: the Sticheron of the martyrs is not chanted; 3 Stichera Prosomia from 
the Triodion; 3 Stichera of the feast, in Tone IV:  
During the sixth month the archangel was sent to the pure Virgin, and having 
pronounced a salutation to her, he announced that the Redeemer would come forth 
from her. Wherefore, having accepted the salutation, she conceived Thee, the pre-
eternal God, Who wast well pleased to become ineffably incarnate for the salvation of 
our souls.  
The Theotokos heard a tongue which she did not know, for the archangel spake to 
her words of annunciation. And accepting his salutation with faith, she conceived 
Thee, the pre-eternal God. Wherefore, rejoicing, we cry out to Thee: O God Who 
wast immutably incarnate of her, grant peace to the world and great mercy to our 
souls!  
Behold, our restoration hath now been revealed to us! God uniteth Himself to 
men in a manner beyond all telling! Delusion is dispelled by the voice of the 
archangel! For the Virgin receiveth joy, an earthly woman hath become heaven! The 
world is released from the primal curse! Let creation rejoice and chant aloud: O Lord, 
our Creator and Redeemer, glory be to Thee!  
And 3 Stichera of the archangel, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”-  
The great Gabriel, * the most godly, radiant and salvific intelligence, * who with 
the ranks on high * beholdeth the light of the threefold Sun * and chanteth divine and 
awesome hymnody, * prayeth that He grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
The great mystery * unknown before to the angels * and kept secret from before 
time began * was entrusted to thee alone, O Gabriel; * and thou didst declare it to her 
who alone is pure, * having arrived in Nazareth. * With her do thou pray, * that God 
grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
At the 11th Verse:
Ever full of light, * doing the will of the Almighty * and carrying out His 
commands, * O chief among the angels, * most excellent Gabriel, * save those who 
honor thee with love, * ever asking, * that God grant unto our souls ** peace and 
great mercy.  
 He maketh His angels spirits, * and His ministers a flame of fire.  
 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
The Archangel Gabriel was sent from heaven to announce the conception to the 
Virgin. And, arriving in Nazareth, he pondered within himself, marveling at the 
wonder: “How is it that He Who in the highest is unapproachable is born of the 
Virgin; that He Who hath heaven for His throne and the earth for His footstool is 
contained within the Virgin’s womb; that He upon Whom the six-winged and many-
eyed beings cannot gaze hath been well pleased to become incarnate of her by His 
word alone? This is God’s word. Why, therefore, do I stand and not say to the Virgin: 
Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee! Rejoice, O pure Virgin! 
Rejoice, O unwedded Bride! Rejoice, O Mother of Life! Blessed is the Fruit of thy 
womb!?”  
During the chanting of the Stichera, the priest performeth proskomedia.  
Entrance with the Gospel book. “O Joyous Light ...” Prokeimenon.  
Readings of the day from the Triodion. And 2 readings for the feast:  
A READING FROM EXODUS  
Moses was tending the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian; and 
he brought the sheep nigh to the wilderness, and came to the Mount of Horeb. And 
an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the bush, and he saw 
that the bush was burning with fire, but the bush was not consumed. And Moses said: 
“I will go near and see this great sight, why the bush is not consumed.” And when the 
Lord saw that he drew nigh to see, the Lord called him out of the bush, saying: 
“Moses, Moses!” And he said: “What is it?” And He said: “Draw not nigh hither: 
loose thy sandals from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy 
ground.” And He said: “I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, and the 
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” And Moses turned away his face, for he was 
afraid to gaze at God. And the Lord said to Moses: “I have surely seen the affliction 
of My people that is in Egypt, and I have heard their cry caused by their taskmasters; 
for I know their affliction. And I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of 
the Egyptians, and to bring them out of that land, and to bring them into a good and 
wide land, into a land flowing with milk and honey.”  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The Lord hath made me the beginning of His ways for His works. He established 
me before time was in the beginning, before He made the earth: even before He 
made the depths; before the fountains of water came forth; before the mountains 
were settled, and all the hills, He begetteth me. The Lord made countries and deserts, 
and the highest inhabited parts under the heavens. When He prepared heaven, I was 
present with Him; and when He prepared His throne upon the winds, and when He 
strengthened the clouds above, and when He secured the fountains of the earth, and 
when He strengthened the foundations of the earth: I was by Him, arranging all 

--- PAGE 22 ---
things. I was that in which He took delight; and daily I rejoiced in His presence 
continually.  
Then, the Little Litany, the exclamation of the Trisagion, and the Trisagion itself.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Proclaim from day to day the good tidings * of the 
salvation of our God.  
Verse: O sing unto the Lord a new song, sing unto the Lord all the earth.  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 306 (HEB. 2: 11-18)  
Brethren: He that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which 
cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren, Saying, I will declare thy name unto 
my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee. And again, I will 
put my trust in him. And again, Behold I and the children which God hath given me. 
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself 
likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy him that had the 
power of death, that is, the devil; And deliver them who through fear of death were 
all their lifetime subject to bondage. For verily he took not on him the nature of 
angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham. Wherefore in all things it behooved 
him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high 
priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. 
For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succor those who are 
tempted.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: He shall come down like rain upon a fleece, and like rain-
drops that fall upon the earth.  
Verse: His name shall be blessed unto the ages, before the sun doth His name 
continue.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 3 (LK. 1: 24-38)  
In those days, Elizabeth, the wife of Zachariah, conceived, and hid herself five 
months, saying, Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on 
me, to take away my reproach among men. And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel 
was sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a 
man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin’s name was Mary. 
And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord 
is with thee: blessed art thou among women. And when she saw him, she was 
troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be. 
And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favor with God. 
And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shalt call 
his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the 
Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of His father David: And He shall reign 

--- PAGE 23 ---
over the house of Jacob for ever; and of His kingdom there shall be no end. Then 
said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the angel 
answered and said unto her, The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of 
the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born 
of thee shall be called the Son of God. And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath 
also conceived a son in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was 
called barren. For with God nothing shall be impossible. And Mary said, Behold the 
handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word. And the angel departed 
from her.  
And the rest of the Liturgy of John Chrysostom.  
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the refrain and Irmos of ODE IX of the 
festal canon.  
Refrain: O earth, announce glad tidings of great joy! Ye heavens, praise the 
glory of God!  
Irmos: In nowise may the hand of the defiled * touch the animate ark of God; 
* and let the lips of the faithful * never-silently cry out with joy to the 
Theotokos, * chanting the words of the angel: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of 
grace! * The Lord is with thee!  
Communion Verse: The Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a 
habitation for Himself.  
 
 
 
 
