--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 28th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHERS HILARION THE NEW & 
STEPHEN THE WONDERWORKER  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 for the venerable Hilarion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Having acquired a blameless life, * patience and meekness, and love unfeigned, * 
boundless abstinence, * standing all-night, divine compunction, * faith and true hope 
in compassion, O father, * thou didst live on earth * like an angel in the flesh, * O 
blessed Hilarion, ** intercessor for our souls.  
An earthly angel and a heavenly man * wast thou, O venerable one, * a wellspring 
of compunction, * a stream of compassion, * an abyss of miracles, a surety for 
sinners, * a truly fruitful olive-tree of God, * anointing with the oil of thy labors * the 
faces of those who praise thee with faith, ** O wondrous Hilarion.  
Illumined with divine understanding, * thy mind transcended the passions of the 
body, * and was aloof from earthly things, * bearing the image of God * and 
depicting divine beauty within itself. * Through the activity of the Spirit, * thou hast 
been recognized as wholly godly, * O Hilarion our father, ** thou adornment of 
monastics.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable Stephen, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
As a most true monk, * a most radiant star * and a wellspring of compunction, * 
thou wast revealed to be full of love, * meek and serene, * compassionate and 
humble, * guileless and blameless, O father Stephen. * Wherefore, Christ hath 
appointed thee as a shepherd for the venerable, ** honored with miracles.  
Thou wast possessed of all-night vigilance, O father, * ineffable abstinence, * 
undisturbed prayer, * godly life, faith, hope and love, * Orthodox wisdom, wondrous 
endurance, * and the greatest compassion; * and thou didst repose, shining forth 
before thine end * in most glorious signs. ** Wherefore, we honor thee, O venerable 
Stephen.  
We praise thee, O Stephen, * as a star of great brilliance, * as a never-setting sun, * 
as an animate heaven * adorned with divine miracles as with stars, * as a fragrant 
meadow * and garden of sweetness, * as a wellspring of sanctity, * as a most great 
physician of the infirm, ** as our good pastor and intercessor.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
With the showers of the most holy Spirit * bedew my thoughts, O most pure one, 
* who hast given birth to Christ, the Drop * Who by His compassions washeth away 
* the infinitely innumerable iniquities of men; * dry up the spring of my passions, * 
and by thy supplications * ever grant unto me ** a torrent of the food of life.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Stavrotheotokion: As she beheld Thee * nailed to the Cross, O Lord, * the ewe-
lamb, Thy Mother, marveled and cried out: * “What is this sight which I see, * O my 
Son most desired? * How hath the unbelieving and iniquitous assembly recompensed 
Thee, * which enjoyed Thy many miracles? * But glory, O Master, ** to Thine inef-
fable condescension!”  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
ODE I  
Canon of the Venerable Hilarion, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I praise thy joyous traits, O father”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II: 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
As thou art compassionate and meek, chaste and truly glad of spirit, O father 
Hilarion, by thy mediation grant unto me divine compassion, that I may hymn thee 
now in the stillness of my heart.  
Having purified thyself from childhood and taken up thy cross, O father, thou 
didst follow the Lord; and, adorned with dispassion, by abstinence and frequent 
prayer thou didst cause the passions to wither away.  
Taking up the easy yoke of the Lord, obedient to His precepts, O venerable 
Hilarion, thou didst cast off the most onerous burden of sin, acquiring holiness, O 
all-wise one.  
Theotokion: Uproot the tares of my transgressions, O Lady, praying to thy Son 
and God; and destroy thou the sin which doth torment me, O Ever-virgin, that, 
saved, I may ever praise thee, O all-immaculate one.  
Canon of the Venerable Stephen, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor thy divine labors, 
O all-blessed one”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
Celebrating thy divine memory with faith, O divinely wise father Stephen, we ever 
glorify the Lord of all Who hath glorified thee with many miracles.  
Thy mind, deified at the bidding of God, turned utterly away from the passions of 
the flesh and showed thee to be an angel on earth, O all-wise Stephen.  
Thou didst endure the pangs of fasting, O father, and didst mortify the passions of 
the flesh, which are subdued only with difficulty; and thou didst manifestly clothe 
thyself in dispassion as with a garment.  
Crucified by restraining thy members, O father, thou didst live for Christ Who by 
the Cross destroyed death and hath enriched thee with the abundant grace of 
healings.  
Theotokion: At the ineffable word of the archangel, O most pure one, thou didst 
conceive Him Who by His word sustaineth all the ends of the earth, and hast given 
birth to Him. Earnestly beseech Him to have mercy upon us.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a lily * 
at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established 
Thy life shone forth with radiant deeds like the sun, O venerable one, and hath 
illumined the choirs of monastics and dispelled the darkness of the demons.  
Thou wast glad of heart, humble of spirit and full of divine love, O venerable one, 
ever possessing a courteous character.  
With the drops of thy tears thou didst quench the burning embers of sin and even 
after thine end, as before it O wise one, thou pourest forth an abyss of healings upon 
those who have recourse to thee.  
Theotokion: Heal the wounds of my soul, O Lady, and direct the movements of 
my mind to fulfill the will of the Word Who became incarnate from thee, I pray.  
Canon of the venerable Stephen  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 
Thou didst shine forth like a most radiant star in honorable deeds and the 
corrections of the virtues upon the assembly of the monastics; and thou hast 
illumined the whole world with beams of miracles.  
By the power of the grace of the Spirit thou didst cast down the incorporeal foes, 
and was right gloriously exalted by humble wisdom; and thou wast thyself a worker of 
miracles, O wise father.  
With the word of truth thou didst shut the mouths of the heretics, O father; and, 
having endured persecution apart from thy wounds, thou hast received a divine 
crown, O wise one, as a most eminent martyr.  
Theotokion: That mankind might become divine, God became a man: the 
Beginningless One received a beginning in time through thee, the only pure one. 
Wherefore, we, the faithful, call thee blessed, O Virgin.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Thou didst consecrate thy whole life to God, O all-blessed and sacred one, as a 
truly most excellent performer of sacred Christian acts. Wherefore, rejoicing amid thy 
great exertions and pangs, thou wast translated to the immaterial mansions and now 
pourest forth streams of healings upon us.  
Glory ..., in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Thy memory, O father, shining forth like the radiant sun, illumineth the hearts of 
the faithful, driving away the passions and dispelling the darkness. Protect us who 
celebrate it with pure faith, O father Stephen, and preserve us from the temptations 
of life.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O pure Virgin Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, thou sole intercessor and 
protection of the faithful: from tribulations, sorrows and cruel circumstances deliver 
all who place their trust in thee, O Maiden, and save our souls by thy divine 
supplications.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O Christ, 
Thine all-immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the 
Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, wherewith Thou hast 
saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Having cleansed thy heart, thou didst furnish thy mind with wings to soar aloft in 
honorable ascents, to behold the inconceivable beauty of the one God and to be 
illumined by the splendors thereof.  
Recounting divine words, O father Hilarion, thou didst draw forth divine 
understanding therefrom, and transmit it unto all who piously have recourse unto 
thee.  
With the sweetness of thy words calm thou the hearts of those who have recourse 
unto thee; for, laboring, thou didst teach them with right acceptable discourse and 
didst preserve love amid compassion, O venerable one.  
Theotokion: The Lord made thee the Sovereign Lady and Queen of all, O most 
pure one; for He became incarnate from thy womb, delivering His creation from the 
dominion of the enemy.  
Canon of the venerable Stephen  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
Thou wast shown to be a fruitful tree, O wise Stephen, having watered thyself with 
the drops of thy sacred tears, bringing forth the sweet-smelling fruits of the virtues; 
and thou pourest forth countless miracles. Wherefore, we piously honor thee.  
The church which possesseth the shrine of thy relics is seen to be a divine garden 
of paradise, O wise Stephen, wherein divers flowers of miracles bloom, wherein the 
hearts of those who ever praise thee with faith delight.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Unto the glory of Christ thou curest the blind and dost cause the cruel infirmities 
of the ailing to cease; and hence, having been enriched by the grace of good works, 
thou hast been magnified, illumined and glorified, O our father, thou glory of 
monastics.  
Theotokion: Sanctify me, O holy Theotokos who hast given birth in the flesh unto 
the Most holy One Who desired to become like unto mortals; and by thy 
supplications show us all forth as having a share in the life of heaven, O most pure 
one.  
ODE V  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: O Christ God Thou art a mediator between God and man; * for by 
Thee, O Master, * we have been led from the night of ignorance, * to Thy 
Father, the Source of light.  
Out of thine own sufferings thou didst weave for thyself a robe of salvation, O 
venerable one; for, clad therein, thou didst clothe the prince of darkness in everlasting 
shame.  
Having caused the pleasures of the flesh to wither through abstinence, O 
venerable father Hilarion, thou didst receive the grace of heaven to cure the 
infirmities of all.  
With thy hands, unceasingly lifted up to God, thou hast delivered the pious from 
the hands of the deceiver, O father, and hast granted health to all the ailing.  
Theotokion: Thou wast the might of the faithful and the dominion of the 
venerable; for through thee, O pure one, have higher things come down upon all, and 
those who dwell on earth have ascended to the heavens. 
Canon of the venerable Stephen  
Irmos: Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, * for we know no other God than 
Thee, * and we call upon Thy Name, * for Thou art the God of the living and 
the dead. 
As a phial full of the divine virtues, O wise one, after thy repose thou didst pour 
forth sweet-smelling myrrh, causing the faithful people who venerate thee with love 
to marvel.  
Thou didst shine forth in the great performing of awesome miracles, O all-wise 
Stephen, before death, and even after thy departure, O right wondrous one, and 
during thy sacred burial.  
Having come to the end of thy life in Christ in a holy manner, O Stephen, our 
divinely wise father, thou hast made thine abode with the saints, sanctifying those 
who with faith honor thee.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: O most immaculate one who hast given birth to Emmanuel our God, 
Who manifestly became a man in His tender compassion: beseech Him to have pity 
upon sinners, in that He is the Lover of mankind, O pure one.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Having slain thyself to this world, O Hilarion, after thy repose thou dost now 
dwell in the mansions of heaven, ever pouring forth life-bearing healing.  
Thou wast rightly named, meek, guileless, blameless and venerable, easy to entreat 
and calm of spirit, O most noetically rich father.  
Adorned with boundless compassion and honored with the beauty of love for the 
poor, thou wast shown to be a chosen favorite of God, O most excellent Hilarion.  
As thy life was honorable and blameless and thy character all-comely and beautiful, 
O most wondrous one, so are the miracles which thou dost ever perform awesome in 
nature.  
Theotokion: All of us, the generation of generations, bless the Theotokos as the 
divine, undefiled bridal-chamber of God, the fiery throne of the Almighty.  
Canon of the venerable Stephen  
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
O venerable father Stephen, in Christ thou dost set the lame aright and dost cause 
the blind to see, dost enable the paralyzed to walk and drivest away evil spirits.  
A stream of healing ever floweth from thy precious shrine in abundance, as from a 
pure spring, O blessed one, drying up every torrent of the passions.  
O father Stephen, who wast shown to be a wondrous worker of miracles and a true 
pastor, ever preserve thy flock, which thou didst gather together with great effort.  
Theotokion: The Savior, descending upon thee like dew upon a fleece, O 
Theotokos, hath manifestly dried up the torrents of ungodliness and ever giveth drink 
to the souls of those who honor thee.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
With the sword of thine ascetic feats thou didst wound the incorporeal serpent and 
utterly destroy him. Wherefore, thou hast received the prize of miracles, O venerable 
one, to heal the most cruel sufferings of both souls and bodies.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thy discourse issueth forth like dew, O our venerable father, dispelling the 
burning heat and despondency of those who with faith have recourse to thee, ever 
illumining their character with thy virtues and spirit.  
Having made thy mind the ruler over thy passions, thou didst clearly reign as an 
excellent victor and vanquisher of alien nations, O wise one, destroying the most 
pernicious passions of the demons.  
The winds of temptations did not shake the tower of thine unmovable heart, O 
venerable one; for strengthened by the love of the Lord, thou wast firmly established 
upon the rock of faith, becoming the divine confirmation of many, O father.  
Triadicon: O transcendent Trinity, I hymn Thee, the indivisible, unconfused Unity 
of three Hypostases, incomprehensible in essence: the one God Almighty, the Father, 
Son and Holy Spirit.  
Theotokion: O pure one, the grace of the Spirit prefigured thee from afar in 
images and the proclamations of the prophets, calling thee the fertile and holy 
mountain, the gate of salvation, the newest scroll and the tabernacle.  
Canon of the venerable Stephen  
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither touched 
nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a single mouth * 
Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * ‘O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou.’ 
Performing the sacred mysteries, thou didst reveal thyself to be wholly the sweet 
fragrance of Christ, for by the ember of thine ascetic sojourn, thou dost ever perfume 
the faces of the faithful, working miracles past understanding.  
Radiant with the brilliance of Orthodoxy, thou didst drive away the darkness of 
heresies, O wise one; and having endured persecution for many years, thou wast a 
martyr who shed not his blood. Wherefore, we praise thee with faith.  
Having acquired great patience, abstinence, faith and true love, thou wast shown 
to be a father of orphans, a compassionate and meek intercessor for widows, and the 
glory and boast of monks, O Stephen.  
The horde of those of evil mind were amazed by thy standing all night, thine 
abiding in prayer, thy tears and sighing to the Creator of true love, O Stephen, 
whereby thou didst destroy their machinations.  
Theotokion: How is it that thou dost nourish with milk the Son thou didst bear 
without father, Who feedeth every creature, O pure Mother? How is it that thou 
bearest in thine arms Him Who sustaineth all things? Thy wonder passeth 
understanding! Wherefore, we ever hymn thy mighty works.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE VIII  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Having abandoned the transitory glory of life and fleeting pleasure, O all-wise 
father, in the heavens, with all those who fear the Lord, thou hast received glory and 
lasting sustenance, which cannot be taken away.  
Thou didst pass all thy life with downcast countenance; wherefore, thou hast been 
deemed worthy of the blessedness and consolation in which the saints share. And 
now, rejoicing, O venerable one, thou abidest in the land of the meek as one 
intelligent and wise.  
Thy death was revealed to be precious in the sight of the Lord, O most sacred 
father; for thou didst venerate His icon and endure persecutions, O venerable one, 
oppressed by tyrants and therein shown to be a martyr.  
Thou didst manifestly cause the displeasure of the fishermen to cease, O father, 
and didst multiply their draught of fishes, which before they were unable to catch; for 
God hearkened unto thy prayers, O venerable and all-blessed sacred minister.  
Theotokion: Wash away the defilement of my passions and the mire of my sins, O 
divinely joyous one, and open the portal of repentance unto me who have stumbled, 
and am impeded mightily by transgressions, and have angered God.  
Canon of the venerable Stephen  
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Doing venerable works in holiness, O all-blessed one, thou hast joined the 
venerable and all the elect. With them we honor thee, worshiping at the shrine of thy 
relics, O God-bearing father Stephen.  
Having acquired purity of mind, O wise one, thou wast a beautiful mirror of the 
Spirit, receiving its manifestations, and illumining the people with thy teachings.  
Through thee, O all-blessed and all-wise one, that which is most glorious and 
perfect is seen; for at the mere sight of thee, a woman was loosed from the illness 
which afflicted her, and began to walk aright.  
Triadicon: Let us hymn the beginningless Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the 
indivisible First Cause, the eternal Rule, the Essence in three Hypostases, the one 
glory and sole reign.  
Theotokion: The Incorporeal One Who was divinely incarnate of thee, O most 
pure one, do thou beseech, that He slay the passions of my flesh and enliven my soul, 
which hath been slain by my sins.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE IX  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Thy tomb, pouring forth healings through the grace of the Spirit, drieth up the 
showers of the passions, expelling spirits of deception, and illumining the hearts of all 
the faithful who bless thee with faith, O venerable Hilarion.  
In the meadow of fasting thou didst blossom like a rose, like a sweet-smelling lily, 
like a fragrant apple, perfuming the souls and hearts of all the pious, O glorious 
Hilarion, intercessor for those who praise thee.  
Thou didst have compassion, love, humility and mercy, a simple demeanor, true 
faith and hope, an honorable life and upright character, O venerable Hilarion, 
adornment of monastics.  
Thy memory hath shone forth today like the sun, truly illumining the hearts of the 
pious with the splendor of thy sufferings and the effulgence of thy miracles, O father; 
be thou mindful of all who honor thee with faith.  
Theotokion: Rejoicing, we offer thee the cry of Gabriel, saying: Rejoice, O place of 
sanctity! Rejoice, glory of the venerable and salvation of all the faithful, because of 
thee we have been deified, O Ever-virgin Theotokos!  
Canon of the venerable Stephen  
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of all 
descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom He was 
incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as the pure 
Mother of God.  
Following the steps of those who lived piously and in holiness upon the earth, O 
God-bearing Stephen, thou didst reveal thyself to be meek, guileless, compassionate 
and humble, peaceful and full of the love of God; wherefore, we praise thee with 
faith.  
Like sweet-smelling myrrh, like a most pure lily, like a fully blossomed rose, O 
father, thou dost emit from thy precious shrine the fragrance of countless healings, 
dispelling the fetid illnesses of those who fervently have recourse unto thee with faith.  
We entreat thee, O divinely wise one, the godly shepherd and emulator of Christ, 
the Chief Shepherd. With thy holy mediations ever save us, who are of thy flock, 
from the wolves of evil.  
Thy most holy memory, shining forth like a great sun, doth splendidly illumine 
creation; and celebrating it with piety, we cry aloud to thee, O Stephen: having 
enlightened the thoughts of all by thy supplications, protect and preserve us.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Being sin-loving and careless of life, O pure one, I tremble before the 
inexorable judgment. By thy holy entreaties keep me uncondemned when there, O 
Bride of God, that I may ever bless thee as mine intercessor.  
 
 
