--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 30th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS SOPHRONIUS THE 
WONDER-WORKER, BISHOP OF IRKUTSK  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O holy hierarch father Sophronius, pure vessel of the Holy Spirit, rule of piety, 
adornment of the Church of the city of Irkutsk and confirmation of all Siberia, 
emulator of the apostles, boast of hierarchs: Entreat the Chief Shepherd, that He 
grant our souls peace and great mercy. (Twice)  
O most sacred Sophronius, thou didst preserve the law of God intact, and, 
instructing thy people in piety, faith, love and tender compassion, thou didst set a rule 
of life for monastics, thyself providing a model of virtue, teaching the fear of God to 
those of every rank and age, and leading all to salvation thou dost beseech God, that 
He grant mercy unto each of us. (Twice)  
Divine grace summoned thee to be the Hierarch of the great city of Irkutsk and 
the land of Siberia, O blessed one, and to be a rule of faith and a model of meekness. 
Wherefore, O divinely wise one, thy life showed thee forth as most comely, an ally of 
hierarchs and a companion of the venerable and the righteous. And now, standing at 
the throne of the Holy Trinity, pray thou for the salvation of our souls. (Twice) 
After thy repose, O holy hierarch Sophronius our father, thy relics were preserved 
for many years, pouring forth miracles upon those who call upon thee with faith; but 
when the time of thy glorification drew nigh, thy tomb was reduced to ashes by a fiery 
conflagration, and thy relics were consumed by the flames because of our sins and 
vile life, for we were found to be unworthy to possess such a heavenly treasure: yet 
even after this thou hast dwelt among us, granting us peace and great mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O glorious and sacred Church of Siberia, ye company of hierarchs and people of 
every rank, let us now join together, that we may glorify in splendor the memory of 
Sophronius, our pastor and teacher, joyfully crying out to him: Rejoice, O champion 
of the Trinity! Rejoice, adornment of the see of Irkutsk! Rejoice, new and excellent 
wonder-worker! For precious are the remains of thy holy relics which have never 
ceased to emit miracles, and which illumine and gladden thy chosen people, whom 
thou didst beget through the Gospel and hast made steadfast in Orthodoxy. And now 
thou prayest to the Lord for us, O holy one.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace, but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 

--- PAGE 3 ---
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple 
mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul 
pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This 
the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His 
grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and this Sticheron, in Tone I: 
“Following in the steps of Christ the Master, illumined with the light of the divine 
Spirit, thou wast shown to be an abode of purity and didst partake of divine visions. 
Wherefore, Christ hath shown thee to be an heir to the kingdom and a dweller with 
all the saints. Pray thou, O father, that we who keep thy memory with love may 
obtain this as well.  
Glory ..., in Tone VII:  
Ineffable grief overtook the flock of Irkutsk when thy holy and precious relics and 
sacred shrine were consumed by a fiery conflagration in the night. Yet even thereafter 
thou wast shown to be an inexhaustible well-spring of miracles, O Sophronius, holy 
hierarch of Christ, thou rampart of thy city, strengthening of soul for thy faithful 
children and confirmation of the holy Faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VII:  
Having recourse unto thy protection, O Sovereign Lady, * all we born of earth cry 
aloud to thee: * O Theotokos, our hope, deliver us * from our countless 
transgressions, ** and save thou our souls. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone III: 
Rejoice, ye people of the city of Irkutsk! For, lo! a new wonder-worker hath 
appeared, a physician and helper amid all sorrow, a healer and expeller of demons, the 
defender of his city and subduer of passions, an ever-vigilant advocate before the 
Lord for all who flee to him in faith.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Rejoice, O sacred one, God-pleasing father Sophronius, thou foundation of right 
faith, fulfiller of all virtue, provider for the poor and consolation of the sorrowful, 
physician who exactest no fee from the infirm, mighty hope of all who call upon thee 
with ardent faith.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Rejoice, O Sophronius our joy, fellow sufferer with the sorrowful and advocate for 
them; for thou didst live on earth like an angel, adorned with innocence and 
righteousness, indicating the radiant path which leadeth to God. And even after thy 
departure from us on earth thou dost not forsake us. We glorify thee, O God-pleasing 
father!  
Glory ..., in Tone III:  
Glory to Thee, O Christ God, Thou boast of the apostles and joy of the martyrs, 
majesty of hierarchs and priests, spiritual delight of the venerable! Glory to Thee, O 
Christ our Savior, for Thou hast revealed to us a new and most glorious wonder-
worker!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Fill thou my heart with joy, O Virgin who didst receive from Gabriel tidings of joy; 
and, destroying now the grief of sin which is within me, fill my heart with love for the 
Lord.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
From thy youth thou didst love Christ, O blessed Sophronius, * guiding aright the 
communities of monastics; * and having been deemed worthy of the priestly rank, * 
thou didst shepherd the flock of Irkutsk. * Wherefore, even after thy repose thou hast 
received the gifts of miracles from God. * Entreat Christ God, that He deliver us 
from misfortunes ** and save our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
From thy youth thou didst love Christ, O blessed Sophronius, * guiding aright the 
communities of monastics; * and having been deemed worthy of the priestly rank, * 
thou didst shepherd the flock of Irkutsk. * Wherefore, even after thy repose thou hast 
received the gifts of miracles from God. * Entreat Christ God, that He deliver us 
from misfortunes ** and save our souls. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
The grace of the Spirit was poured forth in thy lips, O most wise father 
Sophronius, and thou didst become a shepherd of the flock of Christ, teaching the 
reason-endowed sheep to love their neighbor as themselves, and God with all their 
heart and all their strength, and to be faithful to Him even unto death.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O thou who art more holy than all the holy powers * and more honorable than all 
creation, * O Theotokos, thou Sovereign Lady of the world, * who didst give birth to 
the Savior, * by thy supplications save us from countless transgressions and 
difficulties, ** in that thou art good.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II:  
Most wisely didst thou elude the pursuit of the most evil one, and didst cast him 
down utterly, in that thou wast the pillar and ground of Orthodoxy. Wherefore, 
assembling today, we honor thy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
Having thee as our hope and intercession, * O Theotokos, * we fear not the 
assaults of the enemy, ** for thou dost save our souls.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch 
Sophronius, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God 
on our behalf.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., (Thrice)  
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Thou didst live an angelic life on earth, O father, and standest now among the very 
ranks of the angels in heaven. Wherefore, blessing thee as a man of God, we joyfully 
celebrate thy memory, trusting that through thy supplications we will obtain from 
Christ God peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III: 
Without seed didst thou conceive by the Holy Spirit; * and glorifying thee, we 
hymn thee: ** Rejoice, most holy Virgin!  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 35, (MIDPOINT) (JN. 10: 1-8)  
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He 
that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, 
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of 
strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things 
they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, “Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves 
and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
A great wonder do we behold in the immolation of thy relics, O holy hierarch 
Sophronius our father: for the power of working miracles was not diminished in thee, 
neither was thy holy place made desolate; but like a ray of the sun thou illuminest the 
hearts of the faithful, teaching them to believe in the one Godhead, in the 
consubstantial Trinity.  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and that of the holy hierarch, with 8 Troparia, in Tone II:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Let us send up glory to Christ our God, Who is wondrous in His saints, glorifying 
the memory of His favored one this day.  
Thee have we received as a second defender of our city. By thine intercession 
preserve us from all the evils which assail us.  
Showing thyself to thy flock as a model of all good works, thou didst draw many 
souls to salvation; and having obtained the delight of heavenly consolation, they 
chant: None is more holy than Thee, O Lord!  
Theotokion: The storm of temptations and the waves of tribulations beset us, O 
Sovereign Lady; but, going before us, grant us thy helping hand, thy fervent aid and 
intercession.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
As a most precious diamond thou didst shine forth adorning the Church of Russia, 
resplendent in the innocence of thy life, that we, the unworthy, may also delight in the 
light of Christ.  
With the fervor of the Faith, warm our hearts and rescue us from the darkness of 
sin, and root the spirit of piety and the fear of God within us who bless thy memory.  
Steadfast in the love of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be a river watering the 
lands of Siberia with the teaching of thy discourses, O divinely blessed Sophronius; 
wherefore, with love we celebrate thy memory.  
Theotokion: Now hast thou truly made wondrous upon us thy benefactions and 
mercies, O Sovereign Lady; wherefore, we glorify thy great tender compassion.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Truly blessed, yea thrice blessed, art thou, O hierarch Sophronius! Cleaving unto 
God with perfect love, thou didst love all mankind, laying down thy life for thy flock, 
doing good to the unfortunate, and watering souls with humility and submission to 
divine Providence; wherefore, we call thee blessed.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
An invincible rampart art thou for us Christians, * O Virgin Theotokos; * for, 
fleeing to thee, we remain unscathed, * and though we sin again, we have thee as our 
advocate. * Wherefore, giving thanks we cry to thee: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of 
grace! ** The Lord is with thee!  
ODE IV  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
O hierarch of God, standing before the throne of the Lord of glory, entreat Him 
to grant peace unto our land, and that it be delivered from all evils.  
In thy good works thy light shone brightly before mankind, to whom thou didst 
reveal thyself to be a comforter amid sorrows and a gracious physician for the sick, 
that all the people of Irkutsk might glorify the heavenly Father Who hath given thee 
to us as a great wonder-worker.  
Thou wast a temple of the most holy Spirit, O father, containing within thyself 
divine wisdom for the edification of the Church of Christ and the confirmation of 
monastics.  
Theotokion: All the earth is amazed, and all the nations marvel, beholding thy 
surpassing tender compassion towards our land and the Christian race. O Sovereign 
Lady, transform thou our wickedness into piety through faith.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Gathering together this day, O ye people of the flock of Irkutsk, as many of us as 
have been baptized into Christ, let us clothe ourselves in spiritual joy, glorifying the 
memory of the holy hierarch.  
As an emulator of the love of Christ, quell all hatred we harbor for our brethren, 
that, aided by thee in the love of the Gospel, we may reverently praise thee.  
Thou wast shown to be undaunted in the work of the Lord, O Sophronius, 
subjecting thyself in all things to His holy will, in nowise looking to please men, but 
ever chanting: I know none other God than Thee!  
Theotokion: With thy divine radiance heal the passions which ever assail us 
because of our negligence, O good one; for the holy Sophronius maketh supplication 
for this.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Again saving grace hath been revealed to the flock of Irkutsk in the glorification of 
thy memory, O blessed one; for we who honor thy memory have not been rewarded 
according to our sins, but have found in thee a fervent advocate.  
We know thee to be a good shepherd tending to thy flock. Preserve now thy flock 
in the Faith and in oneness of mind, that we may abide in the bond of love and peace, 
and may be deemed worthy of everlasting love.  
Thou didst nurture the hungry with the heavenly food of righteousness; for thy 
discourse was the bread of angels, O Sophronius, rescuing the souls of thy children 
from bondage to sin and leading them to Christ.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: We are seized with trembling, O good one, for the pursuit of the evil 
one doth terrify us. But do thou, O Sovereign Lady, lead us up from the abyss of sin.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
O all ye faithful, * with love let us praise our father, * the holy hierarch 
Sophronius, * the excellent adornment of the Church of Irkutsk, * a hierarch named 
for chastity; * for he is the guardian of this city and land, ** and an advocate for our 
souls.  
Ikos: Wounded by the comeliness of chastity, O holy hierarch, thou didst follow 
after Him Who created thee with unwavering resolve, disdaining every carnal passion, 
and, like another sun, shining upon thy flock of Irkutsk: wherefore, Christ hath 
enriched thee with the gift of miracles. Be thou mindful of us who honor thy most 
radiant memory that we may cry unto thee: Rejoice, adornment of the hierarchal rank! 
Rejoice, spiritual ornament of the city of Irkutsk! Rejoice, ray of the noonday of the 
Russian land! Rejoice, thou who hast not diminished thy miracles since the 
immolation of thy relics! Rejoice, thou who wearest the crown of righteousness in the 
heavenly kingdom! Rejoice, O divinely wise Sophronius, thou advocate of our souls!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
We, the people of the city of Irkutsk, are filled with joy, assembling for thine 
honored glorification, that with one mouth and heart we may adore the 
consubstantial Trinity, Who hath glorified thee, and before Whom thou standest, O 
holy hierarch, praying on behalf of our souls.  
O holy hierarch father Sophronius, as thou standest in the heavens forget not us 
below. Preserve us from the perils that assail us, and subdue all divisions and all 
contention, that we may pass the remaining time of our life untouched by grief, 
protected by thy supplications.  
The light of the threefold Sun rested upon thee, O holy hierarch Sophronius, and 
revealed thee to be a most radiant lamp for thy people, a healer and unmercenary 
physician for those who chant: Blessed art Thou, and supremely glorified!  
Theotokion: O most glorious Virgin Mother, extinguish the furnace of our 
passions with thy tender compassion, that with thine elect we may hymn thee forever.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Desiring not to receive glory from men, and as God permitted, thou didst 
withdraw thy precious relics in a fiery conflagration, so that Christ God alone would 
glorify thee, teaching us to desire not that which is earthly, but rather the kingdom of 
heaven, which we hope to obtain by thy supplications.  
Like a ray of the light of Christ thou didst shine forth in the land of Siberia, O holy 
hierarch father Sophronius, enlightening all who tread the path of the Gospel, that, 
illumined by thy light, we may not wander onto the path of sin, but, having attained 
eternal light, may delight with thee in everlasting life.  
Let us glorify Sophronius, the second apostle of Siberia; let us follow his blameless 
life and, casting aside all sinful remembrance of wrongs, let us cry: Rejoice, O 
Sophronius, thou help of our city!  
Theotokion: Truly holy is this day, whereon the Mother of God hath assembled us 
to glorify her favored one, Sophronius, who resteth in her temple and by his miracles 
moves us to chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Thou didst keep the faith, thou didst finish thy race, and a crown hath been 
bestowed upon thee in the kingdom of Christ. Make us steadfast who are shaken by a 
lack of faith, that we may not prove faithless, but believing, and that, gazing upon 
thine image, we may obtain salvation.  
They who have called upon thee with faith have received great grace, O favored 
one of God; for thou hast shown thyself to be a comforter amid the sorrows of life, a 
helper amid its grief, a healer of multifarious ailments, and a redeemer from all 
tribulations and evils. In thy miraculous aid forsake not us who honor thy memory 
with faith.  
In thy mind thou didst strive for that which is eternal and incorrupt, rejecting all 
earthly things. Help us to seek righteousness and the kingdom of God, O wondrous 
guide, that at the hour of our death we may be granted a Christian end, and be 
deemed worthy to gaze face to face upon the Lord of glory with thee.  
Theotokion: Come ye, let us all praise the Queen of angels, the Sovereign of the 
hierarchal, priestly and monastic ranks, the protectress of the whole Christian race; 
and let us bow down before her: for in truth she hath promised to be our helper until 
the end of time.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III:  
The light of Christ dwelt abundantly within thee, O most wise Sophronius, that, 
having prepared thy soul with purity, He might make thee an heir to the kingdom of 
heaven and an advocate for our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
O delight of the angels, joy of hierarchs and the venerable, intercessor for all 
Christians, Virgin Mother of the Lord: Help us and deliver us from everlasting 
torment!  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Having nurtured thyself well with abstinence, thou didst ascend to the all-glorious 
summit of the virtues, adorned with hierarchal vesture and the splendor of thy life, 
shining with divine grace. With thy supplications illumine us who praise thee, O 
Sophronius.  
O most wise Sophronius, thou hast adorned the Church of Christ, and having 
increased the talant entrusted to thee, thou hast been deemed worthy to enter into the 
joy of thy Lord. And standing before Him, with the angels, O holy one, pray thou for 
our souls.  
As gold tried by the fire is shown to be pure, so were thy precious relics tried in 
the crypt, O father Sophronius, that they might shine forth all the more with the 
radiance of miracles, illumining souls darkened by the cloud of little faith; that they 
might glorify Christ our Savior and His great mercy.  
When thine incorrupt relics were revealed to our generation, O blessed hierarch 
Sophronius, they were consumed in a fire through the malice of the enemy who 
sought to destroy thy glory; but God hath glorified thee with multitudes of miracles, 
and hath made thee an advocate for our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
O father Sophronius, good and faithful servant of the Lord, diligent husbandman 
of the vineyard of Christ, having labored well by founding communities of monks, 
and having given thy flock divine water to drink, thou hast sowed the seeds of piety 
among the people; and now, rejoicing and standing before God, pray thou with all the 
saints for the salvation of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign lady, * accept the supplications of thy servants, ** and deliver us from 
all want and grief. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from Ode III, and 4 from Ode VI, from the 
canon of the holy hierarch. 
As a most precious diamond thou didst shine forth adorning the Church of Russia, 
resplendent in the innocence of thy life, that we, the unworthy, may also delight in the 
light of Christ. (Twice) 
With the fervor of the Faith, warm our hearts and rescue us from the darkness of 
sin, and root the spirit of piety and the fear of God within us who bless thy memory.  
Steadfast in the love of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be a river watering the 
lands of Siberia with the teaching of thy discourses, O divinely blessed Sophronius; 
wherefore, with love we celebrate thy memory.  
Again saving grace hath been revealed to the flock of Irkutsk in the glorification of 
thy memory, O blessed one; for we who honor thy memory have not been rewarded 
according to our sins, but have found in thee a fervent advocate.  
We know thee to be a good shepherd tending to thy flock. Preserve now thy flock 
in the Faith and in oneness of mind, that we may abide in the bond of love and peace, 
and may be deemed worthy of everlasting love.  
Thou didst nurture the hungry with the heavenly food of righteousness; for thy 
discourse was the bread of angels, O Sophronius, rescuing the souls of thy children 
from bondage to sin and leading them to Christ.  
Theotokion: We are seized with trembling, O good one, for the pursuit of the evil 
one doth terrify us. But do thou, O Sovereign Lady, lead us up from the abyss of sin.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
From thy youth thou didst love Christ, O blessed Sophronius, * guiding aright the 
communities of monastics; * and having been deemed worthy of the priestly rank, * 
thou didst shepherd the flock of Irkutsk. * Wherefore, even after thy repose thou hast 
received the gifts of miracles from God. * Entreat Christ God, that He deliver us 
from misfortunes ** and save our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
O all ye faithful, * with love let us praise our father, * the holy hierarch 
Sophronius, * the excellent adornment of the Church of Irkutsk, * a hierarch named 
for chastity; * for he is the guardian of this city and land, ** and an advocate for our 
souls.  
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the earth.  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 318 (HEB. 7: 26-8: 2)  
Brethren: Such a High Priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those 
high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: for 
this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests 
which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the 
Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this 
is the sum: We have such a High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of 
the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, 
which the Lord pitched, and not man.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his 
tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §11 (5: 14-19)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a 
hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a 
candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine 
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come 
to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot 
or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever 
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he 
shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach 
them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be, he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
 
