--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 31st DAY OF THE MONTH OF MARCH 
COMMEMORATION OF THE APPEARANCE OF THE WONDERWORKING IMAGE 
OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS, KNOWN AS THE IVERON ICON, OR THE 
KEEPER OF THE PORTAL 
AT LITTLE VESPERS:  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the icon, in Tone I: 
Come, all ye people, and having assembled with faith, let us glorify the Theotokos 
our Lady, the helper of our race! And, surrounding her precious icon, let us lovingly 
kiss it, saying: Rejoice, O most pure Virgin! Rejoice, Mother of the Lord Most High! 
Rejoice, protection and salvation of our souls!  
Rejoice, Mount Athos, for the glory of the Lord hath shone upon thee! For a star 
of great splendor hath moved from the east to the west: the icon of the Mother of 
God hath appeared in a pillar of fire, enlightening Athos with its advent.  
As the bush which burned with fire, yet remained unharmed, was once revealed to 
Moses on Sinai, so is the sacred image of the all-immaculate one clothed in fire, yet 
remaineth unconsumed, sanctifying those who gaze upon it with faith.  
Come ye joyfully, O choirs of monks! Draw ye forth inexhaustible grace from the 
icon of the Mother of God which flasheth with fire, and receive it with faith and love; 
for it is bestowed most gloriously upon your monasteries as a rampart and bulwark, 
that it may protect you against all enemies, visible and invisible.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V:  
Come, ye people, and let us worship before the wonder-working and most 
precious image of the Mother of God, which she hath been given to the Monastery of 
Iveron as an ever-vigilant and invincible guardian; for she sheltereth that holy 
monastery, and all who live on Holy Athos, with her protection and granteth 
abundant gifts of healings out of the inexhaustible wellspring of her holy icon, unto 
all who honor that wondrous image of the Mother of God. Wherefore, chanting, let 
us cry out to the prototype thereof: Rejoice, O help of the world, thou consolation of 
our souls!  
Then, “O joyful Light ...,” without an entrance.  
Prokeimenon; and then, “Vouchsafe, O Lord ...”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
We thy servants glorify and hymn thee, the pure habitation of the most pure Light, 
O Theotokos; for thou dost sanctify us by the revelation of thy most pure icon.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
Glory to Thee, O Christ our King! Glory to Thy great loving-kindness towards us! 
For Thou hast given to the Orthodox the icon of Thy most pure Mother, which 
poureth forth upon us torrents of grace in abundance.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
Let us keep splendid festival today, O right-believing people, overshadowed by the 
advent of the icon of the Mother of God, with faith receiving therein a constantly 
attentive guardian; and let us cry out to the Theotokos: protect us from all evil and 
save thou our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
Let us make haste to the calm haven, the Virgin Mother, the helper of our race; 
and let us bow down before her precious image which is reverenced by the angels, 
crying out with compunction: Look down, O compassionate Mother, upon the 
grievous sorrows which beset us, and heal thou the sickness of our souls!  
Troparion of the icon, in Tone I: 
The audacity of those who hate the image of the Lord * and the might of the 
impious * came godlessly to Nicaea, * and emissaries inhumanly interrogated the 
widow * who piously venerated the icon of the Mother of God; * but at night, she 
and her son cast the icon into the sea, crying aloud: * “Glory to thee, O pure one, * 
for the trackless sea hath given thee its breast! * Glory to thy straight journey, ** O 
thou who alone art incorrupt!”  
Litany and dismissal.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS:  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the icon, in Tone V:  
Adorn thyself, O Athos! Rejoice and be glad, O Monastery of Iveron! For, lo! the 
wondrous icon of the Mother of God cometh, escorted over the sea by angels, 
resplendent with an ineffable light, driving away the gloom of sorrows and sufferings, 
and illumining all with the rays of her mercy.  
The choirs of monastics and the assemblies of fasters fall down before thee, O 
Lady, and, gazing upon thy holy icon with love, they cry out to thee: Come unto us, 
O good Mother! Take pity upon those who honor thee, and grant us thy holy image 
as an earnest of mercy and salvation!  
O most glorious wonder! For as the bush which burned with fire, yet remained un-
harmed, was once revealed to Moses on Sinai, so is the image of the all-immaculate 
Theotokos clothed in fire, yet remaineth unconsumed, illumining us who are in 
darkness, and preserving us unharmed amid the furnace of temptations and 
misfortunes.  
Come, O Gabriel! Go forth with dryshod feet onto the sea, and take the icon of 
the Mother of God in thine arms, unto the joy of Athos, as a bulwark for the 
Monastery of Iveron, and as a consolation for all Christians!  
O Virgin Theotokos, thou mighty helper, the Monastery of Iveron now boasteth 
and rejoiceth in thee, having thee as an unabashed helper, an impregnable rampart, 
and unshakable foundation, and an ever-vigilant guardian. Cease not, O Lady, to 
deliver thy monastery and all Christian people from all dangers by thy supplications.  
Grant consolation to thy servants who are held fast by temptations, O pure 
Theotokos, and exalt the horn of the faithful. By thy supplications save thou all the 
monasteries and cities of the Orthodox, strengthen our right-believing hierarchs 
against heresies and schisms, and defend all thy faithful servants who praise thee.  
Thy most pure icon, O Virgin Theotokos, is a font of spiritual healing for the 
whole world. We flee to it, bowing down before thee; we venerate and kiss it; we 
draw forth the grace of healing from it, and by thy supplications we are freed from 
ailments of spirit and bodily sufferings.  
The Monastery of Iveron, enlightened by the icon of thee and thy Son, as with 
royal purple and fine linen, O Theotokos, is adorned with miracles. Today it calleth all 
to celebrate its revelation, shining with the grace of the Holy Spirit more brightly than 
the radiance of the sun, gushing forth a well-spring of healings upon the sick and 
infirm, and granting rich mercy unto all.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
O good Mother, Virgin Lady and Theotokos: turn us not away, thy humble 
servants, who offer up our unworthy prayers before thy most pure icon. Be thou a 
fervent mediatress before thy Son for us sinners; delivering us from all misfortunes 
and temptations, that saved by thee, we may continually cry out to thee: Rejoice, O 
good gate-keeper who openest unto us the portals of paradise!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS.  
Jacob went forth from the well of the oath, and departed into Haran. And he came 
to a certain place, and slept there, for the sun had gone down; and he took one of the 
stones of the place, and put it at his head, and lay down to sleep in that place, and 
dreamed: and behold a ladder fixed on the earth, whose top reached to heaven, and 
the angels of God ascended and descended on it. And the Lord stood upon it, and 
said: “I am the God of thy father Abraham, and the God of Isaac. Fear not; the land 
on which thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And thy seed shall be like 
the sand of the earth; and it shall spread abroad to the sea, and the south, and the 
north, and the east; and in thee and in thy seed shall all tribes of the earth be blessed. 
And behold I am with thee to preserve thee continually in all the way wherein thou 
shalt go; and I will bring thee back to this land; for I will not desert thee, until I have 
done all that I have said to thee.” And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said: “The 
Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.” And he was afraid, and sad: “How fearful is 
this place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!”  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF EXODUS.  
Moses was tending the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian; and 
he brought the sheep nigh to the wilderness, and came to the Mount of Horeb. And 
an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the bush, and he saw 
that the bush was burning with fire, but the bush was not consumed. And Moses said: 
“I will go near and see this great sight, why the bush is not consumed.” And when the 
Lord saw that he drew nigh to see, the Lord called him out of the bush, saying: 
“Moses, Moses! And he said: “What is it?” And He said: “Draw not nigh hither: loose 
thy sandals from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.” 
And He said: “I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, and the God of 
Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” And Moses turned away his face, for he was afraid to 
gaze at God. And the Lord said to Moses: “I have surely seen the affliction of My 
people that is in Egypt, and I have heard their cry caused by their taskmasters; for I 
know their affliction. And I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of the 
Egyptians, and to bring them out of that land, and to bring them into a good and 
wide land, into a land flowing with milk and honey.”  
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
READING FROM THE BOOK OF EXODUS.  
God led the people round by the way to the wilderness, to the Red Sea: and in the 
fifth generation the children of Israel went up out of the land of Egypt. And Moses 
took the bones of Joseph with him, for he had solemnly adjured the children of 
Israel, saying: “God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones hence with 
you.” And the children of Israel departed from Succoth, and encamped in Etham by 
the wilderness. And God led them, in the day, by a pillar of cloud, to show them the 
way, and in the night by a pillar of fire. And the pillar of cloud failed not by day, nor 
the pillar of fire by night, before all the people.  
At the Litiya, these Stichera of the icon, in Tone VIII: 
Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, and ye companies of fasters; and 
having assembled together, let us offer hymns of praise to the Virgin Mary: for today 
the splendid festival of the revelation of her precious icon of Iveron hath dawned. 
And surrounding it with reverence and love, let us chant to the Theotokos: Rejoice, 
inexpressible joy of all! Rejoice, thou who enlightenest us with thy holy image! 
Rejoice, boast and confirmation of all! Rejoice, salvation of our souls!  
What shall we call thee, O Virgin Theotokos? Pillar of fire who guidest us to an 
everlasting inheritance? Mighty rampart, in that thou defendest the generation of the 
Orthodox? Ever-vigilant guardian, in that thou preservest and savest this habitation? 
Wherefore, delivered from the tribulations which befall us, let us cry out to the 
Sovereign Lady: Rejoice, thou cause of good things, sure hope of Christians!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Athos rejoiceth; the Monastery of Iveron joineth in chorus, and the whole land of 
Russia holdeth festival. The Mother of God hath mercifully visited us in her wonder-
working image, whereby she hath granted aid amid necessities, consolation amid 
sorrows, healing amid illnesses, deliverance amid misfortunes, bestowing great mercy 
upon us all.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
We glorify today the glorious appearance of thine icon, O all-immaculate 
Theotokos, and we celebrate thine aid to us; for, in that thou art the Mother of Life, 
thou entreatest Christ our God on behalf of us who place a firm trust in thee, our 
true guide to salvation.  
Verse: I shall remember thy name * in every generation and generation.  
Set aside all grief, O ye faithful; for, lo! a second burning bush, the icon of the 
Mother of God, appeareth for the cleansing of the sinful, and is seen by the monks of 
Athos.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
O Mother of God, thou appearest in a pillar of fire, signifying thy guidance of us 
in the sojourn of life, that thou mayest direct us, who have gone astray, to the eternal 
mansions of heaven.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Come, all ye monastics and layfolk, let us glorify the most pure Virgin Theotokos; 
for today, because of her sacred icon, her path is in the sea and her steps amidst many 
waters; for she passeth over the sea from Nicaea to Athos, in a pillar of fire, and in 
her arrival granteth her faithful a gift. And we, illumined by the ray of grace, call the 
mediatress of our salvation blessed.  
Troparion of the icon, in Tone I: 
The audacity of those who hate the image of the Lord * and the might of the 
impious * came godlessly to Nicaea, * and emissaries inhumanly interrogated the 
widow * who piously venerated the icon of the Mother of God; * but at night, she 
and her son cast the icon into the sea, crying aloud: * “Glory to thee, O pure one, * 
for the trackless sea hath given thee its breast! * Glory to thy straight journey, ** O 
thou who alone art incorrupt!”  

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS:  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the icon, in Tone I: 
The audacity of those who hate the image of the Lord * and the might of the 
impious * came godlessly to Nicaea, * and emissaries inhumanly interrogated the 
widow * who piously venerated the icon of the Mother of God; * but at night, she 
and her son cast the icon into the sea, crying aloud: * “Glory to thee, O pure one, * 
for the trackless sea hath given thee its breast! * Glory to thy straight journey, ** O 
thou who alone art incorrupt!” (Thrice) 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
The appearance of thy most radiant countenance hath brought joy to all the 
faithful, and it giveth the Monastery of Iveron an ever-vigilant guardian and 
deliverance from misfortunes. Wherefore, we hymn thee, O most pure one. Ever 
shelter us with thy protection.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
This is the day of the Lord! Rejoice, O ye people! For, lo! the Light-bearing cloud 
spreadeth out upon the air and appeareth before Mount Athos in a pillar of fire, alone 
holding in her maternal arms the one Christ, the Creator of the universe, for the 
salvation of our souls.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Today the flocks of Athos rejoice with splendor. They compose a multitude of 
hymns, with love honoring the immaculate one, adorning themselves with the 
magnitude of the grace which they have received through the appearance of the icon 
of the all-immaculate Maiden who illumineth with rays of divine knowledge those 
who piously hymn her.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
A most glorious wonder is seen today: for the fiery icon of the divine Maiden hath 
appeared on the waters, emitting beams of radiance, and saving the habitations of 
fasters by the miracle. Wherefore, let us cry out in thanksgiving: Rejoice, O thou who 
art full of grace!  
Polyeleos, and this Magnification: We magnify thee, O most holy Virgin, di-
vinely elect Maiden, and we honor thy holy image, whereby thou pourest forth 
healings upon all who have recourse to it.  
Selected Psalm Verse: 
A: Remember, O Lord, David and all his meekness.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Who can describe thy magnificence, O Theotokos? For in the manifestation of 
thine image thou hast astounded all the Orthodox, curing many infirmities and 
healing diseases. O most merciful Lady, deprive us not now of thine assistance, but by 
thy supplications defend and save our lawful civil authorities, and by thy power 
protect all their Christ-loving armed forces; that, boasting in thee and placing all our 
hope on thee, we may not be put to shame forever.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the above is repeated.  
Then, the Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation 
and generation.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 4 (LK. 1: 39-49, 56)  
And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city 
of Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came 
to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her 
womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost: and she spake out with a loud 
voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 
And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo!, 
as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my 
womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of 
those things which were told her from the Lord. And Mary said, My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath re-
garded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all 
generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; 
and holy is His name. And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to 
her own house. 
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
When the appearance of thy wondrous icon took place, the fathers of Athos, 
beholding the pillar of fire upon the sea, were astonished and stricken with awe. But 
Gabriel, walking across the sea like a second Peter, cried out to them, shedding tears: 
O most holy one, come thou and preserve thine inheritance unassailed by the noetic 
foe!  
The Canon of the icon, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Accept these hymns of praise from my defiled lips, O all-immaculate one, as 
before thy Son, my God and Lord, accepted the widow’s two mites, and grant me 
forgiveness of my transgressions, that I may magnify thee as is meet.  
The hymnody of the angels befitteth thee, the Mother of God; for in a strange 
manner thou hast given birth unto their Creator. But accept from us, O Sovereign 
Lady, these humble prayers, that we may chant unto the Lord: Gloriously hast Thou 
glorified Thyself in our weakness!  
The waters grew firm, and the waves became solid in the midst of the sea, bearing 
thine icon, O Mother of God. Wherefore, make firm my quaking heart upon the rock 
of the commandments of Christ.  
Thou wast a helper and protector for the Monastery of Iveron, O Virgin, sinking 
the forces of Amira and their ships in the sea. Drown thou also in the depths of the 
tender compassion of thy Son all the passions of my soul and my countless 
transgressions.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Establish thou my heart in hope on thee, O Mother of God; take thou all pride 
and vainglory from my darkened mind, that I may cry out: None is as holy as the 
Lord, and none is as righteous as our God!  
Thou, O Mother of God, dost gird the weak about with strength and feedest the 
hungry. Visit thou also mine infirmity, and nurture me, who hunger and thirst, on the 
Bread of Life Who came down from heaven to earth through thy virginal womb.  
Raise me up from the ground, wretch that I am, and lift me up out of the mire of 
sin, though I am poor; grant prayer unto me who now make entreaty, that magnifying 
thine assistance, I may hymn thee.  
Show forth my barren mind as fruitful, O good Virgin who wast born of a barren 
woman; for through the appearance of thine icon thou grantest an abundance of all 
good things.  
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Today the splendid festival of our helper hath dawned! Let creation leap up, and 
let the assemblies of mortals join chorus! for the holy Theotokos calleth us together 
to behold her fire-bearing icon which illumineth the faithful with rays of mercy. 
Wherefore, rejoicing, we cry aloud: O Lady; from famine, fire, the sword and 
tribulations save us who honor the appearance of thine icon!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, O Mother of God, and the earth hath been 
filled with thy praise; but thou hast departed for the salvation of mortals, and hast 
come to save thine inheritance.  
Hearing report of thine arrival, the monks of Athos were afraid and, considering 
thy works, were filled with awe. And when my soul is troubled, be thou mindful of 
thy mercy, O Sovereign Lady, that I may cry out: Glory to thine aid, O Mother of 
God!  
Thou art my might and power, O Theotokos. Through thee do I find rest in the 
day of my sorrow, and through thee do I pass from the land of wandering into the 
inheritance of heaven; and I rejoice in the Lord, my God and Savior.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
O pure one, look upon the people of thy flock who wake at dawn out of the night, 
and who surround thy divinely praised icon, entreating forgiveness of their sins, 
emendation of life and a share in divine glory. Yea, thrust us not away from thy face, 
O Mother of the never-waning Light.  
All in thy flock, joining chorus together with all their soul and mind, honor thine 
icon with psalms, spiritual songs and divine hymnody, asking forgiveness and 
salvation of soul. And as thou art our healing, O Lady, Bride of God, grant them unto 
us.  
Thy temple, O Virgin, hath been shown to be another garden of paradise, having 
the icon of thy beauty in its midst like the tree of life; and all, venerating it fervently 
with reverence and love, cry out: O Lady, grant us peace! Pay thou our purchase 
price, for we know none other consolation than thee!  
Having acquired thee as a river of sweetness ever gushing forth a torrent of 
plentitude, the manna of heaven, and abundance and grace, O Maiden, they that dwell 
in thy monastery hymn thy birthgiving.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Engulfed by the tempest of the sea of life, in sorrow of heart I cry out to thee, O 
Lady, and to thee do I flee, as to a calm haven. Lead up my life from corruption!  
The uttermost abyss of sins hath encompassed me, and my spirit perisheth; but 
extend thou thine outstretched arm, O Lady, and render me unharmed who approach 
thine icon, as thou didst Gabriel.  
Turn me not utterly away from thy countenance, O Mother of the never-waning 
Light; neither let me drown in the abyss of mine iniquities, that my life may escape 
corruption, and I may sacrifice with a voice of praise and confession.  
Kontakion of the icon, in Tone VIII: 
Even though thy holy icon was cast into the sea by the widow * who was unable to 
save it from the foe, O Theotokos, * yet hath it been shown to be the preserver of 
Mount Athos * and the gatekeeper of the Monastery of Iveron, * frightening away the 
enemy and delivering from all misfortunes and dangers ** those who honor thee in 
our homeland.  
Ikos: Beholding the icon of the Mother of God which appeared in the pillar of 
fire, the company of fasters of Iveron cried out: O Master, deem us worthy to receive 
the icon of Thy Mother, for the consolation of our earthly sojourn! And do thou, O 
Gabriel, dare to tread forth upon the sea and take the treasure revealed to us in thine 
arms, that it may be for us an ever-vigilant guardian, a protection and joy for all 
Christians!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
I have sinned, I have committed iniquities, I have acted unrighteously before Thee, 
O Lord Jesus! Yet as thou art good, O Theotokos, my Sovereign Lady, quench the 
fire of His just wrath with thy fervent mediation, that we may chant unto Him: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
With the streams of thy compassions, O Mother of God, bedew us who are 
burning up in the furnace of temptations and misfortunes, that our enemies may be 
put to shame, and that all may understand that thou alone, O Lady, art glorified 
throughout the whole universe.  
We hymn thee, O Mother of God, as the throne of the King of glory, more 
honorable than the cherubim, the animate temple wherein the Lord madeth His 
abode, the firmament of the heavens wherein shone Christ, the Sun of righteousness; 
and we supremely exalt thee throughout the ages. 
 Thou art the gladness of those who dwell in the wilds and the consolation and 
boast of the Imperial City, O Virgin Mary, who art all-hymned and supremely exalted 
throughout the ages.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
The hosts of the angels hymn thee, the human race exalteth thee, and all creation 
blesseth thee, O most pure Virgin Theotokos. Accept from me, who am unworthy, 
the praise I offer thee.  
Sing, ye monks of Athos! Bless, O Iberian lands! O land of Russia, exalt supremely 
the good Lady who gusheth forth rivers of miracles through her wonder-working 
icon! We praise, bless and bow down before thee, O Theotokos, hymning and su-
premely exalting thee throughout all ages!  
It is not only Holy Athos which is enlightened by the likeness of the Iveron icon; 
but the reigning city of Moscow was also adorned therewith, receiving miraculous 
help therefrom and acquiring a well-spring of consolation therein.  
The land of Novgorod, and other cities and towns were likewise sanctified by 
copies of thine icon, and have been enlightened by miracles, O Sovereign Lady, crying 
out: Hymn ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of mankind 
and of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
The mystery of the profundity of thy birthgiving striketh the intelligence of the 
angels with awe, O Virgin, and thy most pure icon driveth the demons away; for, 
unable to bear the sight of its power, they flee and vanish. And we lovingly bow down 
and venerate it, and magnify thee, the Theotokos.  
O Virgin Theotokos, hope of Christians, extend unto our generation thy mercies 
which thou didst bestow upon our fathers. Protect and save us from all evil.  
O most merciful helper of Christians, the tongue of neither angel nor man is able 
to hymn thee worthily, in that thou art more honorable than all creation and more 
glorious than earthly things. O Lady, mercifully accept this entreaty offered thee by 
us. Ever save us, for in thee have we placed our trust.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III: 
Taking thy most precious icon in his arms, O Sovereign Lady, Gabriel cried out to 
thee: O sweet Mother of Christ the King, be thou the protection of thy monastery, 
the joy of all Christians, and the surety of life everlasting! (Thrice) 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the icon, in Tone IV:  
O the ineffable goodness, O the glorious revelation of the icon of the Mother of 
God, which is resplendent with miracles and illumineth with grace those who 
approach it! Receiving it with gladness, with hymns we honor and bless the divine 
Maiden as is meet. (Twice)  
O thy forethought concerning us, O Lady! For today thou sendest thy wondrous 
icon, and mercifully grantest us an ever-vigilant guardian and a consolation for our 
sojourn. Wherefore, acknowledging thy precious wonders, with hymns we magnify 
thee.  
O most glorious wonder! How is the fire-bearing icon borne upon the surface of 
the waves of the sea as upon a chariot, illumining men’s minds with radiant beams of 
grace? Joyfully honoring its festival with hymns, we send up glory to the Theotokos.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same tone: 
Fulfilling thy word, O Mother of God, the venerable Gabriel walked out dryshod 
upon the waters of the sea, and, taking up thy sacred icon, he joined the chorus of the 
fasters of Athos and held festival. Wherefore, we also, marveling at the ultimate 
Author of these miracles, cry out: Glory to the one King and God Who, for the sake 
of the prayers of the Theotokos, hath wrought wondrous things! Preserve our 
Orthodox hierarchs, whom Thou hast chosen to watch over us, and grant that they 
triumph over all heresies, in that Thou art almighty!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT THE LITURGY:  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from Ode III, and 4 from Ode VI of the 
Canon of the icon.  
Establish thou my heart in hope on thee, O Mother of God; take thou all pride 
and vainglory from my darkened mind, that I may cry out: None is as holy as the 
Lord, and none is as righteous as our God!  
Thou, O Mother of God, dost gird the weak about with strength and feedest the 
hungry. Visit thou also mine infirmity, and nurture me, who hunger and thirst, on the 
Bread of Life Who came down from heaven to earth through thy virginal womb.  
Raise me up from the ground, wretch that I am, and lift me up out of the mire of 
sin, though I am poor; grant prayer unto me who now make entreaty, that magnifying 
thine assistance, I may hymn thee.  
Show forth my barren mind as fruitful, O good Virgin who wast born of a barren 
woman; for through the appearance of thine icon thou grantest an abundance of all 
good things.  
Engulfed by the tempest of the sea of life, in sorrow of heart I cry out to thee, O 
Lady, and to thee do I flee, as to a calm haven. Lead up my life from corruption! 
(Twice) 
The uttermost abyss of sins hath encompassed me, and my spirit perisheth; but 
extend thou thine outstretched arm, O Lady, and render me unharmed who approach 
thine icon, as thou didst Gabriel.  
Turn me not utterly away from thy countenance, O Mother of the never-waning 
Light; neither let me drown in the abyss of mine iniquities, that my life may escape 
corruption, and I may sacrifice with a voice of praise and confession.  
After the Entrance: the Troparion of the icon, in Tone I: 
The audacity of those who hate the image of the Lord * and the might of the 
impious * came godlessly to Nicaea, * and emissaries inhumanly interrogated the 
widow * who piously venerated the icon of the Mother of God; * but at night, she 
and her son cast the icon into the sea, crying aloud: * “Glory to thee, O pure one, * 
for the trackless sea hath given thee its breast! * Glory to thy straight journey, ** O 
thou who alone art incorrupt!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Kontakion of the icon, in Tone VIII: 
Even though thy holy icon was cast into the sea by the widow * who was unable to 
save it from the foe, O Theotokos, * yet hath it been shown to be the preserver of 
Mount Athos * and the gatekeeper of the Monastery of Iveron, * frightening away the 
enemy and delivering from all misfortunes and dangers ** those who honor thee in 
our homeland.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: the Song of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 320 (HEB. 9: 1-7)  
Brethren: God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto 
the fathers by the prophets, Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom 
he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds; Who being 
the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all 
things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down 
on the right hand of the Majesty on high: Being made so much better than the angels, 
as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they. For unto which 
of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? 
And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son? And again, when he 
bringeth in the first-begotten into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God 
worship him. And of the angels he saith, Who maketh his angels spirits, and his 
ministers a flame of fire. 
Alleluia, in Tone II: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of thy 
holiness.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, and He will not annul it.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, § 54 (LK. 10: 38-42, 11: 27-28)  
At that time: He entered into a certain village; and a certain woman named Martha 
received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ 
feet, and heard His word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came 
to Him, and said, Lord, dost Thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? 
Bid her therefore that she help me. And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, 
Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful; 
and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her. And it 
came to pass, as He spoke these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her 
voice, and said unto Him, Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the paps which 
Thou hast sucked. But He said, Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the word of 
God, and keep it.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
