--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 8th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLES HERODION, AGABUS, 
ASYNCRITUS, RUFUS, PHLEGON, HERMES, AND THOSE WITH THEM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Like winged eagles * ye passed over all the earth, * sowing precious doctrines, * 
uprooting the tares of falsehood by grace, * and producing much grain as fruit, * O 
all-praised ones; * and the noetic granaries hold it forever, * laid up in abundance ** 
for the immortal Husbandman.  
Let us bless Herodion, * Agabus and Asyncritus, * Rufus and the divine Phlegon, * 
the branches of a fruitful vine * who pour forth upon us * the sweetness of salvation, 
* which with divine faith maketh glad * the thirsting hearts ** of those who celebrate 
their godly memory.  
Higher than heaven in your thought, * ye declared the glory of our God * Who 
willingly became incarnate, * O ye apostles, beholders of God, instructors of the 
pious, * foundations of the Churches, * unshakable pillars, * refuges of piety, * 
servants of ineffable mysteries, ** leaders of our souls into the light.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O all-pure one, * who hath contained the infinite God in thy womb * Who, in His 
love for mankind, hath become a man, * and hath received our substance from thee, 
* deifying it: * disdain me not who am now sorrowing, * but quickly take pity * and 
free me from divers enemies ** and the malice of the evil one.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee * nailed to the Cross, O Lord, * the ewe-lamb 
Thy Mother marveled * and cried out: “What is this that I see, * O my Son most 
desired? * How hast Thou been rewarded * by the unfaithful and iniquitous assembly 
* which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? ** Yet glory to Thine ineffable condescen-
sion, O Master!”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy apostles, the acrostic whereof is: “Let us fashion a divine hymn for 
the apostles”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone III:  
ODE I  
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, * 
divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and supremely 
glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
Together let us celebrate the most sacred memory of the holy apostles, and let us 
hymn them with gladness of soul; for they entreat the most holy Word to grant us 
cleansing and mercy.  
Dispelling the putrefaction of the madness of polytheism with the salt of the 
divine Word, O glorious ones, ye rendered healing to souls which fell prey to folly of 
old, and presented them, saved, to the Creator of all. Wherefore, ye have been 
glorified.  
Let the glorious Herodion, Rufus and Phlegon, Agabus, Asyncritus and Hermes be 
blessed, the wise apostles and divine heralds who were close friends of our Redeemer.  
Theotokion: O merciful Theotokos, boast of the apostles, glory of athletes and 
confirmation of the faithful, I pray thee; make steadfast my mind, which is troubled 
by the assaults of the deceiver and darkened by transgressions.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
In that ye are the eyes of the Church, open the eyes of many to see unimagined 
beauty, O godly disciples of the divine Word.  
Thou wast shown to be a splendid habitation of the Trinity, O most glorious 
Rufus, and with the word of grace didst cast down pagan temples and raise up 
churches to the Lord.  
Renewing men’s hearts with thy divine discourse, O wise Rufus, and sowing 
therein the teachings of salvation, thou didst reap the salvation of the saved like most 
fruitful grain.  
Theotokion: He Who is unapproachable in His divine essence hath now become 
accessible to me, O most pure one, and hath united Himself wholly to mankind by 
taking on flesh in His extreme compassion.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”:  
Having been taught by the Wellspring of wisdom, ye made wise those who before, 
through ignorance, madly worshipped graven images, O wise ones. Wherefore, ye are 
blessed for ages of ages, standing before the throne of the Holy Trinity. Earnestly 
pray, that we find forgiveness of our transgressions, O most glorious ones.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O Theotokos, fleeing to thy divine protection after God, * I humbly fall down and 
beseech thee: * Have mercy, O most pure one, * for my sins have submerged my 
being, * and trembling O Lady, I fear the torments to come, * O pure one, entreat thy 
Son, ** that I may be delivered from them.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast in love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
Only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with thanksgiving 
we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
Bringing divine healing to faithful nations, O wise ones, ye gave the wicked land of 
impiety over to destruction and established souls firmly in the Faith. Wherefore, ye 
are blessed.  
The city of Patras hath most manifestly been vested with power by thee, O blessed 
Herodion; for thou wast first to adorn its cathedra, illumined with the divine 
effulgence of the Holy Spirit.  
In thee, its great citizen, O blessed Herodion, was the city of Patras truly made 
rich, for thou hast led it to righteousness, to the Sion on high. Wherefore, it honoreth 
thee with divine hymnody.  
Theotokion: At the archangel’s sacred words thou didst conceive the Word of the 
Father Who delivereth all from all irrationality, O Virgin Birthgiver of God. 
Wherefore, with divine words we ever glorify thee out loud.  
ODE V  
Irmos: The Invisible One hath appeared on earth, * and the Unapproachable 
One hath willingly dwelt among mankind; * and, rising early at dawn, we 
hymn Thee, * O Lover of mankind.  
Ye preached the Word Who came to earth to save the lost, O divine apostles, and 
have delivered all mankind from deception.  
In a strange manner the grace of prophecy hath been poured forth richly upon 
thee by God, O divinely wise Agabus; for thou didst clearly proclaim that which 
would come to pass.  
Thou didst once appear prophesying to Paul concerning his afflictions, bonds and 
tribulations, O prophet Agabus, by binding thy hands with his belt.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: Thou alone didst have a strange childbirth upon earth, reconciling us 
with the only beginningless Father. Wherefore, thee alone do we honor as the Mother 
of God.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit 
perisheth. * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like 
Peter save me, * O my Helmsman. 
The Word set you forth as bright lamps illumining the whole world, dispelling 
darkness and showing forth the path of salvation, O God-seeing apostles.  
Preaching the mortality of the Immortal One, thou didst translate mortals over to 
life, O wise Asyncritus, thou boast of the apostles and firm bulwark of Hyrcania.  
Hyrcania found thee to be a river filled to overflowing with divine water, O 
Asyncritus, and, irrigated by thy precious outpourings, it hath produced most comely 
plants for the Master.  
Theotokion: The ark of the law prefigured thee who received the Fullness of the 
law of God and hast given birth to Him in the flesh, O Bride of God; and even after 
birth giving thou didst remain as thou wast before giving birth, O Ever-virgin.  
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Ye were revealed to be most honorable disciples and apostles of Christ, * O 
glorious Herodion, Agabus and Rufus, * Asyncritus, Phlegon and Hermes. * Ever 
pray to the Lord, ** that He grant forgiveness of sins unto us who hymn you.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Of old the three children did not worship the golden image, * of the 
Persian idol, * but chanted in the midst of the furnace: * O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Founded well upon the rock of Faith, O divinely eloquent ones, ye manifestly 
illumined the fullness of the gentiles who of old had vainly worshipped inanimate 
stones.  
With the fire of thy divine words, O sacred Phlegon, thou didst utterly consume all 
the thorns of falsehood, and with the fervor of the Spirit, manifestly kindle afire 
hearts which had wretchedly been quenched.  
The inhabitants of Marathon, having thee as their great intercessor, excellent 
teacher, luminary and guide, honor thee unceasingly, O glorious Phlegon.  
Theotokion: Having acquired the Tree of life, O pure one, thou didst become a 
new garden of paradise for us; and the fruit thereof giveth life to those slain by eating, 
O pure Birthgiver of God.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Babylonian furnace burnt not the children, * neither did the fire of 
the Godhead consume the Virgin, * wherefore with the faithful children we cry 
aloud: * ‘Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord’. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Let Agabus, Phlegon and Asyncritus, Rufus, Herodion and the glorious Hermes, 
be blessed today, who were divine apostles of the Word, beacons for the world and 
teachers of the nations.  
The most glorious Hermes was the instructor and enlightenment of all Dalmatia; 
for he dawned upon it like a sun of great brilliance, working wonders and illumining 
hearts which before were blind.  
Shining forth like a lamp bearing the word, O glorious Hermes, thou didst illumine 
those sitting in the night of evils; and, working healings and great signs, thou didst 
draw the fullness of unbelievers to the Faith.  
Theotokion: We, thy servants, O most pure one, have thee as our intercessor and 
an unashamed mediator before thy Son and God. Save us from misfortunes and 
grievous temptations, that with faith and love we may ever glorify thee.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Unto her who was prefigured on Sinai in the bush and the flame * 
before Moses the lawgiver, * she who conceived the fire of God within her 
womb without being consumed, * the all-radiant and inextinguishable lamp, * 
the very Theotokos, thee do we honor and magnify with hymns. 
With faith let us form a most sacred choir, and with one mind and soul fervently 
bless Hermes and Herodion, Rufus and Agabus, the great Asyncritus and the divine 
Phlegon, who were eye-witnesses of the Word.  
Truly revealed as mystical olive-trees, the divinely eloquent ones have anointed our 
souls and faces with grace, delivering us from the oppression of the ungodly and the 
darkness of ignorance. Wherefore as is meet, they are called blessed.  
O wise apostles of the Redeemer, ye have delivered us from much suffering and 
enslavement to the enemy, the ancient cause of our fall; and with divine hope ye have 
shown us the ways which lead to the kingdom of heaven.  
O six-branched candle-stand of holy disciples, earnestly entreat the splendor of the 
threefold Sun, that He illumine the souls of us who celebrate your most radiant 
memory, and that He deliver us from the darkness of everlasting damnation.  
Theotokion: Like flame-bearing tongs thou didst receive in thy womb the noetic 
Ember which consumeth our passions, illumining our souls and dispelling the 
darkness of the madness of idolatry, O pure and greatly hymned Virgin.  
 
 
 
