--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 7th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER GEORGE, BISHOP OF 
MITYLENE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
O divinely wise father George, * with honor thou didst bow down * before the 
precious and most pure icon of Christ, * strengthened by His power, * in nowise 
fearing * the vehemence of those who fought against God. * Him do thou now 
entreat, * that He grant our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
O glorious father George, * thou didst endure * the anger of the impious * who 
were mindlessly enraged, * and whom thou didst see exalting themselves * in impious 
arrogance, * and yet manifestly and utterly crushed * by providence, ** moved to 
defend the senseless.  
O father George, * as a fellow-laborer of God, * a priest and husbandman, * by 
thy words * thou hast now brought to the Master * fruit a hundredfold: * the souls of 
the saved. * Pray thou now, that He grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O bush unburnt! * Rejoice, thou who alone gavest birth * to the Angel of 
great counsel! * Rejoice, will of the adored Trinity! * Rejoice, confirmation of mortals! 
* Rejoice, thou who didst cause the uncultivated * Grain of paradise to spring forth, * 
the King and Lord ** Who withereth the offshoots of evil.  
Stavrotheotokion: The Sovereign Lady, the unblemished ewe-lamb, * beholding 
her Lamb upon the Cross, * bereft of form and comeliness, * lamenting, said: “Woe 
is me! * Whither hath Thy comeliness gone, O most Sweet One? * Where is Thy 
splendor? Where is the brilliant grace * of Thine image, ** O my Son most beloved?”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
Shine forth the radiance of Thy tender compassion upon me who am full of 
transgressions and grievous sins, O compassionate Christ, and dispel the gloom of my 
blindness by the prayers of Thy hierarch.  
With thy pangs and sweat, O wise and blessed George, thou didst wholly till the 
ground of abstinence, and sowing the grain of the Spirit in men’s hearts, brought 
forth the wheat of dispassion.  
Taking thy cross upon thy shoulder, thou didst reject the prince of this world of 
earthly beauty, and, following after Christ, acquired the treasure of His immaterial 
kingdom.  
Theotokion: Possessing thine intercession as armor and a steadfast refuge, a 
bulwark, stronghold and divine foundation, a bridge and protection, O Bride of God, 
we are all delivered from misfortunes.  
ODE III 
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as our God, 
* Whom the whole of creation hymns: * There is none more righteous than 
Thee, O Lord. 
Entering the summit of the virtues, O blessed and venerable one, and worthily 
gazing upon the depths of the Spirit, thou dwellest now with the angelic choirs, as 
one who hath received divine vision.  
Poor in spirit, O wise one, thou wast enriched by the immaterial kingdom, wherein 
thou hast faithfully prepared everlasting treasures for thy flock; wherefore we call thee 
blessed.  
With simplicity and meekness of soul, in thy character and corrections, thou wast 
like unto Jacob; and by thy spiritual purity wast shown to be like Israel whose mind 
beheld God.  
Theotokion: Without father thou hast given birth to Him Who before thee was 
without mother, and thou didst nurse as a babe Him Who nourisheth all things. 
Entreat Him, that those who hymn thee with faith as the pure Sovereign Theotokos 
may be saved.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Luminous with loftiness of humility, thou didst utterly destroy the uprisings of the 
enemy, doing battle splendidly; and being merciful, O venerable father, by feeding the 
starving with abundant provision. Wherefore, after death thou didst inherit food 
which waxeth not old, rejoicing forever, O blessed hierarch George. Entreat Christ 
God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy 
memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * gavest birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for the 
fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Thou didst save the ship of thy soul from the passions of the threefold waves of 
materialism, O venerable father, hastening to the harbor and tranquility of abstinence.  
Having acquired angelic understanding, thou didst listen to the angels chanting 
unto the Trinity, in the ecstasy of thy mind, O all-famed one.  
Armed with thy divine faith as with noetic stones, O hierarch, like David thou 
didst bring down the haughty prince of darkness like another Goliath.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, the hope and intercession of the world, entreat Him 
Who was incarnate of thee on behalf of thy servants; for having acquired thee as a 
holy mercy-seat, we have been delivered from sin.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
All of us, knowing thee as a tower of purity and key of chastity, O ever-memorable 
one, have received mercy by thy supplications.  
Thou wast arrayed in priestly rank by godly foresight when the immaculate Virgin 
summoned thee thereto as one blameless.  
Possessed of the compassion of mercy planted within thee and ever dwelling with 
thee, thou wast a producer of abundant food for the poor.  
Theotokion: Having conceived the Master of heaven in thy womb, O all-
immaculate one, thou wast higher than the heavens and all creation.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
The all-holy Spirit found a dwelling-place within thee, driving out legions of evil 
spirits by thy prayers.  
Thou wast shown to be a river of tranquility and a stream of meekness, from 
whence we are watered with a torrent of sweetness, O venerable father.  
Having mortified the pleasures of the flesh, thou didst live according to the Spirit, 
O glorious one. Raise me up also, who have fallen through the passions.  
Theotokion: God the Word, the Word Who shineth forth eternally from the 
Father didst thou ineffably conceive within time in thy womb, O Ever-virgin.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst bedew the Children in the furnace, * and Thou didst 
preserve Thy Mother as a Virgin after childbirth: * Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
God of our fathers. 
By the radiance of the divine Spirit foreknowing thy departure from hence to that 
which is higher, thou hast now joined with the choirs in the heavenly mansions, O 
venerable one.  
A star proclaimed thy repose, O venerable one, when thou was manifest as a star 
illumined by thy life and divine radiance and senses.  
Thou didst worthily enter the wedding-chamber of the kingdom on high all-
arrayed, reclining with the Bridegroom at the feast of immaterial sweetness, O 
venerable one.  
Theotokion: As is fitting, the hosts of heaven have borne thee aloft and hymn thee 
as the Mother of the Life of all, and a sure intercessor on behalf of our souls, O 
Sovereign Lady.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * ‘Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord’. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Having a heart guided by God, O father, drive away the dark tempest of my 
passions and direct me to the haven of Thy serenity.  
Planted by the divine springs of the waters of love, thou didst grow the tree of thy 
life, producing the fruits of piety in due season.  
As a physician of incurable infirmities and a dispeller of unclean spirits, O blessed 
George, heal thou the sickness of my sin.  
Theotokion: Who can tell of thy divine birthgiving, O Mary, Birthgiver of God? 
For every earthborn mortal, and the angels are amazed and call thee blessed.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire of 
the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the salvation 
of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we magnify thee. 
With the springs of thy tears, O venerable one, thou didst blamelessly cultivate the 
paradise of dispassion, producing abundant fruit, and feeding the divine flock with 
the virtues.  
Thou didst offer pure service unto God, O venerable one, and, having finished the 
race of faith, hast now received a crown of righteousness from the hand of Christ, the 
Judge of the contest.  
Today a multitude of the faithful, flocks of monks and assemblies of priests leap 
up and join chorus; for all have found thee to be a model, rule and image of salvation.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Maiden, ceaselessly entreat the God-man, thine 
Offspring, Who is God and the Creator of time, that He save the souls of those who 
hymn thee.  
 
 
 
