--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 5th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS THEODULUS & AGATHOPODES & 
THOSE WITH THEM 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of the heaven ...”: 
Let us assemble with faith, * honoring the sufferings and struggles of the godly 
twain, * furnishing our minds with wings to soar aloft with similar zeal, * earnestly 
entreating Christ and saying: * O Thou Who dost glorify the saints, in that Thou art 
good, ** make us steadfast in the fear of Thee!  
Having received names * in accordance with your character, O wise ones, * and 
set out to accomplish divine works, * ye labored similarly for God * in the straight 
paths, O passion-bearers, ** and truly drained the salvific cup of martyrdom.  
Having parted ungodliness as though another sea, * ye entered into the land of 
dispassion, * the kingdom of heaven, as is meet, * where a torrent of nourishment 
floweth forth * and eternal and immutable light shineth, ** O martyrs of Christ.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
With the dew of the rain of thy divine will * quench the fiery assaults * of my most 
pernicious passions, * O Virgin, * that, like the youths * I also may thank God Who 
was born of thee, ** glorifying and blessing thy goodness, O Sovereign Lady.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb lifted up upon the Cross, * the 
immaculate Virgin cried aloud, weeping: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this 
new and most glorious sight? * How is it that Thou Who holdest all things in Thy 
hand ** hast been nailed to the Tree in the flesh?”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the beauty of Thy 
martyrs, O Christ”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Crowned with the divine wreath of martyrdom, ye stand before the Master, radiant 
with noetic beauty, praying for us, O all-comely great-martyrs.  
Entering into beautiful union with God, O wise ones, ye piously withdrew from 
hateful malice and, rejoicing, joined the choirs of passion-bearers.  
Full of the waters of the life-creating Spirit, O saints, submitting to the 
commandments of God, with beneficence ye gave drink to those who of old had 
been dying of thirst through the burning heat of ignorance.  
Theotokion: In thy womb thou didst carry the Savior, Creator of all and Lord, the 
God and man Whom Agathopodes and the glorious Theodulus preached, O all-
immaculate Virgin Mother.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Tripped up by the bonds of thy word, the enemy fell and was manifestly put to 
shame, O Theodulus, martyr and passion-bearer.  
Having strengthened thy soul with the love of God, O martyr Agathopodes, thou 
didst show all the power of the enemy to be impotent.  
Pouring forth healings upon the faithful from ever-flowing torrents, O glorious 
ones, ye dry up the wellspring of the passions with divine power.  
Theotokion: O pure one, thou hast given birth to the Redeemer Who, clad in our 
flesh, hath delivered mankind from captivity to the enemy.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
O saints of truly great renown, brethren by the grace of the Spirit, ye who in pious 
faith shared the same life: passing through life in prayer and fasting, ye drew all to the 
knowledge of God. Wherefore, O valiant warriors, ye manfully made deception 
captive and, having suffered under the law, have received crowns. Entreat Christ 
God, that He grant forgiveness of sins to those who with love celebrate your holy 
memory.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Having conceived the Wisdom and Word in thy womb without being consumed, 
O Mother of God, thou gavest birth for the world unto the Nourisher of all and 
Fashioner of creation; and thou didst bear in thine arms Him Who holdeth all things. 
Wherefore, I beseech thee, O all-holy Virgin, and glorify thee with faith: May I be 
delivered from transgressions, and, on the day of judgment when I shall stand before 
the face of my Creator, O pure Virgin Lady, grant me thine aid; for thou canst do all 
things whatsoever thou dost will, O thou who art all-hymned.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
Shining forth like most radiant beacons with the splendors of martyrdom, O 
glorious martyrs, ye illumine the fullness of the whole world, casting the malevolence 
of deception into the darkness.  
The angels marveled at the blessed and rightly-wise twain who received crowns of 
martyrdom, wherefore all praise the courage of their endurance.  
“Rejoice!” Theodulus cried out: “I run now along the path of Thy testimonies, O 
Lord, and I delight richly in Thine effulgence, together with the steadfast 
Agathopodes!”  
Theotokion: The glorious martyrs, speaking eloquently of the incarnation of the 
Master Who shone forth from thy womb, O Theotokos, rejoicing, drank of the 
saving drink of martyrdom.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Thou didst set thy feet firmly upon the righteousness of honored martyrdom, O 
all-famed Agathopodes, causing the foe to trip.  
Having acquired the water of life flowing into your hearts, O ye spiritual athletes, 
ye received a glorious end through water.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Cast into the depths of the sea and willingly slain, O ye spiritual athletes, ye dried 
up the outpourings of perilous idolatry.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, who hast given birth to the supremely good Word, 
Who hath brought blessing upon all, heal thou the afflictions of my soul.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Full of living waters, ye met your right-laudable end by drowning in water, and 
there ye drowned the emissary of evil.  
Preserved by the grace and power of God, ye could not be prevailed upon to offer 
sacrifice to abominable idols, but offered yourselves to the Master as a pure sacrifice.  
The weaponry of the enemy was useless against you, O ye spiritual athletes, but 
the sharp arrows of your courage bravely pierced his heart.  
Theotokion: Heal the passions of my soul, O pure and all-immaculate one, for 
thou hast given birth to the Wellspring of dispassion, and put an end to the tyranny 
of those who unceasingly trouble my heart.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Arrayed in the Levites’ vestments through your knowledge of God, and in a sacred 
manner rendering them most radiant by the splendor of martyrdom, thou dost now 
rejoice, O Agathopodes, standing before the Word.  
Adorned with the ministry of the first martyr, O blessed Agathopodes, thou wast 
deemed worthy to serve the slaughtered Word, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Thinking as one with a single mind, O right glorious ones, ye endured the taste of 
death for Christ, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: The Word Who covered the heavens with virtue found thee, O pure 
and most immaculate one, to be all-adorned with the radiance of the virtues, He made 
His abode within thee rendering human nature heavenly.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Casting deception into darkness by thy words, O wise Theodulus, thou didst shine 
forth, illumined by the wisdom of grace, proclaiming piety before the tribunal and 
shutting the mouths of the impious, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord!  
The deep of the sea was not able to conceal your bodies, O holy ones; for, at the 
command of God, it cast them up on land incorrupt, pouring forth wondrous 
miracles upon us who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Having enslaved thyself wholly unto Him Who, for thy sake, appeared in the guise 
of a servant, O glorious one, thou didst appear even after death, showing thy care for 
orphans and widows, fulfilling the commandment of the Master, as a wise servant of 
the Lord, O most blessed Theodulus.  
Thessalonica honoreth your bonds, wounds and struggles; for ye were natives 
thereof, as athletes ye received your truly blessed end there, illumining now the 
Church of the firstborn with honor.  
Theotokion: Without altering His nature, Christ arrayed Himself wholly in the 
nature of man through thee, O divinely joyous Lady; and mightily emulating His 
sufferings, Theodulus and Agathopodes cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
“Behold now, what is so good or so joyous as for brethren to dwell together in the 
city of the living God?” ye cried out, having preserved the bond of piety unbroken, 
even unto death, O passion-bearers.  
As ye finished the race of martyrdom, O spiritual athletes, the regiments of the 
ranks of the Most High received you, O glorious ones, arrayed in imperishable 
crowns.  
Today glorious Thessalonica doth celebrate with splendor, calling every city and 
land to your commemoration with exalted proclamations, O Agathopodes and 
Theodulus.  
As passion-bearers ye were radiantly caught up to ineffable glory; and as ye have 
boldness, O all-honored ones, ever pray that those who celebrate your memory may 
also be deemed worthy of such glory through faith.  
Theotokion: With the light of thy compassion illumine me who lay in the darkness 
of ignorance, O thou who alone hast given birth to the Bestower of light, the 
Redeemer and Lord, and Bestower of the saints’ crowns.  
