--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR EUPSYCHIUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O ye martyrs of the Lord ...”: 
Though thy chest was lacerated until thine inner parts were exposed, O valiant 
martyr Eupsychius, thou didst remain unshaken looking with thy noetic eyes toward 
God Who strengthened thee Who put the iniquitous to shame. Him do thou entreat 
today that those who honor thy memory with faith be saved.  
Thy divine head was cut off with a blow from a sword O valiant martyr, and 
instead of blood thou didst miraculously pour forth milk and water, thereby drawing 
the ignorant to understanding, and having received ineffable glory, thou dost grant 
great mercy to all by thy divine mediations.  
With goodly courage Eupsychius ended his sufferings and struggles, vanquishing 
the mindless through patience, and amazing the unbelieving by undergoing 
unbearable sufferings. Wherefore, after thine end thou hast found blessedness. 
Through his supplications O Lord grant great mercy to all.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
My thoughts are impure, my lips lying, and all mine acts defiled. What then shall I 
do? How can I meet the Judge? O Virgin Sovereign Lady, entreat thy Son, Creator 
and Lord, that He receive my spirit in repentance, for He alone is compassionate.  
Stavrotheotokion: “I cannot bear to see Thee asleep upon the Tree, Who givest 
watchfulness to all, that Thou mightest give divine and saving wakefulness to those 
who of old fell into the sleep of perdition through the fruit of disobedience!” 
weeping, the Virgin said, whom we magnify.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “With good courage I hymn the 
pangs of Eupsychius”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII  
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
With good courage I entreat thee, O blessed martyr Eupsychius, hymning thy 
sufferings: as thou hast boldness before the Lord rescue my soul from the tyranny of 
the passions.  
Yearning for God, thy mind disdained all the beautiful things of this life, O blessed 
Eupsychius, and was shown to be wholly beautiful, having achieved dominion over 
the passions.  
Thou wast truly patient when subjected to torments and sufferings, amazing all the 
ungodly; wherefore thou art acknowledged to be a true spiritual athlete.  
Theotokion: The Master Who was born of thee in the likeness of the flesh, O 
Maiden, hath restored our nature which had grown old and made mortals heavenly.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
The mindless ones reported thee, who art intelligent, to the impious prince who 
mindlessly worshiped demons.  
When thou didst ascend to the summit of thy martyrdom, an angel appeared and 
made thee bold, O passion-bearer Eupsychius.  
Thou didst chant while thou wast in prison, confessing God the Lord, and 
showing thyself to be a keeper of His commandments.  
Theotokion: The choir of martyrs chanteth hymns to thee with thanksgiving, O 
pure Maiden, having triumphed through thy mediations.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Finishing thy good contest with goodly courage, thou didst vanquish the adverse 
foe, O martyr, receiving from God honors and miracles. Wherefore, the whole 
Church of the faithful calleth thee blessed, honoring thee with goodly praise on this 
present day.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Do thou guide to the path of repentance, * we who have ever wandered away into 
the trackless wastes of evil * and have angered the supremely good Lord, * O blessed 
Mary who knewest not wedlock, ** thou refuge of despairing men and dwelling-place 
of God.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O Christ, 
Thine all-immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the 
Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, wherewith Thou hast 
saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Rejoicing, O martyr, thou didst distribute to the poor all thy worldly possessions, 
acquiring instead the riches of martyrdom which cannot be taken away and joy which 
waxeth not old.  
Enlightened with sanctity, thou didst denounce the darkness of the unholy who 
sought to do thee violence and lead thee astray with evil demonic falsehoods.  
Those inclined to deceit were amazed by thee, who wast adorned with a truthful 
character and pourest forth words of life, O right wondrous one.  
Theotokion: As thou art more exalted than the hosts of heaven, O Virgin, show 
my mind to have dominion over the carnal passions.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
Thou didst patiently endure the wounding of thy flesh, O blessed Eupsychius, 
when thou wast suspended aloft, for thy zeal for the Master of all creation.  
Thy sides lacerated and thy skin flayed away, with manly mind thou didst chant 
unto Christ, O most patient martyr.  
When thou didst chant unto God, an angel appeared to thee, urging thee on to 
struggles; and, enabled by the Lord, thou didst complete them.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady of all creation, ever pray on behalf of us who have 
set their hope on thee, that we may be delivered from the coming judgment.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
The burden of tortures assailed thee like a storm, but could not drown thee, O 
martyr; for thou didst have Christ God as thy Helper and Helmsman, guiding thee to 
the calm harbor of His kingdom, O Eupsychius.  
Showing forth the high distinction of thy soul to thine adversaries, O martyr, thou 
wast shown to be awesome to them, amazing their evil minds with thine endurance; 
wherefore thou hast received a reward from Christ for being victorious in thy 
struggles.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
With the blood unjustly shed by thee, thou didst drown the whole horde of 
demons, overwhelming the multitude of the ungodly; but richly didst thou give drink 
to the assembly of the faithful, O Eupsychius, adornment of the holy martyrs.  
Theotokion: Set me aright, who have completely fallen, having opened the door to 
the passions; and by thy good mediation lead me to the doors of repentance, and save 
me, O thou who hast given birth to the Savior and Lord of all.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Thou didst join the assemblies of the martyrs and the ranks of the bodiless ones, 
having prevailed over the irrationality of the passions; and contending excellently, O 
thrice-blessed spiritual athlete of Christ.  
O thy goodly commerce! For thou didst trade a small quantity of blood for the 
kingdom on high, O wise one, wherein thou dost chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
our God, throughout the ages!  
Wounded with the sword, thou didst fall, O martyr, but with thyself thou didst 
bring down Belial, who boasted unrestrainedly, and with thy mighty mind dealt 
incurable wounds to him who had wickedly attacked thee.  
Theotokion: Inspired by the divine Spirit, O Virgin, the Prophet Daniel called thee 
the mountain from whence Christ was cut without the aid of human hands. And He 
hath crushed the false graven images.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thou didst triumph over the tormenters and the unclean spirits, O spiritual athlete 
Eupsychius, and art the glory and boast of the faithful, who praise thee with sacred 
hymns and exalt Christ throughout all ages.  
The sanctified people of Caesarea hymn thee, O most blessed martyr; for thy 
body, lying therein, poureth forth streams of healings, which overwhelm the passions 
and divinely bedew the hearts of the faithful.  
Having bravely entered the arena of struggles, O martyr, thou wast lacerated in all 
thy members, and thine inner parts were laid bare; yet thou didst show thyself to be 
wholly unshaken, O invincible one. Wherefore, thou hast received crowns of victory.  
Theotokion: O merciful Virgin who hast given birth to the merciful Word, freely 
take pity on me, who am lacking in loving-kindness, and accursed because of my 
boundless transgressions, and who am unrepentant having wasted my life in 
slothfulness.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Thou wast uplifted upon a tree, depicting the suffering of the Dispassionate One, 
Who easeth the sufferings of the pious in His tender compassion, O martyr 
Eupsychius.  
A great wonder was seen at thy repose: for instead of blood, milk and water flowed 
forth when thy head was severed, O martyr.  
God Who alone is supremely glorious hath been glorified by thy members, O all-
blessed one, in the glorification of thy most holy memory, as thou didst foretell.  
Today the Church hath known gladness in thy divine memorial, O Eupsychius, 
whereon by thy supplications save all who hymn thee.  
Theotokion: With the light of repentance, O Virgin, illumine me who am darkened 
by the night of sin and have been covered by the gloom of despondency.  
 
 
 
