--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 6th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, EUTYCHIUS 
ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
The Church of God bestowed thee * upon the flock and reason-endowed sheep of 
Christ * as an invincible champion, * O blessed Eutychius, * who didst reject and 
banish therefrom * the impious Nestorius, * who vainly blasphemed * the most 
glorious and pure Mother of God, ** denying that she is in truth the Theotokos.  
Thou didst wisely guide thy flock * to the grass of the right Faith, * the living 
water of true wisdom, * and beauteous verdure of pastures planted by God, * to the 
never failing food of incorruption * which never withereth, * whereby thy mouth 
overflowed * with the divine words of eternal life ** and immutable thought.  
Cutting down the words of the heretics * like roots and thorns * with the scythe 
and plough of thy doctrines, * thou didst fell their vile hearts * and sow thy 
corrections, * and judgments based on the divine commandments; * and having 
shown them to be fruitful, * thou hast increased thy talant twofold ** bearing it to thy 
Master.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
Truly we have acquired * no other mighty refuge and tower of strength, * no other 
unassailable rampart than thee, * O most pure one. * To thee we flee, and to thee do 
we cry aloud: * O Sovereign Lady, help us! * Let us not perish! Show forth thy grace 
upon us, * the glory of thy might and the magnitude ** of thy tender compassion!  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed * to the Tree of the Cross, O Jesus. * she 
that kneweth not wedlock said weeping: * “O sweet Child, why hast Thou abandoned 
me * who alone gave birth to Thee, * O unapproachable Light of the beginningless 
Father? * Hasten Thou, and glorify Thyself, * that those who glorify Thy divine 
sufferings ** may receive divine glory!” 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Eutychius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “I marvel at the wonderworking 
Eutychius”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI:  
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
O wise one, thou wast fortunate in the acquisition of the virtues and radiant with 
the shining splendors of the gifts of God: by thy supplications deliver me from the 
vexation of the passions.  
A heavenly planted shoot in the courts of God, bringing forth the abundant fruits 
of virtuous works and miracles, wast thou O blessed Eutychius.  
Having made thy mind thy master, O venerable one, thou didst restrain the 
tyranny of the passions; wherefore, furnished with wings of dispassion, thou wast 
borne aloft to the very mansions of God.  
Theotokion: Receiving thy Creator from thy seedless womb, incarnate in a manner 
past understanding, as He Himself desired, O pure one, thou wast truly shown to be 
the Sovereign Lady of creation.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Thou wast a temple of the Holy Spirit, O God-bearer, having cleansed thyself of 
the mire of the passions with great care, O holy and glorious hierarch Eutychius.  
Thou wast shown to be a child of the day through partaking of immaterial 
effulgence, O ever all-memorable one, and with the light of true healings thou dost 
dispel the harm of the passions.  
Having sucked upon the paps of abstinence from infancy, thou didst truly reach 
the measure of maturity in Christ through unceasing prayers, O glorious and holy 
hierarch Eutychius.  
Theotokion: The wonder of thy divine birthgiving transcendeth every law of 
nature, O pure one; for thou didst supra-naturally conceive God within thy womb, 
and, having given birth to Him, hast remained Ever-virgin.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Arrayed in divine power, thou didst strip bare the might of the deceiver, O God-
bearer, working marvelous wonders. And having been driven unjustly from thy flock, 
thou didst return to it, glorified, O venerable father. Entreat Christ God, that He 
grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only all-pure Virgin Mother * 
who surpassed the angels in purity. * By the divine waters of thy supplications * 
cleanse me who, more than all others, * have become dust, defiled by carnal 
transgressions; ** and grant me great mercy, O pure one.  
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Illumined with the radiance of divine grace, O all-wise one, thou didst cast into 
darkness every opinion of the heretics enlightening the councils of the Orthodox 
peoples.  
Thou wast not troubled, enduring persecutions for the Faith, O all-honored and 
holy hierarch, for thou didst have the persecuted Christ as an ally.  
Arising, Christ set the feet of thy soul upon the rock of His truth, O blessed one, 
causing the haughty wisdom of the enemy to stumble.  
Theotokion: Truly unutterable and unapproachable are the mysteries of thy godly 
birthgiving to those on earth and in heaven, O Ever-virgin Theotokos.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Courageously enduring separation from the flock entrusted to thee, O father, thou 
wast unjustly banished; but straightway joyfully hastened back to it, greatly praised by 
all.  
Not in indistinct images dost thou now behold the glory of God, which thou didst 
desire from thy childhood, O blessed Eutychius, but face to face, having broken the 
mirror of thy flesh, O our father.  
Thy soul, filled to overflowing with divine water, O father, truly poured forth 
rivers of doctrine upon the Church, O wise Eutychius, irrigating the furrows thereof.  
Theotokion: O all-good Sovereign Lady of the world, save those who fervently 
confess thee to be the Theotokos; for we have acquired thee who art the Theotokos, 
as an unassailable intercession.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Within thee the Trinity dwelt as in a habitation cleansed of the confusion of the 
passions, O divinely wise Eutychius, whereby filled with its gifts thou dost ever dispel 
every infirmity.  
Having truly acquired lofty virtue in thy heart, thou wast exalted, laying low all the 
wiles of the demons, O most glorious hierarch of the Lord.  
Having painlessly traversed the sea of life, O father, thou didst reach the refuge of 
the kingdom of heaven, preserving the freight of thy soul for God, O right wondrous 
one.  
Theotokion: O most pure Lady who hast given birth to the Helmsman and Lord 
for our sake: still thou the inconstant and cruel vexation of my passions, and grant 
tranquility to my soul.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII  
O all ye people, let us chant with faith and love, * blessing the godly Eutychius as a 
great pastor and minister, * and a most wise teacher and expeller of heresies; ** for he 
entreateth the Lord on behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Having acquired a pure white soul through the brilliance of the virtues, O father, 
thou hast become like one of the angels, wherefore, joining chorus with the angels 
thou dost now rejoice, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
From childhood thou didst truly offer thyself to thy Master as an unblemished 
sacrifice, through mortification of pleasures, O venerable one; wherefore, thou dost 
now rejoice, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The torrents of thy tears quenched the fiery burning of fleshly pleasures O father, 
and became a dew of healing for those who ever cry out to Christ with faith: O God 
of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate and Ever-virgin Mother, thee do we acknowledge to 
be the salvation of mankind; for the Son Who remained in-separate from the bosom 
of the Father, assumed flesh from thee. Wherefore, thou art blessed from generation 
to generation!  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Having shaken off the slumber of despondency with care for the virtues, O father, 
thou didst keep vigil until thou wast revealed to be a habitation of the God of Jacob, 
Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
Protected by the shield of piety, O divinely wise one, wielding the honored 
command like a two-edged sword, thou didst steadily cut down all the hordes of the 
heretics.  
With humility of heart thou didst offer unto God un-bloody sacrifices, O father 
Eutychius, sacrificing unto Him Who for thy sake was slaughtered like a lamb: Him 
do we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
Triadicon: The one essence of the Trinity, the immeasurable Power which 
transcendeth all time and nature, do we ever preach and supremely exalt in Orthodox 
manner throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: In giving birth thou didst escape pangs, O pure one, and having given 
birth thou didst remain a Virgin; for Jesus, God and man, doth accomplish all things, 
Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Having acquired that which is greater through lesser things, and with corruptible 
things purchased that which is incorrupt, thou didst receive the enduring Kingdom 
and ever-lasting glory, adorned with the comeliness of thy virtues.  
Thou didst make thy life pure and wast shown to be a servant of the pure Virgin, 
O divinely blessed Eutychius, thou most true hierarch of God, pillar of Orthodoxy, 
firmament of the Faith, rampart of the chosen people.  
Thou didst subject the wisdom of the flesh to thy mind and didst live on earth in 
the flesh like one of the bodiless ones, O Eutychius. Wherefore, with the divine 
incorporeal hosts thou dost stand, rejoicing before the God and Master of all 
creation.  
As one dwelling now with the angels, and one whose habitation is with the 
patriarchs, martyrs and the venerable, pray thou to the Lord with them, that He grant 
forgiveness of sins unto all who celebrate thy sacred memory on earth, O wise one.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: Ineffably conceiving in thy womb the Son Who hath shone forth 
eternally from the Father, thou hast given birth to Him, O pure Mother of God. O 
most holy, undefiled Virgin: entreat God, the Lover of mankind, on behalf of thy 
servants, that He save our race.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Eutychius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII  
O all ye people, let us chant with faith and love, * blessing the godly Eutychius as a 
great pastor and minister, * and a most wise teacher and expeller of heresies; ** for he 
entreateth the Lord on behalf of us all.  
 
 
 
