--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 4th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
 COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHERS JOSEPH THE 
HYMNOGRAPHER  
& GEORGE OF MOUNT MALEON, IN THE PELOPONNESE’S  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 for Saint Joseph, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Having taken thy cross upon thy shoulder, * thou didst crucify thyself to the 
world, * and follow in the steps of God the Word * Who created all things from 
nothingness, as He said, * and having shaken off the love of this world * and every 
passionate attachment to it, * thou didst shine forth in the virtues, O father, * and 
through divine works ** receive an eternal inheritance.  
Thou wast shown to be a mystic trumpet * rousing all to spiritual hymnody, * and 
a harp sounded by God, * praising the regiments of God, * glorifying all the saints * 
and proclaiming their victories, * for thou didst draw forth an abyss of words * from 
the wellsprings of salvation, ** giving drink to the house of God.  
Crucified with love, * thou wast shown to be a treasury of the virtues, * and, 
chanting sacred hymns, * thou didst seek out all * who were well-pleasing to God in 
their lives, * emulating with faith their divine corrections; * and sharing therein in a 
godly manner, * thou wast shown to be ** a partaker of sweetness.  
And 3 Stichera of Saint George, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
As a beauteous vessel of dispassion * containing the radiance of life, * O most 
blessed father George, * by abstinence thou didst enslave the passions to thy mind; * 
and thereby become a destroyer of the demons ** and a healer of sufferings, O right 
wondrous one.  
Let George now be praised, * who was the pure phial of the divine Spirit, * the 
well-spring of miracles, * the pillar of monastics, * the meek emulator of the meek 
Christ, ** the earthly angel and heavenly man.  
Steering the ship of thy soul toward the calm harbor, * thou didst escape the 
turmoil of life * as if from the waves of the sea, * and soaring aloft to God, away 
earthly life, * thou wast revealed to be like an angel ** while yet in the flesh.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
In that thou art the help of us who are helpless, * the hope of all the hopeless, * 
and a release from cruel circumstances, * O Theotokos, be thou my helper, O most 
pure one, * delivering me from sins and tribulations, ** in that thou art merciful. 
Stavrotheotokion: Standing at the foot of the Cross of thy Son and God, * and 
looking upon His long-suffering, O pure Mother, * weeping, thou didst say: “Woe is 
me, O my sweetest Child! * How is it that Thou sufferest these things unjustly, * O 
Word of God, ** that Thou mayest save mankind?”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Two canons for the saints, each with 4 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the venerable Joseph, in Tone II: 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
With hymnody let us honor Joseph the hymnographer, chanting his honeyed 
hymns, for he hath passed over from hymns to everlasting hymnody.  
As the preaching of the prophets and the apostles illumined the whole earth, so 
doth the chanting of thy mouth elevate the world up to the glory of the God of all.  
Having offered thyself to Christ from childhood, O Joseph, thou didst live in 
fasting; wherefore, He enriched thee with divine gifts, with hope, love and pure faith.  
Theotokion: Of old, the divine words of the prophets proclaimed thee to be the 
portal of God and the holy mountain, O Virgin Theotokos, the adornment of godly 
strugglers.  
Canon of the venerable George, the acrostic whereof is: “Earnestly do I hymn thy 
pangs, O father”, in the same tone.  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Illumined with the thrice-radiant effulgence originating from God, O venerable 
father, thou didst forsake the world and the darkness of the passions, and adorn 
thyself with a most splendid life.  
Guided by divine providence, O George, thou didst tread the path which leadeth 
to the heavens, acquiring the only most compassionate Benefactor as thy helper.  
Clearly directed by God and sanctified by the grace of adoptive son-ship, O 
blessed father, thou didst perfect thy life in holiness and righteousness.  
Theotokion: Enriched by thy confirmation and aid, O most pure one, and 
confessing thee to be the Theotokos, we are saved from the threefold waves of life, O 
all-immaculate Virgin.  
ODE III  
Canon of the venerable Joseph  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
With love of purity thou didst entreat God to provide thee with helpers; and 
having received numberless fathers, thou didst likewise receive thy hope, O father.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Showing forth a knowledge of true love, like Job thou didst open to all, like a door, 
the house, activity and wisdom given thee by God.  
Seized by barbarian hands as was the valiant Joseph in Egypt of old, O most 
noetically rich father, with faith and purity thou didst preserve thy gift.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou art known to be a beautiful garden of paradise, having 
borne the Lord Jesus Christ within thee like a blossoming tree; wherefore, we call 
thee blessed.  
Canon of the venerable George  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Rejoicing, O all-blessed one, without straying thou didst tread the path of ever-
abiding timeless life, making thine abode in the everlasting mansions.  
Thy life was shown to be radiant and thy discourse seasoned in the Spirit with 
divine salt, O George, thou divine garden of the husbandry of God.  
By baptism thou wast deemed worthy to become a son of God, O all-blessed one, 
and hast inherited thy father’s treasure through purity of life.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Birthgiver of God, be thou the confirmation, refuge and 
protection of those who have recourse to thee with faith and profess thee to be the 
Mother of God.  
Sessional Hymn of Saint Joseph, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
Thou didst show thyself to be meek, quiet and humble-minded, trembling at and 
fulfilling the divine words of thy Master, Who looked upon thee, O father, and 
granted thee to dwell in the mansions on high.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of venerable George, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
Thou didst desire Christ, the most comely One, and didst hate the carnal passions, 
O George, living angelically upon the earth. Wherefore, we celebrate thy holy repose 
and venerate the shrine of thy relics, O father, from whence thou pourest forth 
healings upon us who honor thee with love.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
As an uncultivated vine, O Virgin, * thou didst sprout forth the most comely 
Cluster of grapes * Which poureth forth upon us the wine of salvation * making glad 
the souls and bodies of all. * Wherefore, ever blessing thee as the cause of good 
things, * with the angel we cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!  
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure unwedded Mother, O Christ, * upon seeing Thee 
hanging dead upon the Cross, * said, weeping maternally: * “How hath the iniquitous 
and thankless council of the Jews * repaid Thy many and great wonders, O my Son, * 
Thou Who filled them with Thy gifts? ** I hymn Thy divine condescension!”  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE IV  
Canon of the venerable Joseph  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
O venerable father, Christ hath shown thee to be the reasonable discernment and 
moderate rule of monks.  
Thou didst show thy life to be a bridge of humility, O divinely wise one, leading to 
the true life.  
The Master blessed thee, O father, having anticipated that when distributing the 
grain of the word, thou wouldst do so by measure.  
Theotokion: Borne within the womb of the pure Virgin, Thou didst shine forth 
light upon those in the night and darkness of transgression, O Lord.  
Canon of the venerable George  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
Fledged with the beauties of virtue and splendid moral qualities, O father George, 
thou didst take wing unto God.  
Thou didst flee the tumult of fleeting things, O father George, removing thyself to 
serenity by thy God-loving life.  
Torrents of iniquity were unable to disturb thy soul, for torrents of sweetness gave 
thee drink.  
Ever heeding the precepts of God, O most wise father George, thou didst reject 
inconstant thoughts.  
Theotokion: Hymning the One Who became incarnate in thy womb, we glorify 
thee as the Mother of God.  
ODE V  
Canon of the venerable Joseph  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
With faith didst thou hymn the saints who are on the earth, O venerable one; and 
thou dost now rejoice, listening to hymnody with them, unceasingly glorifying the 
Lord.  
Leading all to repentance and confession, O wise one, thou didst describe for 
thyself their every cause, offering supplications to God, that thou mayest receive 
forgiveness.  
Passing thy whole life in holy activities, thou wast like a true merchant, acquiring 
words and deeds for thyself like precious stones.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: Deliver us from temptations and the tempest of evil thoughts, O pure 
Virgin, from all wrath, every sin, from starvation and destruction, and from 
everlasting torment.  
Canon of the venerable George  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Thou hast received blessedness and immortal life, O wise and all-blessed father, 
making divine ascents, strengthened by hope, love and faith.  
Adorned with goodly humility, O venerable and divinely wise one, thou didst 
manifestly mount to the summit of the virtues, becoming the granary of God’s 
husbandry.  
Through abstinence didst thou with difficulty achieve the wasting away of thy 
body, O father, acquiring a pure heart, and hast thereby been deemed worthy to 
behold Him Who is invisible to all.  
Theotokion: The mystery of thy divine birthgiving, which passeth understanding, 
is inaccessible and impenetrable to all, O Lady; for thou hast truly given birth for us 
to God Who Is.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the venerable Joseph  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
The Church of Christ, resplendent with the varied multitude of thy hymns as with 
stars of the firmament, driveth away soul-destroying slumber.  
The entreaty of thy words hath been like a sponge which wipeth away all grief for 
those afflicted in soul and body, O venerable one.  
O venerable one, thou hast liberally bestowed twofold healing upon those who 
hunger for the word of salvation and are inflicted with bodily afflictions.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, lead me to the path of repentance who am 
squandering my life along the way and often fall in to trackless ways through my sins.  
Canon of the venerable George  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Thou wast shown to be a zealous expeller of wicked spirits, O most glorious father 
George, manifestly strengthened by the cooperation of the Holy Spirit.  
Adorned with the gift of dispassion, thou hast clad thyself most splendidly in the 
robe of chastity, O George, dispelling the tumult of the passions.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou didst pass by the flaming sword, O wise George, and hast been deemed 
worthy of the sweetness of paradise, armed with the invincible sword of the Cross.  
Theotokion: Upon thee have I set my hope of salvation, O Ever-virgin Mother; 
and thee do I set as the steadfast and unshakable intercessor of my life.  
Kontakion of the venerable fathers, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Thou art an inexhaustible well-spring of repentance * and an imparter of endless 
consolation and compunction, * O Joseph. Grant us tears of divine repentance here, 
* which shedding we may obtain consolation from God, ** asking thine aid, O holy 
one.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the venerable Joseph  
Irmos: Of old the youths revealed themselves to be rhetors * with a love for 
supreme wisdom, * for from the depths of their God-pleasing souls, * they 
theologized with their lips as they sang: * O supremely divine God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Even under the sleep of death thou hast striven not to have the eyes of thy soul 
shut; for thou dost chant hymns with those who sing: O supremely divine God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst receive the crown of martyrdom, having fervently blessed the choirs of 
the countless martyrs, O father, and dost chant with them unceasingly: O supremely 
divine God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
For the healing of great sins, O most wise father, thou hast appointed confession 
for those who chant thy hymns: O supremely divine God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
Theotokion: As thou art the portal of Light, O Virgin Theotokos, with the pure 
effulgence of thy light, O Virgin Theotokos, guide my soul, which hath been 
grievously darkened by evil transgressions, that I may hymn thee.  
Canon of the venerable George  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Strengthening thy soul by the power of Christ, O father George, with His might 
thou didst drive from thyself the hordes of those who hated thee, frightening them 
with the Cross wherewith thou wast protected; and chanting: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God of our fathers!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Blessed, and exceedingly blessed art Thou O George, and good it is now for thee 
who receivest the reward of thy pangs and struggles, and chanting to the Lord with 
the angels: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Thou wast a splendid habitation of Christ, O father George, being a throne of 
sense and wisdom, full of holiness, shining with faith and grace, and crying out: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be a candle-stand of the Light, a radiant 
cloud and a place of sanctity, O thou who knewest not wedlock, for thou didst 
ineffably receive the Word, the Holy of holies; and hymning Him we cry out to thee: 
Blessed art thou who gavest birth to God in the flesh!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the venerable Joseph  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Knowing this present life to be truly a passing shadow, O wise one, thou didst 
strive to obtain that which is incorruptible; wherefore, thou didst found multitude of 
honored monasteries for the salvation of men’s souls.  
Possessing the uprightness of the meek and the spirit of one of the lowly, thou 
didst manifest courage not only to render thyself steadfast, O father, but that all who 
beheld thee might serve the Creator.  
Thine innocence and the outpouring of thy love were a model of Christ, the Lover 
of mankind, O thrice-blessed one; and to Him didst thou unceasingly chant: Let us 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O the awesome mystery! O dread report! How the Virgin, by an 
ineffable union, hath given birth to the Word Who made Himself like us, yet 
remaineth forever pure as she was before giving birth!  
Canon of the venerable George  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Thou didst pass over to immutable life, to never-fading sweetness, to everlasting 
glory and unwaning light, O father; for thou wast shown to be the work of God, 
Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
Thou wast a servant of Christ, as a faithful minister and performer of His 
mysteries, a sure guide, O most wise George, healing passions of soul and body.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou didst bring fruit full of asceticism to the store-house of Christ, O father; and 
with the wine-press of heaven, O all-blessed one! thou didst crush it like ripe grapes, 
and pourest forth the wine of compunction upon us on the day of thy 
commemoration.  
Theotokion: O pure Birthgiver of God, the Fruit of thy womb hath been for me 
the cause of life incorruptible and everlasting sweetness. Wherefore, in gladness I cry 
out to thee the cry of the Archangel: Rejoice, O Virgin!  
ODE IX 
 Canon of the venerable Joseph 
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Inscribing images of the virtues upon thy pure soul as upon a tablet, thou didst 
actively offer them to all the saints, bringing twofold hymnody to each of the virtues, 
offering right-acceptable praise by thy works.  
The choirs of angels, the assembly of the apostles, the Theotokos and the Baptist, 
the company of prophets, the ranks of priests, the armies of martyrs and fasters, O 
Joseph, now crown thee with reciprocal praise.  
Be thou ever mindful of thy reason-endowed flock, and as thou didst make 
intercession when alive, O wise father, so now grant us life incorruptible, doing away 
with sufferings of body and soul by thy supplications to Christ.  
Theotokion: Ceaselessly entreat thy Son and God, the Lover of mankind, on our 
behalf, O Virgin; for we acquired thee as our hope, and we who glorify thee with faith 
are delivered by thine aid from tribulations and sufferings, from transgressions and 
pain.  
Canon of the venerable George  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Strengthened and firmly protected by faith and the power of Christ, O all-blessed 
one, thou didst destroy the snares of the demons and, eluding all their wiles and their 
pursuit, standest, rejoicing, before the Master of all.  
Offering all thy desire to God, O blessed father, and delighting in divine beauty 
which all nature desireth, thou didst adorn thyself with noetic vision, activity and 
splendor of life; wherefore, we call thee blessed.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Cease not earnestly to entreat Christ on behalf of us who celebrate thy memory 
with faith, O all-blessed father, that we may be saved from perils and threefold 
billows, from tempest, tribulations and sufferings, and that He may grant peace unto 
the world.  
Theotokion: O only all-hymned one, thou hast given birth to the incarnate Word, 
Who before was incorporeal and Who is God of God, for the restoration and 
salvation of all mortals. Wherefore, all of us, the faithful, magnify thee with hymns.  
 
 
 
 
 
