--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 11th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR ANTIPAS, BISHOP OF 
PERGAMUM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
O Antipas, thou wast a sacred martyr, * a right acceptable hierarch, * a true 
shepherd, * a steadfast pillar, * a foundation of piety, * a bulwark of the Church, the 
adornment of hierarchs, * a well-spring of miracles; * wherefore, we piously bless thee 
with hymns ** and celebrate thy divine festival today.  
As an excellent helmsman, O glorious one, * thou didst steer the ship of the 
Church * with the rudder of thy words, * sailing over the waves of falsehood * 
without being drowned by the most vile machinations of the alien; * and having 
suffered mightily * and vanquished the enemy, * thou didst pass over to Christ, ** 
Whose sufferings thou didst emulate.  
Thy relics ever pour forth myrrh, * O divinely inspired hierarch, * and thou wast 
truly the sweet fragrance of Christ, * setting at naught the foul stench of falsehood * 
by thy patient opposition, * as an athlete, O martyr. * Wherefore, we pray: * Having 
acquired boldness before the Lord, ** be thou mindful of those who remember thee 
with faith.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Rain down upon me * the depths of thy mercy, O Sovereign Lady, * and as thou 
art merciful, O Maiden, * give drink to my heart, * which is consumed by the burning 
heat of the passions, * that it unceasingly put forth drops of compunction, * I pray, O 
pure one, * and thereby I may be deemed worthy of the consolation ** which those 
who weep sincerely receive.  
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of mankind, 
crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What is this, O my 
Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou 
hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** I 
marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  
Troparion of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Antipas, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Or this Troparion, in Tone IV:  
Thou didst demolish the false idols, O Antipas, * and trampling underfoot the 
power of the devil, * thou didst boldly confess Christ in the face of those who fought 
against God. * Wherefore, dwelling in the highest with the ranks of the angels, * 
sending up glorification to the Master of all, * thou dost offer supplication of 
thanksgiving on our behalf, * granting us the grace of healing: * wherefore, we honor 
thee. O hieromartyr Antipas, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor Antipas, radiant 
among the martyrs”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Illumined by the radiance of the grace of the threefold Sun, O martyr Antipas, do 
thou illumine those who celebrate thy radiant feastday, delivering us from the 
darkness of the passions.  
The Word of God showed thee to be a true witness of His sufferings, O all-wise 
one, who hast destroyed impiety and vanquished all the wickedness of the demons.  
Having mortified the wisdom of thy flesh with much asceticism, thou wast arrayed 
in the sacred vesture of the divine priesthood; and didst offer the un-bloody sacrifice 
of Him Who became mortal for thy sake.  
Theotokion: With the radiance of thy light illumine my heart, which is mired in the 
night of passions and temptations, O all-immaculate Maiden, who ineffably shone 
forth the Sun of righteousness upon all.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Thou didst pour forth rivers of doctrine, giving drink to the faithful, and drying up 
the turbulent waters of polytheism.  
Thou didst cut down the might of the persecutors by the might of Christ, O 
blessed one, and suffering patiently thou hast received the crown of martyrdom.  
Thou didst enlighten those who worshiped demons to worship the true God Who, 
in the richness of His compassion, bore mortal flesh, O venerable one.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth to the Redeemer Who hath delivered us all 
from the captivity of the enemy, O pure one. Wherefore, we piously glorify thee.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Enkindled with the divine embers of the love of God, O martyr Antipas, thou 
didst quench the flame of ungodliness; and, thrust into a heated cauldron, thou didst 
depart into never-waning Light. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that He grant 
us forgiveness of sins.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence when He took flesh in thy 
womb, the one Lord remained God though He had become a man; and even after thy 
birthgiving He preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
The opposition of the most iniquitous ones did not shake the pillar of thy heart, O 
martyred passion-bearer; wherefore, aflame with zeal for the Faith, thou didst shown 
thyself to be mightier than fire.  
Awakening those held fast by the slumber of impiety, O all-famed one, by the 
teachings of the Holy Spirit thou didst raise them up to the understanding of true 
knowledge.  
Thou didst bring low the loftiness of the demons, yearning for God with 
exaltation, O Antipas, deified by divine ascents and known to be a God-seer.  
Theotokion: Thou wast preserved after giving birth as thou wast before 
birthgiving, O incorrupt Virgin Mother; for thou hast given birth to the Creator of all, 
Who through thee voluntarily took upon Himself a human body.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Thou didst ascend the mountain of the virtues, O blessed one, and noetically enter 
into the uttermost darkness, and there converse with God.  
With the nets of thy words, O holy hierarch, thou didst draw forth from the abyss 
of ungodliness lost souls, and saved them by grace.  
Thou gavest thy body over as food for the fire, O holy hierarch, richly receiving 
divine dew from God.  
Theotokion: The Lord, Who is supremely divine in godly form, having assumed 
my form, made His abode within thy womb, O all-immaculate one.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Having crucified thy members by asceticism and struggled in fasting, O blessed 
Antipas, thou wast crowned with the struggles of martyrdom, which thou didst 
undergo with firmness of mind.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thou didst stand before the tribunal, preaching the incarnation of Him Who 
abased Himself for thy sake, Who stood before the tribunal of Pilate and hath slain 
the enemy by the Cross, O passion-bearer.  
The Church, wherein thy patient body lieth, O blessed martyr, is a source of 
healing for the sick, emitting the divine effulgence of the gifts of the Spirit.  
Theotokion: Holy is Jesus, O Virgin Maiden, Who made His abode within thy 
womb, and Who resteth in the saints and glorifieth those who glorify Him with true 
faith.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Thou didst occupy the throne of the apostles * and wast an adornment of holy 
hierarchs, * O blessed and sacred Antipas, * having been glorified in martyrdom * 
thou hast shone forth like the sun, illumining all, * destroying the deep night of 
ungodliness. ** Wherefore, we honor thee as a godly hieromartyr and giver of 
healings.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Emulating the three young children, O wise Antipas, thou didst stand in the midst 
of a cruelly heated brass vessel as they did in the midst of a furnace, crying aloud: 
Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
That thou mightest be shown to be a partaker of the Light, enlightened by God 
thou didst pass through the darkness of the evil demons, crying aloud: Blessed art 
Thou, O God my Lord!  
Through the activity of the Spirit, O martyr Antipas, thou dost assuage the divers 
sufferings of men, emulating the sufferings of Christ, and crying aloud: Blessed art 
Thou, O God my Lord!  
Theotokion: The Word, Who with the Father is beginningless, was truly incarnate 
of thy virginal blood, O Maiden, setting aright our broken state. Blessed art thou 
among women, O most immaculate Sovereign Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Now that thou beholdest the ultimate of good things, not in reflections or 
indistinct images, but face to face, transcending all shadows, thou dost cry out 
joyously to Him Who hath glorified thee: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
O most wise Antipas, the iniquitous consumed thee who tended well the sheep of 
God, with fire as a lamb of the flock of Christ the Chief Shepherd; and thou didst 
chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thou didst set the feet of thy heart firmly upon the rock of the divine 
commandments, and the winds of cruel torments and the tempests of blandishments 
could not shake thee, O most wise Antipas, who chanted: Bless the Lord, all ye works 
of the Lord!  
Theotokion: As the Mother of the Creator of all, as the divine temple of the 
Almighty, as the unploughed ground which produced the uncultivated Grain, O 
Virgin Mother, preserve the faithful who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
As a hierarch thou didst finish the sacred race, most sacredly reaching the end of 
thy most sacred life, O holy hierarch, and, rejoicing, thou didst run to Him Who was 
beloved of thee, O most sacred martyr Antipas.  
Being comely in aspects of the virtues, O most sacred one, thou wast sanctified by 
the glory of martyrdom, and didst pass over to the comely Lord, O God-pleaser, now 
deified by communion with Him.  
Aflame with love for the Lord, O martyr Antipas, thou didst eagerly enter the 
heated vessel, and being wholly consumed, O father, thou didst offer thyself to God 
as a pleasing sacrifice.  
The sacred shrine of thy sacred relics, O blessed one, poureth forth the myrrh of 
healings, dispelling the fetid passions and manifestly perfuming those who glorify thy 
memory.  
Theotokion: Bearing in thine arms Christ Who beareth all things in His hand, O 
pure one, entreat Him as God and Master, that He take pity upon us who ever 
confess thee to be the pure Theotokos, O immaculate Lady.  
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Antipas, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Or this Troparion, in Tone IV:  
Thou didst demolish the false idols, O Antipas, * and trampling underfoot the 
power of the devil, * thou didst boldly confess Christ in the face of those who fought 
against God. * Wherefore, dwelling in the highest with the ranks of the angels, * 
sending up glorification to the Master of all, * thou dost offer supplication of 
thanksgiving on our behalf, * granting us the grace of healing: * wherefore, we honor 
thee. O hieromartyr Antipas, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
Thou didst occupy the throne of the apostles * and wast an adornment of holy 
hierarchs, * O blessed and sacred Antipas, * having been glorified in martyrdom * 
thou hast shone forth like the sun, illumining all, * destroying the deep night of 
ungodliness. ** Wherefore, we honor thee as a godly hieromartyr and giver of 
healings.  
 
