--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 13th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL,  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR ARTEMON  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Having dwelt on earth, * thou hast united thyself to the bodiless ones, * and with 
them dost unceasingly minister to the Trinity, * O divinely blessed Artemon; * 
wherefore, ever comporting thyself as a heavenly man, ** thou teachest mortals the 
divine wonders of heaven.  
Illumined with divine radiance, * thou didst lay waste to thy body with many 
torments, * passing over to the immaterial radiance * wherewith, by thine entreaties, * 
thou hast dispelled the dark night of the passions, ** enlightening our souls.  
O hieromartyr, cease thou never to pray * for those who celebrate thy memory 
with faith * and hymn the many struggles of thy martyrdom, * that we may be 
preserved from misfortunes and tribulations * and thereby delivered from future 
corruption, ** O martyr Artemon, preacher of God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
Having stumbled through my corrupt character, I lie prostrate, * yet do I hasten to 
thy tranquility, O Virgin. * Deliver me from the adverse tempest * and multifarious 
temptations, * that I may unceasingly hymn thy grace, ** O Ever-virgin Mother and 
Theotokos.  
Stavrotheotokion: Standing at the foot of the Cross of thy Son and God, * and 
looking upon His long-suffering, O pure Mother, * weeping, thou didst say: * “Woe 
is me, O my sweetest Child! * How is it that Thou sufferest these things unjustly, O 
Word of God, ** that Thou mayest save mankind?”  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, the acrostic of which is the alphabet, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Opening His treasury, the Bestower of understanding giveth the grace of the 
eloquence in abundance unto those who with faith praise His athlete Artemon.  
Wounded with the arrow of the all-sweet love of Christ from thy youth, O wise 
Artemon, the passionate attachments of the body did not cut thee off from His love.  
Earnestly delving into the depths of the divine Scriptures, O wise Artemon, thou 
didst draw forth a wealth of lofty understanding, with which thou hast enriched all 
the faithful.  
Theotokion: We mortals have truly been borne up from the earth to the heights of 
heaven by thy birthgiving, O pure Theotokos, and have been numbered in the choirs 
of the angels.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Invested with the power of the Spirit, thou didst vanquish the hordes arrayed 
against the Creator, O most valiant Artemon.  
Thou didst extinguish the furnace of ungodliness, O venerable one, with the 
gushing of thy martyric blood, O most glorious Artemon.  
Burning with divine love and aflame with the love of God, O venerable one, thou 
didst willingly suffer.  
Theotokion: Thy birthgiving hath freed us from the cause of our sins, O pure one, 
and binding all the faithful with righteousness.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Emulating the confession of the sanctified and reaching the end of thy life through 
martyrdom, thou didst hasten to the heavens, O wise Artemon, receiving from God 
an imperishable crown. Wherefore, we celebrate thy holy memory, crying: Be thou 
mindful of us, O hieromartyr, when thou standest before Christ!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
exceedingly glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 Stavrotheotokion: When Thy most pure Mother beheld Thee uplifted upon the 
Cross, O Word of God she exclaimed, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and 
strange wonder, O my Son? How is it that Thou, the Life of all, dost taste of death 
desiring to bring life to the dead, in that Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Thy sacrifice, O glorious one, hath been offered up on the altar of heaven, and 
hath now been well pleasing to the Master of all.  
Elevating thy mind to higher vision, O venerable Artemon, thou didst learn the 
mysteries of Christ, for which thou didst suffer.  
Planted firmly upon the immovable rock of the love of the Creator, O venerable 
one thou remained unshaken in mind by the threefold waves of the enemy.  
Theotokion: As thou hast an inexhaustible treasury of gifts, O Sovereign Lady, we 
all receive abundant gifts of miracles from thee.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
Rebuking the waves of ungodliness, O wise one, thou didst save the right obedient 
people guiding them to the haven of the Faith.  
As a radiant beacon shining forth the light of the virtues of the knowledge of God 
in the night of delusion, O venerable one thou didst guide men to the Light.  
As an initiate of the ineffable mysteries of Christ, O venerable Artemon, by thy 
suffering thou didst offer thyself to Him as an acceptable sacrifice.  
Theotokion: Cleansing me of the defilement and mire of the passions, O Bride of 
God, by thy supplications present my soul, pure, to God.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Suffering lawfully for Christ, O Artemon thou didst repudiate the wicked edict of 
the iniquitous enemies; wherefore, thou wast shown to be a lawful martyr, crowned 
with divine victories.  
Drying up the turbulent torrents of ungodliness with the fire of thy words, thou 
didst pour forth radiant rivers of faith and divine knowledge upon the faithful, O 
venerable Artemon.  
Having armed thy mind against the adverse serpent, O glorious Artemon, with 
valiant warfare thou didst cast him down, showing him to be dead, wherefore thou 
didst receive from the Lord a crown of victory.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: We mortals have become immortal through the divine grace of thy 
birthgiving, O pure Theotokos, and we have been delivered from our first corruption 
and adorned with the vesture of incorruption.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Enkindled by the fire of divine love for the Master, O glorious martyr, thou didst 
willingly hasten eagerly to the struggle of labors, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Like the apostles invested with the power of the Comforter, O martyr, 
vanquishing the hordes of delusion with valiant patience, thou didst chant: O God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having adorned thy life with chastity and thy body with purity, O Artemon, in 
purity thou didst serve Christ as priest, singing and chanting hymns of thanksgiving: 
O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: So that He might draw all toward the glory of heaven, the Creator of 
all, was well pleased to be born of thee, O Birthgiver of God, and to dwell with us in 
the flesh, in that He is God our Benefactor, and the Lover of mankind.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
As thou didst prefer the King of heaven to all earthly things, O Artemon, as is 
meet thou rejoicest with Him throughout all ages.  
The assaults of the torturers in nowise stripped thee of the love of the Creator, O 
passion-bearer, for thou wast borne up unto Him in spirit.  
Illumined with the splendors of divine Light, O passion-bearer, thou didst enter in 
unto the ever-shining altar of His mysteries, as an initiate of ineffable mysteries.  
Theotokion: He Who received human nature from thee in a manner past 
understanding and all telling, O Theotokos, hath made the children of mankind His 
own.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Having passed through the winter of ungodliness, thou didst attain unto the 
springtime of piety, and wast deemed worthy of the light of the Sun of glory.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Foreseeing thyself, with spiritual and noetic eyes, standing at the right hand of 
God, O Artemon, thou wast not shaken by the waves of tortures.  
Having been deemed worthy of ineffable divine glory with the passion-bearers and 
disciples of Christ, O spiritual athlete, entreat Him on our behalf, in that He is 
compassionate.  
Theotokion: Visit our poverty from on high with thy compassion, O Theotokos, 
and deliver us from corruption and misfortunes.  
 
