--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 14th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS ANTHONY, JOHN AND 
EUSTATHIUS, SLAIN FOR THE FAITH IN VILNIUS OF LITHUANIA  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
With sacred hymns we praise you, * O wise and godly athletes * Anthony, John 
and Eustathius, * ye proponents of the Faith, * champions of piety, * greatly radiant 
stars of the Church * who by grace * caused the darkness of falsehood to fade ** 
shining forth the light of the true knowledge of God.  
O divine martyrs, ye were heavens * declaring the mysteries of God * and 
proclaiming His glory to all; * for report of your struggles and faith * hath gone forth 
* unto all the ends of the Orthodox Church. * Wherefore, the whole Church 
honoreth the sufferings * which ye valiantly endured for Christ, ** O ever glorious 
ones.  
When thy shins and bones were broken, * thy thighs unnaturally shattered, * and 
thy nose and ears severed, * thou didst rejoice, * O ever-memorable and most blessed 
Eustathius, * cutting off the serpent’s head of idolatry. * Wherefore, Christ God, * 
the Judge of the contest, ** hath given thee the crown of victory.  
Instructed by Nestor the priest, O all-praised ones * who held the Orthodox belief 
in the most Holy Trinity, * ye were enlightened by the Holy Spirit, * and, arraying 
yourselves * against the prince of this world, * ye manfully overcame his wiles, * 
triumphing over him with God’s help. * Wherefore, celebrating your most radiant 
memory today, ** with praises we honor your suffering, as is meet.  
Giving yourselves over to wounds and torments, * O holy ones, * ye remained 
unshakable in your wisdom, * and like lamps lighted by the fervor of the Spirit, * ye 
illumine the hearts of the faithful with grace * and dispel every ailment and every 
affliction. * Wherefore, every race and generation * celebrates your holy memory, ** 
glorifying the Lord with hymns.  
With the radiance of your wonders, O martyrs, * ye have illumined all creation, * 
driving the gloom of sufferings and tribulations, * the enmity of the demons and 
illnesses * away from those who have recourse to you with tears * and with faith 
entreat your aid, * O valiant athletes of the Savior, Anthony, John and Eustathius. * 
Wherefore, with faith ** we celebrate your holy luminous and solemn feast.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Today the Church, arrayed in the blood and suffering of the new passion-bearers, 
as in a new vesture of purple and fine linen, doth splendidly celebrate; for having 
been nurtured in piety, they have brought to Thee, O Christ, an unblemished 

--- PAGE 2 ---
sacrifice, acceptable and right pleasing. Wherefore, O God our Savior Who hast 
shown them forth as vanquishers of the iniquitous, and hast crowned and glorified 
them, send down great mercy upon us by their supplications.  
Now ..., ever ..., Dogmaticon, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Persons, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou beseech, 
O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: all the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be 
gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things 
from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let 
them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith 
the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, 
and understand that I am He; before Me there was no other God, and after Me there 
shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have 
saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My 
witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that 
can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the 
Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the grey hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his 
soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds, that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Like stars of great radiance, * O all-praised athletes, * ye illumine the ends of the 
world * with divine splendors, * doing away with demonic darkness, * corrupting 
passions and misfortunes. * Wherefore, assembling today, * O glorious ones, ** we 
praise your splendid, radiant and holy solemnity.  
Verse: The righteous cried, * and the Lord heard them.  
Let the wondrous, * divine and most wise * passion-bearers be honored * with 
sacred hymns; * for, proclaiming with sanctity * the uncreated Trinity before the 
enemy, * they quenched the delusion of polytheism * with the outpourings of their 
blood ** and have received unfading glory.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the. Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
O blessed martyrs of great renown, * ye wisely put to shame * the iniquitous king * 
who unlawfully commanded you * to worship and render honor * to inanimate and 
soulless gods, * and, having suffered patiently and lawfully, * ye fashioned crowns of 
victory, ** praying for the world.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Come, ye who love the martyrs, and, spiritually celebrating now the most sacred 
memory of the divinely crowned company of martyrs, the unblemished whole-burnt 
offering sacrificed readily for Christ, the holy and chosen warriors, let us cry out to 
them: Crush ye the savagery of the ungodly Moslems, and from every evil 
circumstance deliver the pious people by your supplications.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
We have come to know God * Who was incarnate of thee, * O Virgin Theotokos. 
** Him do thou entreat for the salvation of our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Troparion of the martyrs, in Tone IV:  
O valiant and honored athletes * who spurned earthly honors and glory, * mightily 
and manfully ye endured torments for the sake of the Faith, * giving yourselves over 
to death for the Master, the Life of all. * Wherefore, with a pillar of cloud from 
heaven * Christ most gloriously illumined you. ** Standing before Him with the 
angels, pray ye that our souls be saved.  
Or this Troparion, in the same tone: 
Having caused branches of the Orthodox Faith * to spring forth from a barren 
root, O most blessed ones, * ye were shown to be namesakes of the protomartyr; * 
for ye were not daunted by the wrath of the evil and impious prince, * who 
commanded you to renounce Christ. * Wherefore, having received crowns of victory, 
* and standing with the angels before the throne of the Master, * O most blessed 
ones, ** pray for us who in Orthodox manner honor your holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord...,” the Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
O valiant and honored athletes * who spurned earthly honors and glory, * mightily 
and manfully ye endured torments for the sake of the Faith, * giving yourselves over 
to death for the Master, the Life of all. * Wherefore, with a pillar of cloud from 
heaven * Christ most gloriously illumined you. ** Standing before Him with the 
angels, pray ye that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
Like most magnificent stars ye ever enlighten the firmament of the honored 
Church and illumine the faithful, O divine martyrs, warriors of Christ.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Accepting the entreaty of us * who have recourse to thy protection, O Virgin, * 
cease thou never to make supplication to Him * Who is the Lover of mankind, ** 
that He save thy servants.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up upon the Cross ...”: 
Enduring your torment with manly mind, O wondrous athletes, ye passed through 
fire and water, and crossed over to the broad plain of salvation, receiving your 
inheritance, the kingdom of heaven, wherein ye offer up divine entreaties for us, O 
wise and great martyrs.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O Theotokos and Sovereign Lady, we, thy servants, thankfully chanting from our 
hearts and earnestly entreating thy mercies, cry out, saying: O most holy Virgin, go 
thou before us and deliver us from our enemies, visible and invisible, and from every 
threat, for thou art our aid.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify you, O holy martyrs Anthony, 
John and Eustathius, and we reverence your honored sufferings, which ye 
endured for Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Our God is refuge and strength. A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Bound, ye were led forth by the enemy and subjected to long imprisonment, yet 
were ye preserved by your faith and remained unharmed; and, though your bodies 
were cut in pieces by the sword, O holy ones, ye have manifestly been hound together 
by divine desire. Wherefore, ye have shone forth in the world like lamps, illumining 
all with the grace of the Spirit. O blessed passion-bearers, entreat Christ God, that He 
grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with love celebrate your holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * gavest birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for the 
fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and 
He delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §36 (10:16-22)  
The Lord said to His disciples: Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of 
wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: 
for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a 
testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end 
shall be saved.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us rejoice in the Lord on the day 
of the commemoration of the passion-bearers! Come, let us chant, mystically praising 
the athletes of Christ who committed the delusion of idolatry to perdition and 
manifestly proclaimed Christ in the midst of the tribunal. Wherefore, O most blessed 
ones who suffered greatly, cease not to pray for our souls.  
Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and that of the holy martyrs, with 8 Troparia, in Tone IV:  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Made comely by the beauty of martyrdom, and filled with supra-natural divine 
light, O glorious martyrs, therewith ye illumine those who honor your memory.  
The divine martyrs rejected the words of the tyrant and considered his wrath, 
anger and pride as naught; and in gladness they endured a right praiseworthy death.  
Made steadfast by the strength of the Almighty, O holy ones, and having your 
loins firmly girded about with the truth, ye deftly destroyed the power and wiles of 
the wicked one.  
Theotokion: Fortified by your power, O almighty Jesus, Who of old clothed 
Thyself in our weakness through the Virgin, the divine martyrs showed forth supra-
natural powers.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Having embraced love for the Lord, O true martyrs, and rejoicing in Him, ye truly 
surrendered your souls into His hands.  
He Who accepted your suffering and endurance hath shown you to be healers of 
bodies and souls, O most wise ones.  
Having shaken off the ancient deception, O Steadfast martyrs, ye willingly 
embraced new life, living for Christ rather than for man.  
Theotokion: Cause me to share in the Day of never-waning light, O most pure 
Mother of God, delivering me from the coming darkness.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Ye did not render worship to material fire, O divinely eloquent ones, and have 
been delivered from the fire of Gehenna; and, though subjected to fire and torture, O 
saints, ye did not deny the Master of all, but, rejoicing, strove to preserve the Faith 
until death.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Tested in the fire of torture like gold in a crucible, ye were radiantly tried, O ever-
memorable martyrs, and have been shown to be more precious than gold in your 
nature; for, showing forth the most radiant beauty of your souls, ye truly offered 
yourselves to the Master as most precious vessels, not having worshiped fire. 
Wherefore, pray to the Lord for us all, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those 
who honor your memory with love.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Theotokos, accept the prayers of thy servants, and deliver us from every 
tribulation, in that thou gavest birth to Christ, the Savior of our souls.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
Ye showed yourselves to be friends of the Maccabees, valiant in your mighty 
opposition and headlong assault; and, refusing to eat abominable things, ye were 
undaunted by the rage of those wished to compel you.  
Standing with the heavenly hosts before Him Who hath dominion over all, O 
valiant martyrs, deliver from perils and everlasting torment those who honor you.  
Preserving the gift of most precious baptism undefiled, Thy passion-bearers 
rendered it yet more precious, sweetly emulating Thy death.  
The valiant martyrs, emulating Thy death, O Master Christ, were hanged, rejoicing, 
from a tree and surrendered their souls to Thee, chanting: Glory to Thy power!  
Theotokion: As thou didst foretell, O Sovereign Lady, the Master, Who alone is 
mighty in strength, hath wrought great things for thee, for all generations call thee 
blessed, O immaculate one.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Ye considered your prison a bridal chamber, O blessed martyrs, for there, 
rejoicing, ye betrothed yourselves to the comely Bridegroom; and, your souls 
transfixed by Him, ye hastened to Him with unrestrained desire.  
“Beautiful art Thou, O Master and Bridegroom, and with pure souls we hasten 
after Thee,” the three martyrs cried aloud, rejoicing; “As Thou seest, we are bound 
together by Thy love and divine love for Thee.”  
Ye followed after the Master, O holy ones, and, having the holy water of baptism 
propelling and sweetly moving you toward the struggle of martyrdom, ye gladly 
drained the cup of Christ.  
Theotokion: The earth is full of thy glory, O Bride of God, and thou hast radiantly 
drawn all the choirs of the saints to thyself, prevailing upon them to forsake the sweet 
things of this world and to receive thy splendor.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Pitilessly beaten down with staves, the martyr Eustathius nonetheless uttered no 
sigh nor shed any tear; for he was harder than mighty adamant.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Strengthened by the power of God, O blessed martyr Eustathius, thou wast able to 
endure unbearable torments; wherefore, thou hast been counted worthy of divine 
gladness.  
Hordes of evil demons were vanquished by the great quantity of the martyrs’ 
blood, O Bestower of life, and Thy Church hath been fortified thereby, hymning the 
glory of Thy power.  
Theotokion: Resplendent in the beauty of virginity, O Sovereign Lady, thou wast 
the dwelling-place of the King of ages Whom thou didst bear, and Who preserveth 
Thee incorrupt even after thy birthgiving.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Having forsaken the deception of your fathers, O holy ones, * ye cleaved unto 
Christ, * and with ardor of soul ye stood firmly unto death with manly mind. * 
Wherefore, ye have truly taken in hand the trophy of victory, ** unceasingly 
entreating our Master for us all.  
Ikos: Beholding the struggle of the martyrs, we who love the feasts of the Church 
are astonished, as is meet, at their courage; and the choirs of the angels, rejoicing at 
their battle against the invisible foe, have called them blessed. The hordes of the 
demons, vanquished, avert their faces, and the Master of all gloriously adorneth the 
martyrs’ heads with crowns. Wherefore, we cry out to them: O blessed martyrs of 
Christ, pray ye for us all!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, * Who saved the children of 
Abraham in the fire * and slew the Chaldeans, * blessed art Thou!  
O blessed ones, your honored memory hath appeared to us letting fall joy and 
spiritual gladness, delighting our hearts and filling them with abundant joy.  
Thy mind, which was captivated by beauties which transcend the senses, thou 
didst furnish with wings, O blessed Eustathius; thou didst not feel the breaking of thy 
thighs, and, hard as adamant amid thy tortures, thou didst endure the cutting away of 
thy scalp from thy body.  
O wise martyr Eustathius, thou didst consider the beauty of the body, the mature 
flowering of youth, countenance and desire to be as naught; wherefore, thou hast 
now received divine sweetness.  
His nose and ears cut off for Thy sake, O Savior, the martyr Eustathius magnified 
Thy power and hymned the incarnation of Thee Who deemed him worthy of supra-
natural endurance.  
Theotokion: We entreat thee as our salvation, O Theotokos: pray for us to Him 
Who was incarnate of thee.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
O most blessed ones, your precious blood, gushing forth, hath sanctified all 
creation, making you martyrs by the magnitude of its flow; for ye radiantly proclaimed 
God Who died for your sake.  
O divinely eloquent martyrs, mightily aiding us all, ye have shown yourselves to be 
the indestructible foundation of the Church, the mighty bulwark of the faithful, surer 
than any earthly rampart.  
The earth containeth your precious bodies, O God-bearers, but heaven holdeth 
your souls; wherefore, rejoice with the angels, O martyrs, chanting to the Lord the 
thrice-holy hymn: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Before thy birthgiving, O Theotokos, death was fearsome to 
mankind, but in latter times it was held by the saints to be an arena wherein they won 
life everlasting.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
The wondrous Eustathius was harrowed by thy discourse as with a plough, O wise 
Anthony, and the divinely wise John, receiving the seed of thy words like good soil, 
put forth the grain of martyrdom.  
Having won honors by your great struggle, O most wise martyrs, ye received from 
God rewards for your labor and pain. Him do ye entreat in behalf of us who 
commemorate you, O holy ones.  
Standing now before the throne of the King of all and delighting in the good 
things which are to come, O divinely blessed ones, be ye mindful of those who honor 
your sacred memory.  
Theotokion: Full of the living water of gladness, O Sovereign Lady, thou pourest 
forth gifts of grace, causing them to well forth abundantly upon all, for thy sake hath 
every good thing been given to the world.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs, in Tone III: 
Resplendent with the beauties of martyrdom, O martyrs, ye have now truly 
received from God the reward of your labors. Entreat ye the Benefactor on our 
behalf!  
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
O all-hymned Maiden, thou hast given birth to Christ, the Angel of great Counsel, 
the King of glory, Whose Cross the martyrs took up, hastening after Him. With them 
pray unceasingly on our behalf.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Holding the divine power of Christ * as it were an invincible weapon, * O blessed 
ones, * ye cut through all the demonic powers * and the incorporeal warriors of 
darkness, * and laid hold of the trophies of victory; * wherefore, standing before 
Christ, * the Judge of the contest, ** pray ye for us who honor your memory. (Twice)  
Refusing to worship fire, * and being subjected to fire and torments, * O ever 
memorable ones, * ye received heavenly dew, * divine rest and everlasting joy; * and 
having utterly consumed the princes of darkness * by your endurance of pain, * O 
most wise martyrs, ** ye have made the faithful steadfast in true piety.  
Ye put it at the calm harbor, * O wise martyrs, * having been delivered from the 
tumultuous waves * and billows * of great turmoil; * and gathering in everlasting life, 
* the fruit of your pangs, * remember us who honor your memory, ** O blessed 
ones.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
O true and valiant martyrs, neither the violence of the tyrant, nor his false 
blandishments, neither the severing of your members, nor the threat of death was 
able to separate you from the love of God; wherefore, as ye have boldness before 
Christ Who is God over all, by your supplications entreat Him to grant us great 
mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, * accept the supplications of thy servants, ** and deliver us 
from all want and grief.  
Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the appointed ODE of the 
Pentecostarion, and 4 from ODE VI of the martyrs’ canon.  
Pitilessly beaten down with staves, the martyr Eustathius nonetheless uttered no 
sigh nor shed any tear; for he was harder than mighty adamant.  
Strengthened by the power of God, O blessed martyr Eustathius, thou wast able to 
endure unbearable torments; wherefore, thou hast been counted worthy of divine 
gladness.  
Hordes of evil demons were vanquished by the great quantity of the martyrs’ 
blood, O Bestower of life, and Thy Church hath been fortified thereby, hymning the 
glory of Thy power.  
Theotokion: Resplendent in the beauty of virginity, O Sovereign Lady, thou wast 
the dwelling-place of the King of ages Whom thou didst bear, and Who preserveth 
Thee incorrupt even after thy birthgiving.  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
O valiant and honored athletes * who spurned earthly honors and glory, * mightily 
and manfully ye endured torments for the sake of the Faith, * giving yourselves over 
to death for the Master, the Life of all. * Wherefore, with a pillar of cloud from 
heaven * Christ most gloriously illumined you. ** Standing before Him with the 
angels, pray ye that our souls be saved.  
Another Troparion, in the same tone: 
Having caused branches of the Orthodox Faith * to spring forth from a barren 
root, O most blessed ones, * ye were shown to be namesakes of the protomartyr; * 
for ye were not daunted by the wrath of the evil and impious prince, * who 
commanded you to renounce Christ. * Wherefore, having received crowns of victory, 
* and standing with the angels before the throne of the Master, * O most blessed 
ones, ** pray for us who in Orthodox manner honor your holy memory.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone III: 
Having forsaken the deception of your fathers, O holy ones, * ye cleaved unto 
Christ, * and with ardor of soul ye stood firmly unto death with manly mind. * 
Wherefore, ye have truly taken in hand the trophy of victory, ** unceasingly 
entreating our Master for us all.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §233 (6: 10-17)  
Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW §36 (10:16-22)  
The Lord said to His disciples: Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of 
wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: 
for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a 
testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end 
shall be saved.  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
