--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 15th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLES ARISTARCHUS, PUDENS & 
TROPHIMUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
With a discourse of divine understanding * ye utterly delivered the people from 
ignorance, * O most wise apostles, * and led them, saved, unto the Word * Who 
shone forth from the unbegotten Father. * Him do ye entreat, * that He grant unto 
our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
Let us manifestly praise the true preachers of Christ: * Pudens and Aristarchus * 
and the divine Trophimus; * for with the warmth of divine grace * they brought the 
winter of falsehood to an end, * and have now made their abode in the never-waning 
radiance, * receiving the reward of their labors, ** deified by ineffable communion.  
Following Paul, the glorious disciple, * ye endured many tribulations, * O glorious 
ones, * imprisoned in chains * and subjected to pain; * and finally ye suffered 
beheading by the sword. * Entreat Christ, that He grant our souls ** peace and great 
mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
Woe is me! What shall I do? * For I have defiled My mind, soul and body * with 
transgressions! * What shall I do? * How shall I escape the unbearable flame * and the 
unbreakable and everlasting bonds? * Yet, before the end * grant me forgiveness, ** 
O all-immaculate one!  
Stavrotheotokion: Once, when the unblemished Virgin * beheld on the Tree * 
Him to Whom she had given birth from her seedless womb, * unable to endure the 
wounding of her womb, * she said, rending her hair: * “O Thou Who sustainest all 
creation, * how hast Thou been uplifted upon the Cross as one condemned, ** 
desiring to save mankind in every way?”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy apostles, the acrostic whereof is: “I chant a divine hymn to the 
disciples of God”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VI:  
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Standing as servants and ministers of Christ before the throne of God, as noetic 
luminaries, shine forth enlightenment upon us who honor your sacred memory, O 
apostles.  
He Who in His loving-kindness appeared on earth chose you as disciples and 
ministers, who with many others declare His divine will everywhere.  
Assembling the most sacred choir of the seventy sacred disciples of Christ, with 
Paul ye illumined the whole land with teachings of divine light.  
The most sacred and glorious Pudens, the wise Aristarchus and Trophimus, shone 
forth on earth like radiant stars, dispelling the darkness of falsehood.  
Theotokion: That He might join those below to those on high, God took flesh of 
thee in the excess of His loving-kindness, O most pure one, yet remained what He 
was before His incarnation.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
With the glorious Paul ye passed over all the earth like stars with the sun, dispelling 
the darkness of ignorance by the light of sacred preaching.  
With great pain of your flesh the disciples of the Word removed painful sin from 
their midst, winning rest without pain for the faithful in the highest.  
With divine struggles ye truly destroyed all the malice of the enemy, and, casting 
down the temples of the idols, ye made all people temples of God.  
Theotokion: With milk thou dost feed the Nurturer of all Who was born of thy 
most pure womb without corruption, O Virgin, and hath restored all who are broken 
with corruption.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Shining forth upon the world in godliness like the dawn, O apostles, by faith ye 
dispelled the most profound darkness of falsehood and enlightened men’s souls. 
Wherefore, the whole radiant Church hymneth your luminous memory today, 
magnifying Christ.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
The transcendent Trinity lit the sacred Pudens, Trophimus and Aristarchus like a 
triple lamp, illumining the land with divine discourse.  
Ye were shown to be wise companions of Paul, and gladly endured multifarious 
persecutions and tribulations with him for the sake of the life which is to come, O 
glorious ones.  
Suffering, ye hallowed all creation with the torrents of your blood, O apostles, and 
with the power of Christ abolished the vile blood-sacrifices offered to the demons.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, my might, refuge and invincible rampart, as thou 
art mine advocate before God, free me from the eternal flames and Gehenna.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
As preachers of God the glorious ones cast down graven images and the temples 
of the idols, raising up through grace the hearts of all people like tabernacles fallen 
through disobedience.  
As steeds of God roiling the sea of ungodliness, by divine preaching the most 
glorious ones truly brought life to those who before were drowning therein.  
As our saviors, visited by God with your divine visitations, ye have saved those 
drowning in the pain of the madness of idolatry.  
Theotokion: Illumined by the divine Spirit, the sacred Isaiah cried out of old in 
sanctity: Behold, a Virgin shall receive the infinite God, Who will become incarnate in 
His tender compassion!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Let the most wise Trophimus and Aristarchus, and the wondrous Pudens, be 
praised with sacred hymns as disciples of the Word and sacred companions of Paul.  
Truly filled to overflowing with the water of the Spirit, ye have given every soul 
the drink of doctrine, wresting them from the midst of the flame of falsehood by 
divine grace.  
United in the Spirit, ye were in nowise separated bodily; for ye were beheaded 
together with Paul your teacher, and with him are glorified.  
Theotokion: Strange was thy conceiving, and strange, awesome and beyond 
understanding thy birthgiving, O Maiden, who hath reconciled to God those 
estranged from Him of old, restoring our primal beauty.  
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
This honored festival of the apostles hath appeared today, * illumining us and 
dispelling the darkness of sin * from those who cry: * Light hath appeared ** and 
deliverance hath come! 
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
As apostles and divine athletes, ye quenched the furnace of impiety with showers 
of honorable preaching, consuming the tinder of idolatry with the torrents of your 
blood, O wise ones; wherefore, ye are glorified.  
Ye were shown to be disciples of Christ subordinate to the twelve disciples, O 
glorious ones; for, traversing the whole world with Paul, ye endured many 
tribulations, and with him received a sacred end.  
Ye adorned yourselves with your beautiful wounds, O glorious Aristarchus and 
Trophimus, and with the sacred Pudens became more lustrous than any gold, praying 
ever to Christ for us.  
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be blessed by the Holy Spirit, having given flesh 
to the Angel of great Counsel, Who sent His godly disciples into the world like divine 
flashes of lightning, to illumine the faithful, O pure one.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Severing the roots of ungodliness with the scythe of God, ye planted the true Faith 
and perfect understanding in the hearts of the pious, O divinely eloquent ones. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 Ye cleared men’s hearts with divine discourse, sowing therein the seed of 
understanding, O wise apostles, and ye reaped greatly fruitful grain, the multitudes of 
the saved.  
Let Aristarchus, Pudens and Trophimus be honored as the unshakable pillars of 
the Church of Christ, the divine grapes of the vine of God, exuding the sweetness of 
life.  
Theotokion: By thy recent birthgiving, O Virgin, thou hast renewed all of broken 
mankind, restoring the bonds of nature in a manner transcending nature, O joyous 
Mother of the living God.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
The might of the proud one hath been taken away, and his haughty arrogance hath 
fallen; for the saints, wrestling with him in the weakness of their flesh, triumphed and 
destroyed him, and have delivered the faithful from his tyranny.  
Scattering delusion like dust, ye showed yourselves to be true guides for all people, 
and have become fellow citizens with the angels, chanting with them: Holy, Holy, 
Holy are the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit!  
Healing the infirmities and pangs of body and soul, O apostles of the Lord, and 
working wondrous miracles, ye have drawn all who are in ignorance to the 
understanding of the true Light; wherefore, ye are blessed.  
Ye now delight in the immaterial mind which is celebrated in the heavens, O 
apostles, having received your blessed hope. O divine preacher Trophimus, most 
excellent Pudens and glorious Aristarchus, be ye mindful of us!  
Theotokion: O most pure and joyous Maiden, who in a manner beyond 
understanding hast given birth to the unbearable Fire, free me from the flame of 
Gehenna, and set my soul aflame with the love of Him Who came to bring to the 
earth the fire of understanding.  
 
 
 
