--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 19th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER JOHN  
OF THE ANCIENT CAVE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
O venerable and right wondrous father John, wounded by the divine desire of 
Christ God Who for thy sake willingly became a wanderer, and clothed Himself in 
flesh from the Virgin, thou didst reach a strange land, and utterly estrange thyself to 
all the sweet things of the world, O wise and most blessed father, and didst live as a 
stranger, acquiring the virtues: standing whole nights in prayer and the contemplation 
of death, thou didst restrain the passions by thine abstinence, showing thyself to be 
an emulator of those who fasted before thee, and with them thou hast been glorified.  
O venerable and most glorious father John, having been trained in the fold of the 
godly Chariton, thou didst draw forth grace like a sponge and didst pour it forth, 
emulating his divine ways; and having spent thy life in stillness, thou wast deemed 
worthy of honored ordination, becoming a worthy priest, ever offering sacrifice. And 
like an unblemished lamb, purified by divine effulgence and enlightened in mind, thou 
wast borne up in mind to mystic visions, to excellent beatitude.  
O most blessed father John, strengthened by the power of the Trinity, thou didst 
avoid all the harm of heresy, through vision and divine activity didst cleave unto and 
attain the divine glory which is the ultimate of all desires, O wise and blessed one, and 
didst truly and worthily receive it after thy repose, rejoicing, shining and standing 
before God with the angelic choirs. Wherefore, be thou mindful of those who 
celebrate thy memory as is meet, O right wondrous one.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Alas, O wretched soul! * What answer wilt thou have to give to the Judge * at that 
hour when the thrones will be set in judgment * and the Judge descendeth from the 
heavens, * with myriads of angels? * When seated upon the judgment seat * to judge 
His unprofitable servants likened unto me, * what answer shalt thou give then? * 
What wilt thou bring unto Him? * Truly nothing, having defiled thy mind and body. * 
Wherefore, fall down before the Virgin, and cry without ceasing, ** that she grant 
thee abundant forgiveness of sins!  
Stavrotheotokion: When thou didst behold hanging upon the Tree, * the planted 
Cluster of grapes * Whom, like a vine, thou didst bring forth, * with His divine side 
pierced by a spear, * thou didst exclaim crying aloud O most pure one: * “What is 
this, O my Son and God? * How is it that Thou Who dost heal all infirmities and 

--- PAGE 2 ---
sufferings, * hath undergone suffering, * though Thou art dispassionate according to 
Thy divine nature? * How have the thankless people thus rewarded Thee for Thy 
benefactions, O Benefactor?” * By His sufferings pray thou * that I may ever be free 
from sufferings, ** that I may glorify thee.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Strengthened from thy youth with hope in God thou didst hasten to the good 
God, O blessed John, fortifying thyself with the highest ascetic feats of monasticism.  
Full of rich and radiant grace, and living in laudable places, thou didst honorably 
appoint ascents leading to the virtues, O most blessed one.  
Instructed by the might of the Spirit, having hastened to the fold of the God-
bearing Chariton, and abiding therein, thou didst become a sacred minister radiant in 
purity.  
Theotokion: Through thee, O joyous and all-pure one, Christ, the Sun of 
righteousness, hath appeared to us and illumined with light those who before sat in 
the fortresses of darkness.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Having mortified the wisdom of thy flesh with exemplary asceticism, O father 
John, thou didst draw nigh to the life-creating Spirit. (Twice)  
Divine and radiant effulgence manifestly dwelt in splendor within thy heart, O 
blessed father John.  
Theotokion: Thou alone, O Mother of God, wast the mediatress of good things 
transcending nature for those on earth; wherefore, we cry out to thee: Rejoice!  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having wounded thy soul with divine desire, O blessed one, thou didst take thyself 
away, forsaking riches, food and splendor, and didst most honorably live a life of 
non-acquisition in foreign lands; and thou didst wound thy body with the pangs of 
abstinence, and, courageously living in stillness, didst attain the perfection of the 
virtues, O venerable one. Wherefore, we cry out to thee with faith: Entreat Christ 
God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy 
memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * gavest birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for the 

--- PAGE 4 ---
fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: For the sake of love for Thine image, * O compassionate One, * Thou 
didst ascend the cross * and the nations melted away. * For Thou, O Lover of 
mankind, * art my strength and my praise. 
Reared in a land illumined with godly splendor, and enlightened by radiant 
effulgence, O divinely wise father, thou didst live in virtue and abstinence.  
Having forsaken thy homeland, thy kinfolk and friends, O divinely wise and 
blessed one, thou didst cleave unto Christ with great desire, taking up thy cross.  
Having died to all visible things through the Cause of life, O most wise John, and 
having lived in abstinence, thou didst depart unto Him.  
Theotokion: He Who supra-naturally made His abode within thy God-receiving 
womb, O Virgin, by divine power kept thee a virgin even after birthgiving.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Having acquired a pure mind through stillness, O father, thou didst escape the 
snares of the enemy by the power of the Holy Spirit. (Twice)  
Thou didst live in the grace of God, in wisdom and doctrine, O divinely manifest 
and most blessed holy one, becoming a hierarch.  
Theotokion: All generations piously bless thee, O most pure one, for thou didst 
truly give birth to the Blessed One in a manner transcending nature and all telling.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
As a lover of the Wisdom of God, thou wast crowned by Him with a wreath of the 
virtues, O divinely inspired one, becoming in all ways the disciple of the light-bearing 
Chariton. (Twice) 
Thou didst set thy feet upon the rock of Christ, ascending the virtues by thine 
activity, O divinely wise father, making ascents in thy heart with divine understanding.  
Theotokion: By thy birth giving have we been freed from the curse of our first 
mother Eve; for, giving birth to Christ, O Virgin Mother, thou didst pour forth in its 
place blessing upon all. 
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Clothed in divine power as in vesture, O most blessed one, thou wast able to flee 
all the perils of heresy, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O 
Lord! (Twice) 
The Lord, Who became a stranger upon the earth for our sake, in thy wandering, 
O blessed one, manifestly preserved thee who cried aloud: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O hallowed and divine habitation of the Most High! For 
through thee, O Theotokos, hath joy been given to those who cry: Blessed art thou 
among women, O all-immaculate Sovereign Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Comely in body and soul, and in thy piety, O venerable one, thou wast an 
instrument of divine understanding, a devotee of the commandments and a flute of 
pure hymnody, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! (Twice) 
O venerable and blessed one, thou hast passed over to immortal life and 
blessedness without end, and hast been deemed worthy to receive joy incorruptible, 
chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Having become incorrupt through thy divine birthgiving, O most 
pure one, we have shaken off the dust of mortality; for thou, O pure Lady, hast given 
birth to the true, natural and transcendent Life. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed, O 
Mary Bride of God.  
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Thou didst achieve an all-blessed end through the struggle of asceticism, O sacred 
father John, and, departing unto Christ, after death thou didst make thine abode in 
the life free of suffering and pain. (Twice) 
Thou hast been deemed worthy to dwell in the land of the meek, O venerable and 
blessed father, for thou wast an emulator of God-bearing men of inner stillness; and 
with them thou hast manifestly received delight.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Bride of God, in giving birth to Christ thou hast poured 
forth upon us a well-spring of immortality, whereby we are purified of all the 
defilement of sin.  
 
 
 
