--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 10th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR GREGORY V, ARCHBISHOP OF 
CONSTANTINOPLE, THE NEW ROME, & ECUMENICAL PATRIARCH  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Come, ye children of the pious, * let us rejoice * in the most glorious memory * of 
the chief shepherd, ** rendering glory unto God.  
Dance, O city of Odessa, * for thou didst acquire the body * of the godly Gregory, 
* which divine providence ** most wisely sent to thee.  
Ye vile races of the Jews and Moslems, * behold the glory * of the divine patriarch 
* in the city of Odessa, ** and be ye put to shame.  
Thou standest before God * as an intercessor, O patriarch, * that the people of 
Greece may be saved. * Wherefore, thou didst become the victim ** of the iniquitous.  
Glory ..., in Tone I:  
O thy valiant and adamant soul, O Gregory, worthy of blessings! For, possessed of 
steadfast love for God and thy neighbor, thou didst say: “I shall have no rest until I 
see the Hellenic nation freed from slavery!” Wherefore, set afire by the Holy Spirit, 
thou didst cause the impious Moslems to separate thee more speedily from this 
world, and to send thee to thy desired Christ, Whom do thou entreat, that He deliver 
all our people from bondage.  
Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Pentecostarion; and Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
O hieromartyr Gregory, who didst put on Christ the Master: thou didst bear the 
reward of the divine service of the Gospel of Christ, which was achieved by the 
shedding of thy blood. Wherefore, becoming a sacrifice of the heavenly Father by the 
hand of the iniquitous Moslems, thou wast slain, O most sacred one, and wast shown 
to be a pure martyr for the Faith and thy people. Intercede for us, O blessed 
struggler.  
Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.  
After “Now lettest Thou ...,” the Troparion of the hieromartyr, in Tone VIII:  
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast given strength to the godly 
patriarch, * sending down upon him Thy grace from on high, ** and through him 
hast restored the race of the Hellenes to their ancestral glory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr: 3 from the 
Pentecostarion; and 5 for the hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
The prince of iniquity prepared * a gallows of reproach for thee, * O wise 
Gregory, * but the pious autocrat, beloved of God, * and his retinue, as is meet, ** 
buried thee in Odessa with great glory. (Twice)  
Though thou wast given over to the Jews, * O hieromartyr of Christ, * and wast 
dragged across the ground for thy love of thy people, * thou dwellest joyously in the 
highest amid the cherubim, * sending up a hymn of triumph ** to God the Creator. 
(Twice)  
Ye multitudes of the faithful now assembled, * let us celebrate the holy day * on 
which the godly Patriarch Gregory of New Rome * became a sacrifice for us, * and 
with a voice of splendor ** let us give thanks unto the Master of all, as is meet.  
Glory ..., in Tone I:  
Drawn to Odessa from all places in oneness of spirit, the Christ-bearing Orthodox 
ardently greet thy venerable and renowned body on bended knee, and the powers of 
heaven on high, going on before with their Master, cry aloud to the multitudes that 
follow: “Why doth your tongue keep silent, O ye of godly mind? Why doth it not cry 
out boldly with great voice, exclaiming: ‘Behold, the champion of Greece doth 
come!’? Lift up your hands and all give thanks to the supreme sacrifice of your father, 
for through him hath the desired salvation of the Greeks been accomplished. We 
have not the strength to acclaim him fittingly, nor is it easy to bestow upon him 
worthy hymnody, for his way of life surpasseth all praise!” Wherefore, O most pure 
hierarch, with the Virgin Mother of the God-man intercede in the highest before the 
Master for all, that thy faithful people may be preserved unharmed by tyrants; for, 
ceaselessly and splendidly magnifying thee, we all set thee before us as our protector.  
Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 

--- PAGE 3 ---
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is 
immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the 
Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. 
For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that 
ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of 
God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master 
of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is 
a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image 
of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more 
beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the 
light, she is found pre-eminent. She hath delivered from pain those who please her, 
and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them 
from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that 
godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall 
judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, 
reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his 
holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our 
strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing 
to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and 
denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have 
the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a 
reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like 
other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery, 
and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. 
Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine 
him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his 
forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall 
he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wicked-
ness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not, neither thought 

--- PAGE 4 ---
they that Thou alone art God, who hast the power of life and death, savest in time of 
tribulation, and deliverest from all evil, who art compassionate and merciful, givest 
grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: All the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be 
gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things 
from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let 
them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith 
the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen; that ye may know, and believe, 
and understand that I am He. Before Me there was no other God, and after Me there 
will be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no savior. I have declared and have 
saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My 
witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that 
can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the 
Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.  
At Litiya, these Stichera:  
In Tone II: Today Patriarch Gregory doth stand for the nation of the Hellenes 
before the iniquitous ruler. O ye pious, be not troubled, for his death will deliver the 
faithful from their yoke, that they may regain their ancient renown.  
In Tone III: Today creation beholdeth an awesome and unheard of thing: he who 
is revered as the common shepherd of the Church of Christ hath been hanged by 
Ishmael upon a gallows. But look down from above, O Lord, and, refusing to endure 
the infamy, render unto him twofold retribution.  
In Tone IV: The most vile race, the plague on the New Rome, looked on while 
dragging the body of the venerable one. Yet that which they did to it incurred no 
shame, just as the sun which shineth everywhere maketh no stain; rather, they show 
among the nations what ungodly offspring they spawn.  
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
Come, ye faithful, and with awe let us look upon the majesty of the hand of the 
Almighty. He whom the iniquitous cast into the waters of the sea safely reached 
Odessa. The Author of creation strangely dispatched him, and the pious Russians 
received and buried him fittingly, rending glory to the Creator Who deemed them 
worthy of such a treasure.  
Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ascetics ...”:  
Rejoice, O hierarch of Christ, most faithful shepherd of all shepherds, who 
joyously and willingly laid down thy life for thy sheep, as said the God-man. Rejoice, 

--- PAGE 5 ---
thou boast of the Greeks, ornament of the piety of the Church, radiant and all-
wondrous one who hast been poured forth upon the whole world, much-suffering 
martyr, incorporeal mortal! Rejoice, thou who didst live in the world, yet didst show 
forth a life equal to that of the angels, O inextinguishable lamp, who hast delivered 
Greece from bondage!  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of my heart shall be 
of understanding.  
Exult this day, O splendidly clothed divine city of Constantine, for thou wast truly 
found worthy after many years to receive Gregory, the champion of piety, on thy 
widowed throne. Through him hath Greece cast aside its chains, and the ungodly race 
of Hagar hath been put to shame. He who mocketh all is now cast down to the earth, 
lamenting unceasingly in utter despair, from which, O my God, do Thou deliver us 
who with faith worship Thy divine might.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Lift up thy voice, O homeland of Gregory, and with boasting proclaim to all the 
world the ineffable virtues of thy most golden offspring, wherein he lived a supra-
human life upon the earth, illumining the coarseness of the flesh and revealing the 
entire unseen inner man, like a beacon outshining many of the venerable, like a sun 
among sparks, ever delighting in ineffable divine glory.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
When thou didst stand before the iniquitous ruler and wast condemned by him to 
the gallows, the powers of heaven fashioned crowns for thee; and when thou wast 
dragged across the ground by the impious Jews, the angels invisibly placed their 
wreaths upon thy head, crying out one to another: “Glory to God, Who hath given 
thee strength, O hierarch!”  
Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII:  
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast given strength to the godly 
patriarch, * sending down upon him Thy grace from on high, ** and through him 
hast restored the race of the Hellenes to their ancestral glory. (Twice)  
Troparion from the Pentecostarion, (Once)  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” Troparion from the Pentecostarion (Twice);  
Glory ..., that of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII:  
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast given strength to the godly 
patriarch, * sending down upon him Thy grace from on high, ** and through him 
hast restored the race of the Hellenes to their ancestral glory. (Once)  
Both now ..., that from the Pentecostarion.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Come, O ye faithful, and let us glorify God today, Who hath delivered us from the 
yoke of the Moslems and led us back to the glory of our forefathers. For this the 
divine Gregory, desiring that the race of the Hellenes receive it again, endured to be 
hanged upon a gallows on this day like a malefactor. Him doth all Greece hymn 
unceasingly. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was secretly commanded ...”: 
O city of Odessa, make ready to receive the patriarch whom God doth send to 
thee; for, from childhood to his last breath, he hath been a true follower of the paths 
of piety, at whose life the incorporeal choirs marveled and cried out in amazement: 
“Truly he was a vessel of the Spirit!” (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hieromartyr 
Gregory, and we honor thy precious sufferings, which thou didst endure for 
Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ... (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
When the Moslems of old were moved to rage against the pious Greeks, the 
divinely wise Gregory valiantly cried out: “My countrymen, be of good cheer, be not 
daunted by the children of the impious, though they persecute us; for the Almighty 
hath with the pen of decision written; to deliver the Orthodox from their yoke, that 
the whole world may behold His invincible power and believe on Him as the only 
Omnipotent One!” (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Hymn of Ascent, the first antiphon of Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, §35, (MIDPOINT) (10: 1-9)  
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that 
entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, 
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of 
strangers. This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things 
they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves 
and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by me if any man enter 
in, he shall be saved, and go in and out, and find pasture.  
“Having beheld the resurrection of Christ ...”  
And after Psalm 50, this Sticheron, Idiomelon, in Tone II: 
Today Patriarch Gregory doth stand for the nation of the Hellenes before the 
iniquitous ruler. O ye pious, be not troubled, for his death will deliver the faithful 
from their yoke, that they may regain their ancient renown.  
Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the 
holy hieromartyr, with 6 Troparia, in Tone I: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
Assembling from all the ends of Greece, O friends, celebrate most joyously with us 
on the most pure feast of our patriarch.  
Thee, O divine Gregory, doth all Greece acknowledge as its champion and savior, 
crying aloud that, having been sacrificed for us, thou hast delivered her from the 
tyrants’ yoke.  
Rejoice greatly, O Erymanthos, thou homeland of the patriarch, on the all-glorious 
commemoration of thine offspring, for because of him art thou now blessed under 
the heavens.  
Theotokion: O immaculate one, who gavest birth to my Light and redemption, 
redeem me from darkness and everlasting torment, that, saved, I may hymn thy 
majesty.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Katavasia: The Irmoi of the canon of Pascha  
ODE III  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 
O Smyrna and Patmos with Athos, each from thy place, proclaim ye all the 
inexpressible virtues wherein he shone forth like another radiant sun.  
Clothed like Aaron in the most holy vestments of the patriarchs, Gregory was 
well-pleasing to God as a fulfiller of the Gospel, and as one most ardent he hath been 
received by Him.  
Thy three seatings upon the patriarchal throne truly prefigured prophetically thy 
three-day hanging, whereby the race of the Greeks hath shaken off their yoke.  
Theotokion: The inexorable judgment seat, the unquenchable fire and the dread 
sentence do I fear, O pure one. Make haste, and save me, thy suppliant, before the 
end, O good one.  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Pentecostarion.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Behold, the holy day of the divine feast of the wise patriarch hath shone forth 
today, and together all the most pious Greeks, the descendants of heroes, joyously 
celebrate it, for it became the harbinger of our salvation. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
Rejoice, O New Rome; and with us do thou also rejoice, O Gregory, for thou hast 
made splendid the throne of the patriarchs and dost lead us in choir to the divine 
courts of the Creator. Protect us from invisible and visible foes.  
With the senior members of thy synod who suffered with thee, O wise Gregory, 
do thou offer supplication before the Master on high for those who with faith 
celebrate thine ever-memorable memory.  
Today the angels who took up thy spirit dance in the heavens, and the choirs of 
the Orthodox who acquired thy sacred relics in Odessa radiantly praise thee with 
garlands of praise.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, most holy and undefiled, with most pure drops of thy 
compassion cleanse me now who have defiled my body with sins; and extend to me a 
helping hand, that I may cry: Glory to thee, O pure one, made wondrous by God!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE V  
Irmos: Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light * upon us who rise early at 
dawn, * unto the judgments of Thy commandments, * O Master, Lover of 
mankind, * Christ our God.  
Let all of us, the Orthodox, rejoice today, for on this day our patriarch put the 
ungodly arrogance of the son of Hagar to shame when he became a sacrifice.  
A most faithful shepherd hath the chief shepherd Gregory been shown to be, 
inheriting the habitations of the firstborn today.  
Let us who love the feasts of the Church today with splendor bless the renowned 
pastor, the fifth Gregory, who hath delivered Greece from the tyrant.  
Theotokion: Ever delivered from perils and misfortunes, in thine intercession 
amid tribulations we have acquired a calm haven and an impregnable rampart.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
Having been hanged upon a gallows, the most wise shepherd of Greece hath cast 
off the yoke from his people and restored them to their ancient glory.  
The lawless tribes of the impious Jews, in dragging the illustrious patriarch across 
the ground, show what iniquitous forefathers they have.  
In the city of Odessa, the emperor beloved of God fittingly buried the champion 
of the faithful, rendering glory unto the Creator, the three-Sunned Godhead.  
Theotokion: By thy supplications free from all temptations and spiritual dangers us 
who flee to thee, O all-hymned Mother of Christ God.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
All the true children of Greece, * assembling today in the city of Odessa, ** now 
splendidly celebrate Gregory the patriarch with divine hymnody.  
Ikos: Desiring that the people of Greece attain again to the glory of their ancestors, 
at the hands of the impious race the patriarch endured hanging upon a gallows as a 
malefactor, though he was innocent. But the autocrat, the scion of piety, receiving 
him in the city of Odessa, buried him with fitting honors. Wherefore, delivered by 
him from their harsh yoke, let the Greeks, assembling today on his feast, now 
radiantly celebrate with divine hymnody.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The furnace became bedewed, O Savior, * and the children dancing, 
chanted: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Dancing, the angels waited on high when thou, with forbearance, wast hanged 
from the gallows, O divinely wise Gregory.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
The ranks of martyrs rejoiced to see thy spirit ascending on high in triumph, O all-
blessed Gregory.  
“The godly patriarch now approacheth!” they shouted in the heavens; “Be ye lifted 
up, O gates, that we may all receive him!”  
Theotokion: Intercede before Him Whom thou didst bear as Lord, in that He is 
merciful, O thou who by nature art the Theotokos, that He save the souls of those 
who hymn thee.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Let us now go together through the city of Odessa, O ye Greeks, that we may 
rejoice exceedingly on the most pure feast of the chief shepherd, rendering thanks 
unto God.  
Having lived an angelic life upon the earth, the godly Gregory hath now made his 
abode in the heavens and, crowned with an ever-verdant wreath, doth truly delight in 
glory  
Thy body, to which the godly autocrat gave fitting burial in the city of Odessa, is 
preserved by thine intercessions, O wise Gregory, for thou art the champion of 
Greece.  
Theotokion: Raise me up from the abyss of evils and wage war on the enemies 
who fight against me, devouring my soul with unseemly pleasures, O pure one; and 
surrender it not to them, but, taking pity, save it.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of all 
descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom He was 
incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as the pure 
Mother of God.  
Send down now thy blessing from on high upon the rulers of the nation, O all-
blessed one, that they may ever shepherd in peace the pious Christ-bearing people, 
for whom thou wast condemned to die upon the wood of the gallows.  
Upon those who now would fain subjugate Greece let thy curse not be slow to fall, 
O wise one, that, living under it in this age and in that which is to come, they may be 
fittingly punished as enemies of the devout.  
O illustrious patriarch, ask thou that timely forgiveness of many sins be granted 
even to me, who venerate thee, that, saved, I may hymn the one indivisible God in 
three Hypostases: the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: O pure and all-blameless one who gavest birth to the Light, illumine 
me who am darkened by all the assaults of the evil one and all manner of evil, and 
who have angered God; and guide me toward good works, in that thou art the cause 
of all good things.  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us ...”:  
Let us, the faithful, give glory to the one God in three Hypostases, the King of all, 
Who hath delivered us through the hanging of the godly patriarch. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Praises, 6 Stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion. 
And 3 for the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
Thou wast fittingly called passion-bearer, O blessed Gregory, for the Master, in 
that He is good, foreordained thee to be a godly shepherd for His Church. Then didst 
thou receive the greatly radiant splendor of the Paraclete, through Whom thou didst 
illumine thy flock and wast rewarded as His most diligent steward. Intercede before 
Him, that He save and restore thy nation.  
Consumed by perfect love when heavenly desire inflamed thy soul, O most sacred 
father, as one most eager to set forth, thou didst exclaim the memorable words: “I am 
the servant of the Creator, and for this am I slain by the hands of the iniquitous, that, 
in a word, I may be shown to be a most trustworthy steward of our God.” Him do 
thou entreat, that He save and deliver our nation.  
Thou wast crucified with Christ, O hieromartyr, when thou didst cry forth the 
divinely inspired words: “My race hath fallen, and therefore I greatly desire to raise it 
up!” Wherefore, O Gregory, like Moses thou didst hasten from the land of the 
Hellenes to the Imperial City, and with the diadem of martyrdom thou wast adorned, 
passing on to Christ, Whom do thou entreat, that He save and raise up our people.  
Glory ..., in Tone I:  
Come, O ye faithful, let us bless Gregory, the ecumenical patriarch, who 
courageously contested for piety, saying: Rejoice, O adamant soul and most valiant 
man of God! Rejoice, O shepherd who gavest thyself for thy flock! Rejoice, O boast 
of Greece and gladness of the Orthodox! Intercede fervently for our people.  
Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.  
Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the appointed ode of the canon from the 
Pentecostarion; and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the holy hieromartyr:  
Having been hanged upon a gallows, the most wise shepherd of Greece hath cast 
off the yoke from his people and restored them to their ancient glory.  
The lawless tribes of the impious Jews, in dragging the illustrious patriarch across 
the ground, show what iniquitous forefathers they have.  
In the city of Odessa, the emperor beloved of God fittingly buried the champion 
of the faithful, rendering glory unto the Creator, the three-Sunned Godhead.  
Theotokion: By thy supplications free from all temptations and spiritual dangers us 
who flee to thee, O all-hymned Mother of Christ God.  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII:  
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast given strength to the godly 
patriarch, * sending down upon him Thy grace from on high, ** and through him 
hast restored the race of the Hellenes to their ancestral glory.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
All the true children of Greece, * assembling today in the city of Odessa, ** now 
splendidly celebrate Gregory the patriarch with divine hymnody.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: The saints shall boast in glory, * and they shall rejoice 
upon their beds.  
Verse: Sing unto the Lord a new song; His praise is in the church of the saints.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 334 (13: 7-16)  
Brethren: Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto 
you the word of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. 
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. Be not carried about with 
divers and strange doctrines: for it is a good thing that the heart be established with 
grace; not with meats, which have not profited those who have been occupied 
therein. We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the 
tabernacle. For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary 
by the high priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he 
might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go 
forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. For here have we 
no continuing city, but we seek one to come. By him therefore let us offer the 
sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his 
name. But to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is 
well pleased.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation 
for Himself.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 67 (12: 32-40)  
The Lord said: Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give 
you the kingdom. Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax 
not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither 
moth corrupteth. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. Let your 
loins be girded about, and your lights burning; And ye yourselves like unto men that 
wait for their lord, when he will return from the wedding; that when he cometh and 
knocketh, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom 
the lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird 
himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. 
And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find them 
so, blessed are those servants. And this know, that if the good-man of the house had 
known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have 
suffered his house to be broken through. Be ye therefore ready also: for the Son of 
man cometh at an hour when ye think not.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
