--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS BASIL, THE 
CONFESSOR, BISHOP OF PARIUM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
With praises * thy memory is splendidly celebrated, * O holy hierarch Basil; * and 
filleth with joy * the assemblies of the Orthodox, * for thou didst love righteousness, 
* the purity of chastity and meekness, * and didst ever honor stillness ** with 
excellence and perfection.  
Emulating the divine Paul, * patiently enduring exiles, * O holy hierarch Basil, * 
thou didst reach the end of thy life * in need and tribulations, * continually oppressed, 
* and ever forced to move; * but now thou hast found habitation and delight in God 
** which is without care and immutable.  
As a God-pleasing hierarch, * gazing now upon the never-waning beams * of the 
noetic dwellings, * and clothed in holiness * and clad in righteousness, * thou wast 
deemed worthy to behold things which are above this earth; * and, face to face, O 
most noetically rich confessor, * thou seest the beauty ** of the magnificence of 
noetic things.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Save me, O most pure Sovereign Lady, * who ineffably gavest birth to Christ the 
Savior; * for thee alone have I acquired as our intercessor, * an invincible rampart, * 
protection and joy, * and the divine consolation of my soul. * Wherefore, deliver me 
from the worm which sleepeth not * and from the everlasting fire, ** O Mother of 
Christ God.  
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all?” * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
The indescribable and thrice radiant Light hath shone forth upon thee in the 
unshakable kingdom of heaven, O father, and the gladness of the righteous hath 
received thee.  
The gates of Eden have been opened unto thee, O right glorious one; thou hast 
joined the holy hierarchs and been numbered among the Church of the firstborn.  
Having suffered lawfully and preserved thy priesthood pure to the end, thou hast 
been deemed worthy to rejoice with the priests of heaven.  
Theotokion: Having united Himself hypostatically to the flesh, and having 
received it from thee, O Mother of God, the Creator of all ineffably issued forth and 
was well pleased to draw nigh unto mankind.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Thy right wondrous and most glorious memory doth gladden the assemblies of the 
Orthodox with joy.  
Shedding the cloud and breaking the bonds of the body, O venerable one, thou 
didst draw nigh unto God  
As one elect, O venerable one, thou didst receive a blessed end and the delight of 
the chosen, as is meet.  
Theotokion: Having thee as my helper, O most pure Mother of God, I am not 
ashamed; and having thee as mine intercessor, I am delivered from mine enemies.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine faith ...”:  
A great sun hath shone forth upon the whole world in thy virtues, and thou hast 
enlightened the companies of the faithful with radiance and the splendors of miracles, 
destroying the darkness of the passions. O Basil our father, entreat Christ God, that 
He grant us great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only all-pure Virgin Mother * 
who surpassed the angels in purity. * By the divine waters of thy supplications * 
cleanse me who, more than all others, * have become dust, defiled by carnal 
transgressions; ** and grant me great mercy, O pure one.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Making entreaty to God, O father, for thou didst cast down the haughty thinking 
of wicked heresy, gladdening the Church.  
The Judge of the contest hath caused thee to dwell in the tabernacles of heaven, O 
father, accepting thy tireless opposition to those who fought against Him.  
For the sake of the Traditions preserved in the Church of God, thou didst endure 
exile; and, winning victories, thou didst repose.  
Theotokion: O pure Virgin, entreat God Who was born of thee, that He grant 
forgiveness of sins to thy servants.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
The divine grace which abode within thee, O God-bearer, revealed thee to be a 
most faithful pastor of the Church.  
Having mortified the wisdom and passions of thy flesh, O glorious one, thou didst 
follow the Spirit of life.  
Having achieved the end of thy life in chastity and righteousness, O divinely wise 
one, thou hast received reward for thy virtues.  
Theotokion: As a most holy temple, thou hast given birth to the Well-spring of 
dispassion, O all-immaculate Virgin Mother.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Illumined with the beauty of heavenly effulgence, O venerable one, thou didst 
leave thy seat on earth, and, as one most meek, received the incorruptible inheritance 
of those who are meek on earth.  
Mocking the deception of the blasphemous heretics, O right wondrous one, thou 
didst most diligently master the divine and pious understanding of Orthodoxy: and 
venerated the icon of the Savior. 
  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thy desire for God was fulfilled, O most glorious one, for thou didst divinely pass 
over to Him, rejoicing; and now thou dost behold the splendors and beauties of the 
saints, O father.  
Theotokion: Mankind hath been delivered from mortality and corruption; for thou 
didst seedlessly give birth to the Bestower of life by nature, O all-immaculate Virgin, 
unto the benefit of those who praise thee with faith.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking in the highest ...”:  
Illumined by the light of the Most High, O blessed father, * thou dost enlighten all 
who with love venerate thine honored suffering. * O sacred athlete Basil, ** entreat 
Christ God unceasingly on behalf of us all!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
O the ineffable gladness which thou hast been deemed worthy to receive, O all-
blessed one, living in immaterial light and chanting: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, 
throughout the ages!  
Beautifully adorned with the crown of divine magnificence, O all-blessed one, 
thou hast joined chorus with the armies on high, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God, throughout the ages!  
As an initiate of the mysteries of the Trinity, a minister of the mysteries of heaven, 
render the Master merciful to those who cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, 
throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Thou didst transform the ancient curse of Eve into a blessing, having 
given birth to the Son of God, to Whom we all cry: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, 
throughout the ages!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Delivered from the sorrows of life and grievous turmoil, O all-blessed one, thou 
didst receive joy and gladness past understanding, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Zealously opposing the blasphemies of the blasphemers with the doctrines of the 
Spirit, O father, thou didst easily break them asunder, O initiate of the mysteries, 
chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
How beautiful is the place wherein thou hast made thing abode, O thou who art 
manifest in sanctity! How comely the habitation where thou abidest, chanting: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: All of us, the faithful, have acquired thee as our intercessor, O most 
pure one, and, delivered from evils by thy supplications, we cry out to Christ: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Thou didst live a holy life, O father, and having pleased God by thy works, thou 
hast received the kingdom of heaven, O wise one.  
Having finished the race, having kept the Faith and accomplished the struggle, O 
Basil, thou hast received the crown of righteousness, rejoicing.  
Thou didst receive a divine name, O most blessed one, and the complete 
fulfillment of thy desires; wherefore, cease thou never to pray now for thy flock.  
Theotokion: Spurn not the torrent of my tears, O Virgin who hast given birth to 
Christ Who taketh away all tears from every face.  
 
