--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 17th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR SYMEON, BISHOP OF PERSIA  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, ACACIUS, BISHOP OF 
MELITENE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
More radiantly luminous than the sun, * thy memory hath shone forth upon the 
faithful, * enlightening creation with divine splendors, * O all-blessed Symeon, * and 
dispelling the gloom of the passions * and the darkness of the demons. * Wherefore, 
we call thee blessed * and prayerfully hymn thee * as a beacon for the whole world ** 
and a fervent intercessor.  
O wise martyr, * having acquired heavenly things through the things of the earth, * 
and permanent things through that which is transitory, * rejoicing, thou didst receive 
incorrupt glory through corruptible things, * and patiently, through tortures and 
wounds for the Word of God, * thou didst obtain crowns and the kingdom, * 
wherein, rejoicing, O glorious one, * with those who suffered with thee, ** pray thou 
for all those who praise thee with faith.  
The shafts of thy words * wounded the assemblies of the iniquitous, * O martyr 
Symeon; * for which cause the clouds of heaven lifted up their voice * and the choirs 
of the incorporeal ones * came together in joy, * marveling at the patience of thy 
struggles. * Wherefore, rejoicing, we honor with faith * thy holy repose, ** glorifying 
the Savior.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
As a right acceptable hierarch, * thou beholdest the noetic tabernacles * and hast 
been deemed worthy * to see never-waning and heavenly sights, * arrayed in holiness, 
* clad in righteousness * and magnificence; * and, face to face, O blessed one, ** thou 
beholdest the beauty of noetic things.  
O venerable father Acacius, * with faith furnishing thy mind with wings to fly to 
God, * thou didst disdain the disorderly state of the world * and, taking up thy cross, 
* thou didst follow after Him Who beholdeth all things, * enslaving to thy mind * the 
intemperance of thy body * through feats of asceticism, ** by the power of the divine 
Spirit.  
Shown to be a partisan of the godly Council, * preeminent with Cyril, O Acacius, * 
thou didst commit the wicked Nestorius to damnation, * denouncing his 
mindlessness, O blessed one, * and putting his vanity to shame * with spiritual 
discourse. * Wherefore, every soul calleth thee blessed, * celebrating with faith ** thy 
divine memory.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Save me, O most pure Sovereign Lady, * who ineffably gavest birth to Christ the 
Savior; * for thee alone have I acquired as our intercessor, * an invincible rampart, * 
protection and joy, * and the divine consolation of my soul. * Wherefore, deliver me 
from the worm which sleepeth not * and from the everlasting fire, ** O Mother of 
Christ God.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician and healer * of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and two 
canons for the saints, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “With hymnody I crown thee, thou 
blessed Symeon”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath 
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they 
chanted a song of victory. 
Arrayed in a crown of incorruption, and standing before the throne of the Lord, O 
blessed one, by thy supplications ever save those who with faith honor thy holy 
suffering.  
Thou wast shown to be a precious vessel of the divine Spirit, O God-bearing and 
blessed Symeon, and having been anointed therefrom thou didst shepherd the 
reason-endowed by the staff of divine teachings with the waters of understanding.  
Thou didst stop the flow of falsehood with the divine torrents of thy sweet 
discourse and the drops of thy blood, O wise and glorious hierarch; wherefore, we 
hymn thee with faith.  
Theotokion: Thou bearest in thine arms Him Who holdeth all things, O Virgin, 
and feedest with milk, as if He were an infant, the Giver of milk. Wherefore, beseech 
Him that He take pity upon all thy people who hymn thee with faith.  
Canon of the holy hierarch, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified! 
Vanquish all the malice of the serpent, in that thou didst live in innocence of soul, 
O wise Acacius, rescue me from malice and deadly passions, and enrich me with good 
examples, that I may praise thee who fought the good fight.  
All-splendid Melitene produced thee as a comely offshoot, O great Acacius, 
bringing forth sweet fruits which delight the hearts of the faithful more than honey, 
and dispel the soul-corrupting bitterness of the passions with divine grace, O 
venerable one.  
The offspring of thy parents, like the sacred Samuel thou wast offered to God, 
given over to Him from earliest infancy to be reared in the house of sanctity and to 
minister to God Almighty Who hath illumined thy soul with divine actions.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned and pure one, who hath inconceivably given flesh unto 
God and with Him reconciled us who have fallen away, by the suffering of thy Son 
heal, I pray thee, the passions of my heart, and save me who ever chant: Gloriously 
hath He been glorified!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the hieromartyr  
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing * and 
suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * who alone art good * 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Beautifully ordering the movements of thy soul, and treading the path which 
leadeth to God, thou didst avoid all the trackless wastes of the evil one, and wast 
taken up to the portal of life, of everlasting rest.  
Withdrawing thy thoughts from carnal passions, O father, thou didst offer up un-
bloody sacrifices to the Word Who was sacrificed for our sake; and proclaiming His 
divine incarnation which passeth telling, thou wast slain like an innocent lamb.  
Having spent thy life in holiness, O most noetically rich hieromartyr, thou hast 
now made thine abode with the saints, having illumined thy soul with sufferings and 
shone forth more brightly than the sun, O blessed one, becoming a child of the Light.  
Theotokion: Thou hast freed us from the curse of our first parents, having given 
flesh to the Word Who hath crowned all with blessings, O pure and ever blessed one, 
thou adornment of passion-bearers and cleansing of the sinful.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Thou didst submit to the law of the Author of life, O venerable one, and with all 
thy soul didst hate all mortal iniquity.  
O wise one, the Holy Spirit ordained thee a priest, who had become radiant 
through thy spiritual activities.  
O wise one, thy tongue hath poured forth, like a river, doctrines which drieth up 
the turbulent torrent of delusion with divine power.  
Theotokion: O pure one, thou impassable gate, open unto me the doors of 
repentance and guide me to the right paths.  
Sessional Hymn of the hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Like the sun hath the holy memory of thee and those who suffered with thee 
shone forth upon us, O wise hierarch Symeon, illumining the faithful; and celebrating 
it today, we cry aloud: O passion-bearers, entreat Him Who alone is the Lover of 
mankind on our behalf.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”:  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Adorned with confession, O God-bearer, rejoicing, thou didst receive the crown 
of victory from the Lord for thine abstinence; and didst denounce all the vainglory of 
heresies with thy divine precepts. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that He 
grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence when He took flesh in thy 
womb, the one Lord remained God though He had become a man; and even after thy 
birthgiving He preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He grant us great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Canon of the hieromartyr  
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying, O 
Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the salvation 
of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed Ones. 
Led forth, bound, thou didst loose the tangled webs of the evil one, O most 
noetically rich initiate of the sacred mysteries; and having suffered valiantly, thou didst 
receive crowns of incorruption.  
With the darts of thy words, O hieromartyr Symeon, thou didst wound the 
assemblies of the iniquitous, and with the fire of thy blood thou didst consume the 
delusion of polytheism.  
Let us form choirs, blessing the God-bearing Symeon and the glorious Ananias, 
and the martyrs who, like them, suffered manfully.  
Theotokion: The Sun of righteousness, shining forth from thee in a manner 
beyond understanding, hath illumined the whole world, O divinely joyous maiden, 
and brought an end to the winter of delusion.  
Canon of the hierarch  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Thou wast an emulator of the divine apostles, O father Acacius; for thou wast en-
riched with their authority to bind and to loose.  
Thou wast an instrument of the Spirit, sounding forth the doctrines of salvation, 
O father, and destroying the mad deception of the mindless Nestorius.  
By thy most radiant prayer thou didst bring rain upon the earth, O blessed father, 
watering the furrows thereof which had long been dry.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thy cheeks, beautified by the precepts of God, breathed gently upon the faithful 
dispelling fetid delusion, O venerable one.  
Theotokion: Enliven me who am slain, and quickly turn me back who am lost, in 
that thou art the unerring path and guide of all, O Sovereign Lady.  
ODE V  
Canon of the hieromartyr  
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise 
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O Christ, 
* in that Thou alone art compassionate!  
As thou hast been shown by thy suffering to be the pillar and ground of the 
Church of God, O most blessed one, by thy mediations preserve it upright and 
unshaken forever.  
With hymns we bless thy life, thy persecutions and opposition, for which thou 
wast deemed worthy of a blessed end, O Symeon, most noetically rich confessor.  
As a shepherd anointed with divine myrrh, O blessed one, thou wast slain for thy 
flock like an exemplary lamb, gladdening the firstborn of the Church.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, at the hour of judgment let me find thee rescuing 
me from condemnation, and, faithfully glorifying thee, let me be delivered from the 
torments which await me.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Thy life was shown to be wondrous, for replete with the gifts of the divine Spirit, 
thy supplication staunched the uncontrollable onrushing of the river, O holy hierarch 
Acacius, setting a rock to mark its limit.  
Among the Council thou wast, with the divine Cyril, a godly champion of the 
sacred precepts of the fathers, O blessed one, confessing the pure Virgin to be the 
Mother of God and vanquishing the deceitful Nestorius.  
Thy discourse was recognized by the people of Melitene to be sweeter than honey, 
delighting their souls with sacred confessions and revealing the bitterness of sin, O 
right wondrous father Acacius.  
Theotokion: The Transcendent One, Who alone is the Lover of mankind, without 
leaving the bosom of the Father, was seen to be held as a babe in thy womb, O 
Virgin, clothing Himself in my great poverty through the richness of His loving-
kindness.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE VI  
Canon of the hieromartyr  
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its soul-
destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou art 
compassionate. 
Thou hast been shown to be full of divine consolation, O blessed Symeon, having 
received thine end by the sword with the holy martyrs who suffered splendidly.  
Young men and elders, monks and priests, inspired to fight the good fight for 
Christ, were slaughtered like lambs.  
Having lived a blessed life, ye received a blessed end from Christ, and, rejoicing, ye 
met your end by the sword.  
Theotokion: The Creator shone forth from thee, O most holy one, and with the 
radiance of divine understanding hath illumined those who are in the night of 
ignorance.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Thou didst erect an honored temple to the pure Mother of God, O sacred 
Acacius, having first made thyself a temple of His Spirit; and when thou didst 
consecrate it, thou didst manifest a river of miracles.  
Thou didst utter holy cries to thy flock, far more melodious than those of the lark, 
O Acacius; and having received the law of thy tongue, they preserved it 
unadulterated.  
When the emperor beheld thee approaching like a servant, he fulfilled thy 
petitions; for he recognized thee as a right wondrous favorite of the heavenly King, O 
God-bearing father.  
Theotokion: By thy mercy, O pure one, heal, I pray, the distractions of my mind 
and the uprisings of my heart, and deliver me from besetting sin, who with faith call 
thee blessed.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the hieromartyr  
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, * and 
bedewed the Youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed art Thou! 
Showing forth a beacon of understanding, thou wast recognized as a light for 
those who sleep in the darkness of ignorance, O venerable one, dispelling the 
darkness of those who worshipped fire, and suffering most gloriously.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou wast shown to be the leader among the company of martyrs, O God-bearing 
Symeon, and, meeting thine end with them through the sword, thou didst cry: Blessed 
art Thou, O God!  
Let us honor the assembly of the many martyrs honorably gathered together from 
divers cities; the sacred performers of the mysteries of God and the God-bearing 
monks.  
Theotokion: Heal thou the sufferings of my heart, O most immaculate one, put an 
end to the stormy turmoil of my mind, and save me who chant: Blessed art Thou, O 
God!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Adorned with perfect mercy, thou wast kind to the poor, O father, and known to 
be the health of all the ailing and a mediator for those who chant: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Beholding gad-flies afflicting the sick, O father Acacius, thou didst drive them 
away, commanding them to never plague them again, chanting: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Like a ripe cluster of grapes, thou hast poured forth upon us the wine of 
understanding, which gladdeneth men’s hearts with great understanding, commanding 
us to cry: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: All of us, thy servants, O thou who art full of the grace of God, ever 
hymn thee as the cause of our salvation, and we bless thee with faith, saying: O God 
of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the hieromartyr  
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace chanted a 
hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Showing thyself to be a noetic ember, O most blessed Symeon, thou didst not 
worship fire, but having consumed the bitter tinder of polytheism, O venerable one, 
thou didst pass over to never-waning radiance.  
Heal thou our infirmities, O martyr, drive away the gloom of our hearts, and by 
thy mediations before the Master of all show us to be partakers of everlasting life.  
We hymn the assembly of godly, the honored army of the hundred, of which the 
valiant Symeon was captain, as the shepherd and great pillar of the Church.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: The bush which was seen to be unconsumed showed forth thy 
precious birthgiving, O most holy one; for, having received the divine Fire in thy 
womb, thou wast in nowise consumed. Wherefore, we hymn thee.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * ‘Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord’. 
With the choirs on high and all the saints, O father, entreat the most holy Lord, 
that He sanctify and save us.  
With thy quiet voice thou didst rebuke the frogs, which were croaking loudly, that 
they not lift up their voices, and didst show them to remain voiceless, O Acacius.  
Having written discourses against Nestorius who uttered foolishness, O blessed 
one, thou didst establish the Church like a precious stone upon the rock of the 
unadulterated Faith.  
Triadicon: With the heavenly ranks let us cry out with faith to the Trinity: Holy, 
Holy, Holy are the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit!  
Theotokion: As thou art a well-spring of incorruption, O Maiden, vouchsafe thy 
healing unto me who have grown corrupt through the manifold inundations of sin.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the hieromartyr  
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and man; * and 
Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed. 
Thou didst offer thyself to the King of all like pleasing incense, as a sacred 
immolation, as an acceptable and all-comely sacrifice, as myrrh, and an oblation, as a 
fragrant rose, O right wondrous and holy hierarch.  
As the confirmation of all the faithful, O holy hierarch, thou wast slaughtered like 
a lamb, and hast passed over to the noetic kingdom, where thou standest before the 
King and God of all, shining with divine glory, O blessed one.  
The holy memory of thee and those who were martyred with thee hath shone 
forth upon us today like a great sun, O wise Symeon. With them ask that Christ grant 
us grace, mercy and deliverance from sins.  
Theotokion: O most pure Mother of God, illumine my mind which is stuck fast in 
the darkness of grievous ignorance with thy radiant effulgence, that, having obtained 
divine enlightenment, I may declare thy mighty works, O Ever-virgin.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Thou hast passed the limits of nature, * having conceived the Maker 
and the Lord, * and didst become a door of salvation * unto the world; * 
wherefore we unceasingly magnify thee, O Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
By thy mighty supplication, O father, thou didst open the rainless skies, and didst 
compel a rock to pour forth water most gloriously, unto the glory of the Savior Who 
glorified thee, O Acacius.  
Like a great sun thou didst shine forth from Melitene in the splendor of thy 
discourses, emitting the effulgence of miracles and illumining those who piously call 
thee blessed, O Acacius.  
Adorned with the wisdom of discourses and the radiance of many healings, O 
Acacius, and shining with the beauties of thy hierarchal rank, thou didst pass from the 
things of this earth to heavenly delight.  
Today thy divine memory summoneth those on earth to hymn thy pangs, thy 
struggles and corrections, O most blessed Acacius, enlightener of our hearts.  
Theotokion: Thou wast truly shown to be the dwelling-place of the beauteous 
Light Who hath illumined all things, O all-hymned Virgin; wherefore, enlighten me 
who am darkened by wickedness, that I may magnify thee with faith.  
 
 
 
