--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 21st DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR JANUARIUS  
AND HIS COMPANIONS  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR THEODORE,  
BISHOP OF PERGE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of St. Januarius, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Thou wast a most sacred priest * and a lawful athlete, * O Januarius, * and hast 
entered not with the blood of another, * but with thine own, * into heaven itself, * 
where Jesus is, the forerunner of all; * and ever looking and gazing upon Him, ** 
thou dost behold Him, Whom the angels see, O father.  
Beheaded by the sword, * cast into the fire, thrown to the wild beasts, * 
imprisoned for many days, O right wondrous one, * by divine power thou didst 
remain * unshaken in mind, * and didst finish thy race, * suffering lawfully, * O 
sacred wonder-worker, ** converser with the incorporeal ones.  
Together let us honor * Desiderius and Proclus, * Sosius, Faustus and Eutychius, * 
the glorious Januarius * and the wise Acutius, * as wise sacred ministers, * crowned 
martyrs, * citizens of the holy city ** and true advocates for those who bless them.  
And 3 Stichera of St. Theodore, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
Standing before the unjust tribunal, * O great-martyr Theodore, * thou didst 
denounce the ungodliness of idolatry, * and wast unjustly beaten, * stretched out 
upon a heated grill, O most blessed one, * and cruelly seared; * yet being bedewed 
with the Spirit * Who imparted steadfast strength to thee, ** thou didst destroy the 
savagery of the cruel foe.  
Thou wast manifestly the chariot of our God, O blessed one, * bearing Him in thy 
pure heart, * and as thou wast bound to a chariot, * thou didst loose from bonds 
those who bound thee, * binding them to the love of Christ; * and cast with them 
into the furnace, * thou wast not consumed, * magnifying the Lord with them, ** O 
right wondrous Theodore.  
Emulating Him Who stretched forth His arms upon the Cross, * thou wast 
crucified, O blessed Theodore, * and remained there, hanging, for three days, * until 
thy soul was committed into the hands of God, * thereby finishing the race of thy 
suffering, * O summit of martyrs, * great tower of the Church, * adornment of the 
faithful, ** converser with the angels.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Rain down upon me * the depths of thy mercy, O Sovereign Lady, * and as thou 
art merciful, O Maiden, * give drink to my heart, * which is consumed by the burning 
heat of the passions, * that it unceasingly put forth drops of compunction, * I pray, O 
pure one, * and thereby I may be deemed worthy of the consolation ** which those 
who weep sincerely receive.  
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of mankind, 
crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What is this, O my 
Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou 
hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** I 
marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Two canons of the saints, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the venerable hieromartyr Januarius, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
Dwelling with the armies of the immaterial angels, and illumining thy soul by 
partaking of the never-waning light, O blessed one; illumine the heart of me who 
praise thy radiant feast today.  
A splendid army, a sacred assembly, suffered patiently with thee, O wise sacred 
minister, and with them thou didst destroy every machination of the serpent, 
enduring most complex tortures with firm resolve.  
Following the steps of Christ, the great Chief Shepherd, O wise one, thou didst 
make the vesture of thy priesthood bright with the dye of thy martyrdom; wherefore, 
we honor thee with uprightness of mind.  
Theotokion: Blessed are the people who glorify thee, the true Mother of God, O 
pure Theotokos, and ever bless thee, as thou didst foretell, prophesying in a sacred 
manner, when thou didst bear Christ within thyself.  
Canon of holy hieromartyr Theodore, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O Theodore, thou wast the adornment of the martyrs, a gift right-acceptable to 
God and beloved by Him; wherefore, I offer thee hymnody as a gift: Grant me thine 
aid.  
As one comely of body and beautiful of spirit, thou didst go forth to do battle with 
the deceiver; and having destroyed him, thou hast received the crown of victory.  
Thou didst set at naught the words of the wicked one, O Theodore, and didst 
manifestly show thyself to be a true favorite of the Lord, and a warrior and perfect 
martyr of Christ the King.  
Theotokion: He Who is unapproachable in His essence made His abode within 
thy womb, O most immaculate one, and in His ineffable loving-kindness hath shown 
us to be inhabitants of paradise, from whence we had been driven by the malice of 
the serpent.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE III  
Canon of saint Januarius  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath been rendered impotent * and the infirm 
are now girded with strength; * wherefore my heart is established in the Lord. 
Preserved by the effulgence of the Holy Spirit, thou didst dance within the 
furnace, O most blessed one, emulating the venerable children of old.  
The ranks of sacred hosts danced with thee in the midst of the furnace, O divinely 
wise one; and with them thou didst hymn the Benefactor, remaining unconsumed.  
Thy tongue was truly a honeyed river of mellifluous teachings, O most wise 
Januarius, delighting the thoughts of those who beheld thee.  
Theotokion: Break asunder the bonds of my sins, O Bride of God, in that through 
thy birthgiving thou hast broken the bonds of Hades and filled all with joy.  
Canon of saint Theodore  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
As the temple of the divine Spirit, O wise Theodore, thou didst demolish the 
pernicious temples of the graven images, and with thy words denounce the 
abominable offerings of the iniquitous.  
With rage and wrathful intent the iniquitous judge beat thee who maintained the 
laws of our God, O Theodore. And beholding Him before thee, thou didst remain 
unshaken.  
Thou didst willingly lie down upon the heated grill, O athlete Theodore, burning 
with zeal for God Almighty, and aflame with divine love for Him.  
Theotokion: He Who is timeless by nature became visible and subject to time 
through thee; and was born in the likeness of the flesh, overlooking mine 
immeasurable transgressions in His ineffable tender compassion, O all-immaculate 
one.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr Januarius, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Having empurpled thy priestly vesture in the dye of thy blood, thou didst 
manifestly show it forth as most splendid, O favorite of Christ. Wherefore, thou hast 
entered into the eternal mansions, pouring forth an abyss of healings upon those who 
honor thee, ever entreating God, that He grant forgiveness of transgressions unto all. 
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of holy hieromartyr Theodore, in the same melody: 
Come, let us praise the namesake of the gifts of the Savior, the heir to His 
blessedness, as an emulator and martyr of Christ God, celebrating now his honored 
memory and crying out to him: O great martyr, pray thou, that He grant us 
forgiveness of sins.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O Theotokos, fleeing to thy divine protection after God, * I humbly fall down and 
beseech thee: * Have mercy, O most pure one, * for my sins have submerged my 
being, * and trembling O Sovereign Lady, I fear the torments to come, * O pure one, 
entreat thy Son, ** that I may be delivered from them.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in latter times gave birth to Thee in the flesh, * O 
Christ Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * when she saw Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried out: * “Woe is me, O Jesus most beloved! * How is it that 
Thou Who art worshipped as God by the angels, * art now crucified by iniquitous 
men? ** I hymn Thee, O Long-suffering One!”  
ODE IV  
Canon of saint Januarius  
Irmos: For the sake of love for Thine image, * O compassionate One, * Thou 
didst ascend the cross * and the nations melted away. * For Thou, O Lover of 
mankind, * art my strength and my praise. 
Together let us all honor the deacon and athlete Sosius, the sacred Faustus, the 
great Proclus and Desiderius.  
Thou didst in nowise fall into the slumber of impiety, O martyr Proclus, but with 
thy divine vigilance didst lull to sleep all the evil thoughts of the ungodly.  
O Januarius, Christ our God preserved thee unharmed with thy fellow athletes, 
when, like a new Daniel, thou wast set in the midst of wild beasts.  
Theotokion: Let us magnify the only blessed one, for whose sake the Supremely 
good One, becoming incarnate of her, hath truly and greatly blessed all mankind.  
Canon of saint Theodore  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
An angel of heaven stood by thee as thou didst lie, unburned, upon the grill, 
bedewing thee, and revealing fearsome portents in the flooding of the river’s waters, 
in earthquake and thunder. 
 Cleaving unto thee who didst work miracles by faith, O martyr, Dioscorus 
suddenly left falsehood for the Faith, rolling away from it like a stone; wherefore he 
hath been enrolled in the choir of the martyrs, having met his end in the fire.  
Laying up, at the command of God, the Faith which thou didst have from 
childhood in safekeeping, as a guardian thereof thou didst preserve it for God, O 
most glorious one, and with perfect understanding didst revile as mindless those who 
did not cherished it.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou didst endure the trials of greatly painful tortures and manifold sufferings, O 
martyr, and hast been deemed worthy of the ability to heal, as an heir to the 
habitations devoid of pain, and life and delight truly devoid of grief.  
Theotokion: O Maiden, thou hast given birth without pain to the incorporeal God 
Who hath done away with the pain of our first mother and delivereth from the pangs 
of Hades the pain-filled life of those who have sinned.  
ODE V  
Canon of saint Januarius  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Thou didst make thy vesture most splendid with thy sacred blood, O most 
noetically rich hieromartyr, and as a priest hast arrived in the temple on high.  
Thou wast a river of healings, pouring forth thy most precious blood upon the 
earth and drying up the torrents of the passions.  
The unjust judge who was blinded didst thou illumine by thy supplication, 
emulating the loving-kindness of the Master of all, O most noetically rich 
hieromartyr.  
Theotokion: We hymn thee, because of whom the Master of all, the never-waning 
Light, hath shone forth upon those in darkness, and with love we bless thee.  
Canon of saint Theodore  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Thou didst thoroughly denounce ungodly delusion; wherefore, though thou wast 
bound to a chariot, thou didst remain whole when the fiery steeds of the chariot of 
flame bore thee aloft, like the glorious Elijah, O Theodore.  
Raging, the iniquitous one cast thee, and the godly Dionysius and Socrates, into 
the burning furnace; and with them thou didst chant the sacred hymns of the 
prophet, O Theodore of valiant mind.  
Let the godly Dionysius be praised in hymns, together with the valiant Socrates, 
for in the midst of the furnace they were pierced by a spear; for, having submitted to 
the divine instructions of Theodore, they became mighty martyrs.  
Theotokion: As thou alone art truly and surely most immaculate, O Theotokos, 
strengthen me, that I may gain control over the passions which enslave me, that, 
rejoicing, I may bless thee, the salvation of the faithful, with a free mind.  
ODE VI  
Canon of saint Januarius  
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
 
The assembly of the iniquitous, seeing thee working signs by thy words, O initiate 
of the sacred mysteries, came to the Creator with all their soul, being most gloriously 
enlightened.  
Both before thine end and after thy divine repose, O holy hierarch, thou wast 
shown to work a multitude of miracles, having received the gift of the Holy Spirit 
from childhood.  
In sacred convocation we all now hymn Faustus and Sosius, Desiderius and 
Eutychius, the wise Acutius and the God-bearing Proclus.  
Theotokion: God the Word became incarnate of thy pure blood for the good of all 
people, O Mother of God. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that our souls be saved.  
Canon of saint Theodore  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
The fire of the furnace was quenched by the divine arrival of the angel, O most 
blessed one, and thy heart, cooled by thy yearning for the Creator, was filled with 
boldness.  
When the tyrant heard the holy words of her who gave thee birth, O martyr 
Theodore, he had her put to the sword, and she finished the race of martyrdom in a 
godly manner.  
Like a heifer, Philippa desired to die with her son, and she hastened, un-
summoned, to the tribunal, receiving the glory of the martyrs.  
Theotokion: Behold the holy mountain! Behold the phial of the Spirit, the bridge 
leading to the God of all, the Virgin Theotokos, whom we bless!  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyrs, in Tone III:  
Ye were adorned with the anointing of the priesthood * and the blood of 
martyrdom, * O glorious Januarius and Theodore, * shining forth everywhere, * 
dancing in the highest, and look down upon us, * who have come to your temple and 
unceasingly cry out therein: * Preserve us all, ** entreating God Who is the Lover of 
mankind!  
ODE VII  
Canon of saint Januarius  
Irmos: The three youths in Babylon, * regarded the tyrant’s command as 
foolishness, * and cried aloud in the midst of the flame: * Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God of our fathers!  
By the descent of the angel in the midst of the flame thou didst emulate the godly 
children, O Januarius, dancing about and hymning the Savior with mystic songs, 
chanting: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Preserving thy mind free from pain by divine grace, even before thy suffering thou 
didst heal all manner of ailments, being known as a pastor, a martyr and a great 
wonder-worker.  
Thou didst stand in the midst of the tribunal of the tyrants, O martyr, suffering 
patiently, putting the wicked to shame and showing the truth to all the deceived.  
Theotokion: Mortify the movements of my flesh, O most pure one who hast given 
birth to Life, and enliven my soul, which hath been slain by the passions and many 
sins, O pure one.  
Canon of saint Theodore  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Preserved by the dew of the Spirit like the three children, unconsumed in the 
midst of the fire, O divinely wise Theodore, with them thou didst chant: Blessed art 
Thou, the all-hymned God of our fathers!  
With discourse of grace which richly flowed from thy lips thou didst denounce the 
delusion of the heathen, O martyr Theodore, and thou didst cry: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
She who gave thee birth was given knowledge of thy name and thy suffering even 
before thou wast conceived, O much-suffering great martyr Theodore, crying out: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Be thou my cleansing, O all-immaculate one, mediating before Him 
Who was born of thee, that He terminate my grievous debts, grant me divine entry 
into the kingdom of God, and delight in the sustenance and a share of the light of 
heaven.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of saint Januarius  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
Let the great Proclus be hymned with Acutius and Eutychius, the godly 
Desiderius, Faustus and Sosius: the valiant minded and glorious martyrs of the Savior.  
The blessed choir of athletes acquired thee as its chief, O glorious initiate of the 
sacred mysteries, and they trampled underfoot the chief among the demons 
destroying the haughty pride of ungodliness.  
Like the children thou didst trample the fire underfoot, like Daniel thou didst 
restrain the raging of the wild beasts, O most excellent one, and like Paul thou wast 
beheaded, finishing thy race in piety.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: He Who made His abode within thy womb showed thee to be a 
dwelling-place for Himself, O most pure Bride of God. To Him do we unceasingly 
cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Canon of saint Theodore  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Uplifted upon thy cross, thou didst hang suspended thereon for three days, O 
Theodore, manifestly portraying the ever-memorable three-hour suffering of thy 
Master. Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou wast affixed to a tree, receiving painful wounds, and thou didst wound the 
serpent foe who had caused Adam and his descendants a painful death through eating 
of the tree, O Theodore. Wherefore, we honor thee throughout all ages.  
Perge proclaimeth thy struggles, pangs, contest, wounds, blessed suffering and 
honored death, for the sake whereof thou hast passed over to immortal life, O 
Theodore, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
Theotokion: O the depth of thine ineffable mystery! He Who of old formed man 
with His hands Himself taketh form, incarnate, entering the womb of the Ever-virgin; 
and He saveth me who cry out with fear: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of saint Januarius  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
With gladness let us magnify the honored contest, struggles and battles of 
Januarius, his courage even to the shedding of his blood, his sufferings and violent 
death, and the unfathomable abyss of his miracles.  
Thou hast been seen on the summit of honored martyrdom, O glorious one, like a 
never-setting sun; leading forth a multitude of martyrs like divine stars, who now 
enlighten the ends of the earth with the splendor of their great sufferings.  
Thy radiant memory hath shone forth, illumining the whole world with the rays of 
the divine Spirit, driving away the darkness of evils; and thereon we beseech thee, O 
divinely inspired one, to enlighten all who hymn thee.  
Theotokion: With the effulgence of the Light within thee, O Maiden, illumine my 
blinded soul, and with thy hand teach me to walk along the paths of salvation and to 
avoid stumbling into delusion, that I may bless thee with faith.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Canon of saint Theodore  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Following the steps of Christ and the first martyr, O most wise one, thou didst 
endure crucifixion, accepting stripes and the wounds of nails; and hastening from 
earth to the heavens, thou hast received the honor of those who are crowned: the 
immutable kingdom of God.  
Standing in the midst of the fire, thou wast shown to be like lustrous gold through 
the descent of the honored angel, O Theodore, and, aflame with desire for the 
Master, thou didst remain unconsumed. And with him thou didst chant a hymn of 
salvation, rejoicing in sanctity.  
We stand piously in the house of our God, with faith blessing His athlete who 
contended with manly mind, casting down the arrogance of the enemy, and hath 
thereby received the crown of victory from the hand of Christ on high.  
Rejoicing, O martyr Theodore, thou wast taken up to the mansions on high, and 
hast attained unto the ranks of the incorporeal ones, having with thy body mightily 
vanquished the incorporeal demons; and thou prayest with faith for those who honor 
thee, that we may receive release from our debts.  
Theotokion: Enlighten the eyes of my soul, O pure Birthgiver of God, that the 
grievous darkness of sin not overtake me, and the abyss of despair not cover me. Do 
thou thyself save and guide me, O intercessor for the faithful who cannot be put to 
shame.  
 
 
