--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 28th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLES JASON & SOSIPATER  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS DADA, MAXIMUS & QUINTILIAN  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy apostles, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs, O Lord ...”: 
The blessed Jason, the stream of salvation flowing forth upon the fullness of the 
earth, watered the hearts of all those beset by the burning of evils and bedewed them 
with faith; wherefore, since his repose he hath been called blessed. By his 
supplications, O Lord, bestow great mercy upon us all.  
The divinely inspired Jason became a ladder reaching to the heavens, leading the 
faithful up to the heavenly life by his teaching; and the glorious one liveth even after 
his death, and standeth, rejoicing, before the Trinity. By his supplications, O Lord, 
bestow great mercy upon all.  
Jason, the most noetically rich apostle, ever poureth forth healings upon those 
who approach his shrine, and causeth the infirmities of their souls to cease, driving 
away the spirits of falsehood, and stilling tempests. By his supplications, O Lord, 
bestow great mercy upon all.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
Having confessed the uncreated Trinity * before the tribunal, * O ye three holy 
martyrs, ye were slain, * and ye have now been deemed worthy of the life which 
groweth not old * having inherited a torrent of sustenance. * Wherefore, pray ye, * 
that the Trinity grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
O invincible martyrs, * ye who shed your blood in torrents, * have dried up the 
flows of delusion, * pouring forth showers of healings * upon all who have recourse 
to you with faith, * by taking away the power of infirmities. * Wherefore, pray ye, that 
the trinity ** grant unto our souls peace and great mercy.  
With hymns, O ye faithful, let us all honor today * the godly Dada, Maximus and 
Quintilian, * the steadfast warriors, * the most wise martyrs, * who are inhabitants of 
paradise, * and now make supplication, * that God grant unto our souls ** peace and 
great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion, in 
the same melody:  
O all-hymned Sovereign Lady, * the hope and confirmation of the faithful, * our 
refuge and help, we beseech thee: * from every misfortune preserve thy servants * 
who with faith worship thine Offspring. * Him do thou entreat, * that He grant unto 
our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The Sovereign Lady, the unblemished ewe-lamb, * beholding 
her Lamb upon the Cross, * bereft of form and comeliness, * lamenting, said: “Woe 
is me! * Whither hath Thy comeliness gone, O most Sweet One? * Where is Thy 
splendor? Where is the brilliant grace * of Thine image, ** O my Son most beloved?”  
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostles * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins ** 
unto our souls 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy apostle Jason, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified! 
Dwelling with the angelic choirs, ever full of never-waning light, and deified by 
true communion, O most spiritually rich apostle, illumine those who with love 
celebrate thy holy memory and chant unto the Lord: For gloriously hath He been 
glorified!  
Divine and ardent desire all but consumed thee, O Jason; wherefore, thou didst 
follow Him Who came to cast fire down to the ground, O glorious one, and, 
illumined by Him, thou didst radiantly cry aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, for glori-
ously hath He been glorified!  
Emulating the immaterial intelligences in character, O blessed one, thou didst 
serve Him Who mercifully manifested Himself on earth for our sake in the matter of 
a body; and thou wast His sacred minister, crying aloud: Let us sing unto the Lord, 
for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Theotokion: The Incomprehensible One Who in His great tender compassion 
became visible, assuming flesh from the Virgin who knew not a man, hath through 
the suffering of His flesh manifestly led up to dispassion those who were wretchedly 
brought low by the passions of the flesh. To Him let us sing as is meet: For gloriously 
hath He been glorified!  
Canon of the holy martyrs, the composition of Joseph, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
Ever standing with boldness before God Almighty, O martyrs, pray ye, that He 
send us cleansing of sins.  
Having finished the fight and vanquished the greatly crafty enemy, O martyrs, ye 
were crowned with divine beauty. Wherefore, in joy we ever glorify you with hymns.  
By the strength of the most Holy Spirit ye destroyed the lying serpent, O ye who 
are blessed of God, and ye now enjoy the gifts of immortality.  
Theotokion: In His loving-kindness He Who is filled to overflowing hath emptied 
Himself and assumed flesh, leading up to our primal beauty us who with faith praise 
thee on earth, O pure one.  
ODE III 
 Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thou wast shown to be the harp of the Spirit, sounding forth for us divinely 
comely teachings, interrupting the songs of the most wicked.  
Like a river thy tongue hath poured forth springs of life and dried up the bitter 
waters of delusion, O glorious one.  
Through the activity and grace of the Holy Spirit thy divers sacred relics pour 
forth healings, O wise one.  
Theotokion: By thy life-imparting entreaty, O most pure one who hast given birth 
to Life, slay thou the sin which dwelleth in me.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 
Having been forcibly made prisoners for Christ, ye broke the evil bonds of 
delusion with grace, and having been sundered from the flesh, ye have passed over to 
life.  
Desiring to behold the beauty of God, O all-praised athletes, adorned with 
steadfastness of mind ye endured wounds, chains and a violent death.  
Suffering lawfully with strength of character, O all-praised martyrs, together ye 
were arrayed in a crown of victory, and ye stand now in joy before the adored Trinity.  
Theotokion: He Who by nature is uncircumscribable, becoming incarnate through 
thee hath been circumscribed, O divinely joyous and pure one. Him do thou 
unceasingly entreat, that He take pity and save those who hymn thee.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
With the brilliantly radiant beams of thine honored discourses thou didst illumine 
all in a godly manner, O Apostle Jason, and having driven away the darkness; and 
suffered, O blessed one, thou pourest forth healings, causing the cruel pangs of our 
bodies to cease. Wherefore, assembling, we all celebrate thy holy festival, glorifying 
the Savior, and we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of 
sins to those who honor thy holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Having drawn nigh to pain with steadfastness of soul, ye showed yourselves to be 
unconquered by the manifold wiles of the deceiver, O martyrs, ye peers of the angels. 
Wherefore, the whole world honoreth your struggles and honored sufferings, 
whereby ye have been glorified.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion,  
or the Theotokion in Tone I: 
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Thou wast a disciple of Paul, the most wise preacher of sanctity, and an emulator 
of Christ, O glorious one, submitting to His divine commands.  
Thou wast adorned with the vesture of the bridal-chamber of the divine Church, 
O God-bearer, having betrothed thyself to it with the sweet words of thy wisdom.  
With thy divine hands which dispelled evils thou wast a most skilled physician of 
the infirm, healing the most grievous sufferings.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady who knewest not wedlock and hast given birth to 
the Word, save me and free me from misfortunes and eternal damnation.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord * and I am afraid. * Having 
understood Thy works, * I have glorified Thy might, * thus said the prophet. 
Confirming the divine law, the athletes spurned the iniquity of the ungodly, 
suffering piously and pleasing the Lord.  
Let us bless today the valiant Dada and Maximus, who suffered lawfully, and let us 
crown the most honored Quintilian with praises.  
Remaining unmoved during your suffering, O saints, ye cast down all falsehood 
and have received a crown of victory from Christ God.  
Theotokion: Raise me up who am beset by despondency, O Birthgiver of God, 
that I may do the will of God, and that I may bless thee, O tireless intercessor for all.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
With divine teachings thou didst free those stuck fast in delusion and mindlessly 
and perniciously enslaved, O most blessed one.  
Standing forth like a beacon on the heights of divine knowledge, O Jason, thou 
hast drawn to the divine harbor those who are grievously drowning.  
With thy vivifying discourse, O blessed one, thou hast given life to those slain of 
old by the sting of the serpent, astonishing them.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be more holy than the cherubim, having 
given flesh on earth to the Master of all, O all-immaculate and pure Sovereign Lady.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light * upon us who rise early at 
dawn, * unto the judgments of Thy commandments, * O Master, Lover of 
mankind, * Christ our God.  
Confessing the divine and saving name before the tyrants, O holy ones, ye endured 
the trial of many tortures and an unjust death.  
Strengthened by the grace of the divine Spirit, ye were not afraid of bodily tortures, 
nor did ye render worship to graven images, O right victorious martyrs.  
Having received an imperishable crown, O ye three holy martyrs, ye stand now 
before the Trinity, having been deemed worthy of never-waning radiance, and are 
now called blessed.  
Theotokion: Heal thou the incurable passions of my heart, O all-immaculate 
Sovereign Lady, I pray thee, and dispel the grievous darkness of my mind, O most 
pure one.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: As Thou didst deliver the prophet from the depths * of the abyss, O 
Christ God, * so deliver me also from my sins, * O Lover of mankind, * and 
guide my life, I pray Thee.  
Amazed by the beauty of Him Who hath drawn nigh unto us in His loving-
kindness, O Apostle Jason, thou didst follow after Him forsaking the beauty of life.  
Studying things divine, O glorious one, by grace thou didst teach the effulgence of 
the Trinity to those afflicted of old with blindness and the mindlessness of ignorance.  
Dispelling divers ailments and expelling evil spirits, thou didst turn the people to 
the knowledge of the Lord, delivering them from the deception of the evil one.  
Theotokion: The Word of salvation descended into thy womb like dew upon the 
fleece and became a man through thee, O Maiden, saving me by thy mediation.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Lead my life up from corruption O Christ God, * as didst Thou the 
Prophet Jonah, * I cry to Thee O Lover of mankind, * for with Thee is life, 
incorruption and might.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Seen as newly revealed stars, O all-praised martyrs, ye enlighten the whole of the 
earth, dispelling the gloom of ungodliness with grace.  
Having utterly rejected the laws of the ungodly, and been manifestly confirmed by 
the law of the Lord, O holy martyrs, ye suffered lawfully for Christ.  
Shown forth well by your exalted understanding and deeds, O all-praised ones, ye 
subdued beneath your feet, beatified with martyrdom, him who fell headlong from on 
high.  
Theotokion: In a manner transcending the laws of nature and past all 
understanding, O all-immaculate Maiden, thou hast given flesh to the Creator of 
nature. And, confessing Him, the right victorious martyrs suffered.  
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Ye were shown to be like most radiant stars, * illumining the whole world * with 
the light of your preaching, * O divine Apostles Jason and Sosipater. ** Save those 
who honor you with faith.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: In Babylon, the pious youths did not worship the golden image, * but, 
bedewed in the midst of the fiery furnace, * they chanted a hymn, saying: * O 
supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having drawn nigh to constant pain, O Jason, thou hast eased the pangs of the 
faithful and guided to painless acceptance those who piously chant: Blessed is the 
God of our fathers!  
Thou didst cause the corruption of evil to cease, O blessed one, and planting the 
understanding of salvation in the minds of all; thou hast thereby enlightened those 
who cry out to the Master: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Bearing Christ in thine arms, as thou a throne of fire, O most 
immaculate one, entreat Him as thy Son and Lord, to grant peace to the world which 
crieth aloud: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither touched 
nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a single mouth * 
Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * ‘O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou.’ 
Setting your souls aflame with the fire of divine fear, O wise ones, ye utterly 
consumed all the bitter tinder of polytheism, and having been taken up to the never-
setting radiance, grant unto us forgiveness of our sins.  
Having truly quenched the conflagration of polytheism with the streams of your 
blood, O blessed ones, ye pour forth a shower of miracles upon us who with faith 
ever have recourse to the shrine of your relics.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Having shown yourselves to be the dwelling-place of the Spirit, O wise and right 
victorious martyrs, the temple wherein ye now lie hath poured forth a well-spring of 
miracles; and fleeing to it, we have been delivered from all the defilement of the 
passions.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Birthgiver of God, thou hast given birth for us to 
the incarnate Word Who is consubstantial with the Father and the Spirit. Him do 
thou beseech, that He save from all sufferings and evil circumstances those who 
hymn thee. 
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * ‘Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord’. 
Thou didst uproot the thorns of blasphemy with the seed of the Word, O Jason, 
and cultivate thereby a multitude of the saved as grain a hundredfold.  
Him before Whose throne thou dost now stand in holiness and sanctity, hath 
appointed thee a luminary for Tarsus, for the enlightenment of those in darkness, O 
Apostle Jason.  
Thou wast an instructor of the law for those who had been made subject to vain 
delusion, and didst save those who offered worship to created things, teaching them 
to worship the uncreated God alone.  
Theotokion: Having given birth to God the Word, O Maiden, heal thou the 
passions of our flesh and soul, that we may all glorify thee with faith and love.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Loving the Lord with all your soul, ye were slain like lambs for the noetic 
Shepherd, and having been offered up upon the divine altar; ye now dwell in the 
mansions of the firstborn.  
With faith let us honor Quintilian, Dada and Maximus, the martyrs of Christ, the 
divine stars illumining the hearts of all with rays of miracles.  
By your discourse ye overcame the ungodly and the impious, and rejoicing ye 
suffered, O martyrs of Christ; and have been numbered among the divine passion-
bearers from all ages, and with them ye are ever honored.  
Theotokion: Like a fiery throne thou didst bear Christ Who mingled with us in the 
coarseness of the flesh. Him do thou beseech, O pure Theotokos, that He take pity 
and save those who honor thee with love.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE IX 
 Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: Thou hast passed the limits of nature, * having conceived the Maker 
and the Lord, * and didst become a door of salvation * unto the world; * 
wherefore we unceasingly magnify thee, O Theotokos. 
Let us all form sacred choirs, blessing in sanctity Jason, the great apostle of Christ 
who ever rejoiceth with the incorporeal choirs.  
Creation leapeth up, dancing now on thine honored festival, O glorious Jason, and 
the apostles, prophets and all the martyrs rejoice. With them we magnify thee with 
faith.  
The shrine where thy patient and much suffering body lieth doth ever emit rays 
dispersing the darkness of pain, O most blessed Jason.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, thou hast been revealed to be the Mother of 
Emmanuel, Who assumed flesh from thy womb, deifying human nature. Wherefore, 
O most holy Birthgiver of God, we call thee blessed.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud, * upon which came down the beggingless 
Lord of all, * like the dew from heaven upon the fleece, * and from whom He 
became incarnate for our sake, * becoming a man; * wherefore we all magnify 
thee, as the pure Mother of our God. 
Following the passion of the Dispassionate One, O passion-bearers, together ye 
underwent the testing of most subtle tortures and have inherited life through death, 
abiding unto the ages of ages. Wherefore, ye are ever blessed.  
Having come to the comely knowledge of, and trodden well, the paths of 
martyrdom, which lead to the noetic places of rest, O glorious martyrs, ye received 
your end by the sword, and ever rejoice with the angels.  
Let us stand in the temple of the Lord and bless Dada, Maximus and Quintilian, 
the valiant warriors who have destroyed the enemy, and let us cry out with faith: O 
Lover of mankind, by their supplications deliver us all from the perils of great 
confusion.  
Like the sun your sacred memory doth radiantly illumine creation, O most glorious 
victors. By your sacred mediations deliver us who celebrate it from the darkness of 
the passions, we pray, O athletes of God the Savior.  
Theotokion: As a lover of sin I fall down in repentance before thy compassions, O 
God, and cry out with faith: By the intercessions of her who bore Thee in purity on 
earth, take pity on me and deliver me from everlasting torments, O supremely good 
Christ.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostles * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins * 
unto our souls 
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
Ye were shown to be like most radiant stars, * illumining the whole world * with 
the light of your preaching, * O divine Apostles Jason and Sosipater. ** Save those 
who honor you with faith.  
 
 
