--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS,  
STEPHEN BISHOP OF PERM  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy hierarch: 3 in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
When divine love came upon thee, * O most wise Stephen, * forsaking all carnal 
wisdom, * thou didst follow Christ without turning back, * and, emulating the 
apostles, * didst preach God * to the ignorant in faraway lands, * guiding them all out 
of their darkness * and into the light of divine knowledge; * wherefore, Christ, Whom 
thou didst serve, * hath crowned thee with heavenly wreaths; * Him do thou beseech, 
** that He save and enlighten our souls. 
When divine desire descended upon thee, * O holy hierarch, * forsaking all the 
deceptive wisdom * which is in the world, * thou didst seek that which is higher, * 
desiring to ascend on high; * hence, receiving wisdom * not from men or through 
men, * but from the providence or the Most High, * thou didst devise a new alphabet 
to transmit the knowledge of Christ, * and God became known amongst an ignorant 
people through thee. * Him do thou beseech, O most wise Stephen, ** that He save 
and enlighten our souls.  
When divine knowledge came upon thee, * O holy hierarch Stephen, * moved by 
the Holy Spirit, * thou didst come to enlighten a people * who from of old had lain in 
the darkness of unbelief, * and, enlightening them, didst move them * toward the 
light of divine knowledge, * teaching them to believe * in the consubstantial Trinity, * 
the one Godhead, * Whom do thou entreat on our behalf, * O most wise and holy 
hierarch, ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
And 3 Stichera in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
With thy teaching, O blessed Stephen, * thou didst cultivate the hearts of the 
unbelieving people * which of old had become stony; * wherefore, all of us, the 
faithful, * greatly bless thee ** as a teacher and instructor in piety.  
Thy tongue became the pen of a swiftly writing scribe, O holy hierarch, * 
explaining to all the mighty works of God. * leading all to the knowledge of God, * 
thou didst show forth Pamoi, the deviser of evil, as one mocked with ridicule; * 
wherefore, assembling in spirit, ** we honor thy repose.  
Casting down the temples of the idols, O most wise and holy hierarch, * thou didst 
utterly destroy them, and didst consecrate churches * in which Christ might be 
known; * wherefore, we, thy spiritual children, * hymn thee as an instructor in piety, 
and beseech thee: ** Pray thou that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
All the priests of the idols marveled at thy wisdom and intelligent discourse, and 
reviling their own vain religion as ungodly, they believed with all their soul in Christ, 
Whom thou didst preach. Him do thou entreat, O most wise Stephen, that all who 
celebrate thy sacred festival and honor thy most holy memory with faith, be saved.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple 
mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul 
pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This 
the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His 
grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace; but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet. 
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple; and this of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Like the apostles thou didst teach all to believe in the Trinity One in essence, the 
sole Godhead; wherefore, honoring thee as is meet, we all bless thee as a spiritual 
father, an emulator of the apostles, the kinsman of holy hierarchs, and beseech thee: 
Pray thou, that all who honor thy sacred memory be saved.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Thou wast the dwelling-place and habitation of the most holy Spirit, * O most 
wise Stephen; * wherefore, do thou also make us * who honor thy sacred memory ** 
into a habitation for Him.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Thy life shone forth like the sun * in the hearts of the unbelievers, * emitting the 
radiance of sacred teaching; * wherefore, do thou also illumine with never-waning 
light ** us who honor thy sacred memory.  
Verse: The saints shall boast in glory, * and they shall rejoice upon their beds.  
Cease not in thy supplications, O Stephen, * for thy spiritual children * whom 
thou didst beget through baptism, * that we may all venerate ** thine honorable 
repose.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
As a treasury of wisdom, O holy hierarch Stephen, thou didst illumine the hearts 
of the unbelieving with thy teaching, planting therein the seeds of piety; wherefore, as 
is meet, we all bless thee as a most wise teacher, and we beseech thee: Entreat Christ, 
Whom thou didst serve from thy youth, that He deliver us from the assaults of the 
enemy and save our souls.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Afire with divine desire from the years of thy youth, O most wise Stephen, * thou 
didst take up the burden of Christ, * and, sowing the divine seed in the hearts of the 
people, * which had from of old been hardened by unbelief, * thou didst spiritual 
beget them evangelically; * wherefore, honoring thy most glorious memory, we be-
seech thee: ** Entreat Him Whom thou didst preach, that He save our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion from the Pentecostarion (Twice);  
Glory ..., that of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Afire with divine desire from the years of thy youth, O most wise Stephen, * thou 
didst take up the burden of Christ, * and, sowing the divine seed in the hearts of the 
people, * which had from of old been hardened by unbelief, * thou didst spiritual 
beget them evangelically; * wherefore, honoring thy most glorious memory, we be-
seech thee: ** Entreat Him Whom thou didst preach, that He save our souls.  
Both now ..., that from the Pentecostarion.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed by the Jews ...”: 
Knowing thee to be a most excellent healer of the passions of the soul, O holy 
hierarch Stephen, we beseech thee: Pray thou that the sufferings of retribution be 
lifted from us, that, finding thee as the cause of all good things, we may cry aloud: 
Glory to Him Who hath given thee wisdom! Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! 
Glory to Him Who bestoweth enlightenment upon all through thee! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Cleaving unto virtue from childhood, O holy hierarch Stephen, thou didst become 
a vessel of the Holy Spirit; and having learned wisdom from Him, thou didst teach 
men to cast aside their idols and to believe in Christ. Him do thou entreat, that He 
save all who honor thee with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Stephen, 
and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God on our 
behalf.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having been taught wisdom from on high and united thyself unto God, following 
the Gospel thou didst forsake the world, and having betaken thyself to faraway 
places, through baptism thou didst bring all to the knowledge of Christ; wherefore, 
thou didst cry out unto all: “Come to know God, and ye shall find grace!” O most 
wise hierarch Stephen, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto 
those who with love honor thy most precious memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 35, (MIDPOINT) (JN. 10: 1-8)  
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He 
that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, 
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of 
strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things 
they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, “Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves 
and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
All the priests of the idols marveled at thy wisdom and intelligent discourse, and 
reviling their own vain religion as ungodly, they believed with all their soul in Christ, 
Whom thou didst preach. Him do thou entreat, O most wise Stephen, that all who 
with faith celebrate thy sacred festival and honor thy most holy memory may be 
saved.  
Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos, and two 
canons of the holy hierarch, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon I of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
Having studied the sacred Scriptures from thy childhood, O God-bearing Stephen, 
thou didst travel to faraway places, and through thee God was made known unto the 
unbelievers.  
Where falsehood was worshiped, God hath now been made known to the 
unbelievers through thee, O holy hierarch Stephen; wherefore, we bless thy sacred 
memory as is meet.  
With thy divinely inspired doctrine thou didst teach the people to believe in Christ 
and to turn away from the delusion of idolatry; wherefore, with hymns we all honor 
thee as an emulator of the apostles.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: In thine arms, O Bride of God, thou didst bear Him Who alone doth 
sit in the highest and Who assumed flesh from thee; for thou wast chosen from all 
ages to be a worthy receptacle of the Almighty.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
When thou didst arrive in Perm, O most wise hierarch Stephen, thou didst cast 
down the falsehood which had exalted itself, and by thy most wise teachings didst put 
evil sorcery to shame.  
Thou didst mightily shatter the weapons of the demons, O holy hierarch Stephen, 
and, conquering them by the power of God, thou didst confess Christ to all as the 
true God; wherefore, thou hast received a crown from Him.  
Afire with divine love, O father, thou wast not daunted by the length of thy 
journey, nor by the opposition of the ungodly of those parts, but enduring all thou 
didst lead them to Christ.  
Theotokion: From a royal root thou didst cause Christ the King, the Word of 
God, to bud forth, and didst give birth to Him through thy pure blood in a manner 
transcending human thought and understanding, in two natures but a single 
Hypostasis.  
ODE III  
Canon I  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Thou wast not afraid of the people who were then unbelievers, O holy hierarch, 
but boldly committed their temple and its idols to the fire; teaching them all to cry: 
There is none more holy than Thee, O Lord! (Twice)  
With thy courage and humility thou didst transform murderers into meek lambs; 
wherefore thou hast been crowned, O holy hierarch Stephen.  
Theotokion: Having acquired thee as sure aid, O Mother of God, setting our hope 
on thee we are saved, and fleeing to thee, we are all preserved.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
As a wise and intelligent worker, thou didst prefer nobility of soul over the 
pleasures of the flesh, for revealing most wise teachings unto all, O father, thou didst 
lead a new people to the knowledge of God.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Having rid thy mind of the turmoil of the passions, and emulating Christ, thou 
didst go forth to seek the lost; and having found them, thou chantest with them to 
Him: There is none more holier than Thee, O Lord!  
Having acquired a divinely eloquent tongue, O holy hierarch, thou didst teach the 
people the mysteries of theology, to believe in the Trinity, the one God, Whom do 
thou entreat on our behalf, O Stephen.  
Theotokion: O pure one, we all know thee as the staff which put forth Christ, the 
incorrupt Flower, and the golden censer, who bore in thine arms the Ember of the 
divine Essence, O thou who art divinely blessed. 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
O ye faithful, let us laud the all-praised Stephen, the all-wondrous mind and 
vigilant teacher, who adorned the Church with sacred service, and who by his own 
discourse preserved his spiritual children unharmed, driving away from the sheep of 
Christ the sorcerer who like a wolf had bedeviled them with his vexing teachings; and 
let us say: Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE IV  
Canon I 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Thy pure life shone forth like the sun, O holy hierarch, driving away from the 
people the gloom of the madness of idolatry; and thou didst teach all to cry: Glory to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
As one who is most wise, thou didst put to shame the foolish words of the 
sorcerers, and by thy discourses, as with a sling, thou didst drive them away from the 
flock of Christ, teaching them all to say: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
As a true hierarch, peaceable and meek, O father, thou wast shown to be a pillar of 
devotion to the Church, teaching thy people piety, that they might cry unto Christ: 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Thee do we set forth as a weapon against the enemy, O Mother of 
God, whereby we repel all the sorrows of evil circumstances and escape the turmoil 
of heresy.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Pray that the people be saved whom thou didst enlighten by thy teaching and didst 
teach to cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Having received from God the election of the priesthood, invested with power 
from on high, like the apostles thou didst enlighten a people shrouded in the darkness 
of idolatry, teaching them to cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Theotokion: Of old the ark which received the divinely inscribed law prefigured 
thee, O all-immaculate one, who ineffably conceived in thy womb the Word of God 
Who richly nourisheth the souls of those who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
ODE V 
Canon I 
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Of old thou didst raise up a people who lay in darkness of unbelief by thy teaching, 
showing them to be children of God and heirs of the light; wherefore, O holy 
hierarch, with the love of wisdom we all honor thee.  
The wisdom of the Holy Spirit having poured itself forth through thy lips by grace, 
led the people to the knowledge of Christ, O holy hierarch.  
Since thou dost stand before the great Light as one crowned, O holy hierarch, be 
mindful of thine excellent inheritance which thou didst acquire by manifold labors, O 
father, that we may all call thee blessed.  
Theotokion: The noetic Sun shone forth from thee and spread the radiant beams 
of His divinity upon all, O Sovereign Lady Theotokos; wherefore, we all glorify thee.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
Enkindled by divine zeal, O holy hierarch, thou didst commit the vain idols to the 
fire utterly consuming them; and having led the unbelievers to the Faith, thou 
teachest all to believe in the one Godhead in three Hypostases.  
The accursed sorcerer who desired to turn the people of Christ away from the 
Faith was put to shame when God glorified thee, O most sacred and most wise 
Stephen.  
Theotokion: Thou wast adorned with the beauties of virginity, covering the shame 
of the nakedness of Eve, O thou who hast given birth to Christ, Who bestoweth the 
vesture of immortality upon those who honor thee.  
ODE VI 
Canon I  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
With the plough of thy words thou didst cultivate the stony hearts of the people, 
O holy hierarch, and, having planted in them the divine seed, thou didst produce for 
Christ beautiful fruit.  
Extinguishing the conflagration of idolatry with the rushing streams of thy 
teachings, O most wise Stephen, with thy divine discourses thou didst make steadfast 
the hearts of the faithful.  
Teaching the people to believe in the consubstantial Trinity, O most wise Stephen, 
thou didst lead them away from the pollution of idolatry to the living God.  
Theotokion: Rend thou asunder the record of my sins, O Sovereign Lady, granting 
me release from the grief and sorrows which beset me, and preserve me unharmed.  
Canon II  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Receiving the pastoral staff, O most glorious hierarch Stephen, thou didst become 
a teacher for a new people, becoming all things to all men, like the apostle, that thou 
mightest lead all to Christ. (Twice)  
Thy tongue was a two-edged word wielded against the wicked sorcerer, O holy 
hierarch, cutting down his vile teaching; wherefore, we glorify thee with sacred 
hymns.  
Theotokion: The all-accomplishing Spirit descended upon thee, O all-immaculate 
one, and the Word of God made His abode within thee, ineffably assuming flesh, yet 
remaining immutable.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”: 
Thou wast found to be called not for only those who sought thee, O holy hierarch, 
* but, freeing all from the delusion of idolatry, * thou didst lead them to the Christian 
Faith putting to shame the sorcerer Pamoi, * wherefore, thou didst become the first 
bishop and teacher of Perm. * For this cause, we, thy spiritual children, as ones 
delivered by thee from idols, ** cry out to thee in hymns of thanksgiving: Rejoice, O 
Stephen, most wise teacher!  
Ikos: Untouched by any passionate attachment to the world, O father, from thy 
youth thou didst cleave unto wisdom and attain well unto the art of theology; and 
going forth into faraway lands, thou didst fing the peoples lacking knowledge of God, 
who in their delusion worshiped demons. There, as an apostle, thou didst teach them 
to believe in Christ, and destroying their idols and putting their sorcerer to shame, 
thou didst become their holy hierarch. Wherefore, we, thy spiritual children, as ones 
delivered by thee from idols, cry out to thee in hymns of thanksgiving: Rejoice, O 
Stephen, most wise teacher!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
The ungodly shaman who uttered blasphemy against piety, didst thou drive far 
away from the new people of the flock of Christ, O most wise one; wherefore we cry 
out to Christ: Blessed is the God of our fathers! (Twice)  
As thou hast most gloriously passed from the world to that which transcendeth the 
world, O holy hierarch, and having drawn nigh unto God by thy manner of life and 
by participation in Him, thou dost chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Delivered by thee from the primal curse, O most glorious Sovereign 
Lady, passing on to everlasting life we cry to thee: Rejoice, O thou who hast given 
birth to God for us!  
Canon II  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Vanquished by thee, O most blessed Stephen, the ungodly sorcerer fled, and we 
who have been delivered from his evil spells, cry out unto Christ: O God of our 
fathers Blessed art Thou!  
We who of old were enlightened cry out to thee as to one living; O all-wondrous 
hierarch Stephen, forsake not us who are thy children, as thou didst promise, that 
with thee we may all cry out to Christ: O God of our fathers Blessed art Thou!  
Having been anointed as a hierarch with the oil of divine joy, thou didst lead a new 
people to the knowledge of Christ, teaching them all to cry unto Christ: O God of 
our fathers Blessed art Thou! 
Theotokion: Now have all things been filled with light by thee, O most pure one; 
for thou hast been shown to be the gate through which God hath communicated 
with the world, enlightening those who cry with faith: Blessed is the fruit of thy 
womb, O most pure one!  
ODE VIII  
Canon I  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
 
Instructed by thy words, O holy hierarch, and having come out of the darkness of 
idolatry to the light of divine understanding, we thy children cry out to Christ with 
one voice: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages! (Twice)  
The light of the three-Sunned Trinity, made its abode within thy godly heart, by 
which thou didst enlighten all the people with holy baptism, teaching them to cry out 
to the Creator and Redeemer: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Considering thee the Theotokos, O most immaculate one, with our 
lips and minds we hymn thee; for thou, O most pure one, hast given birth to God the 
Lord Who hath clothed Himself in flesh. Wherefore, we hymn and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thou wast shown to be a brave warrior, O most blessed one, demolishing the 
temples of the idols; and having delivered the people from them, thou didst teach 
them to cry unto Christ with all their soul: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Having penetrated to the depths of the Holy Spirit, thou didst draw forth divine 
understanding therefrom; wherefore, having embellish the Church with Orthodoxy, it 
crieth unto the Creator and Redeemer: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Having put on the armor of Christ, thou didst drive the wicked demons away 
from all people; wherefore, with the holy hierarchs thou hast received a heavenly 
inheritance, O father, and with them thou criest out to Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Eve was driven away from the tree of life, of which she was 
forbidden to partake; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast poured forth upon the 
world Life everlasting, Who giveth life-bearing vivification to the faithful.  
ODE IX  
Canon I  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry: Rejoice! * Pure and blessed 
Ever-Virgin, * who gavest birth to God. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
By thy labors on the earth, O holy hierarch, thou hast received rest in heaven, 
where the choirs of the saints and the most radiant celebration of the righteous are; 
wherefore, be mindful of us who ever glorify thy memory.  
Desiring to receive eternal and incorruptible things, O holy hierarch, and forsaking 
the pleasures of this world, thou didst follow after Christ; wherefore, thou hast joined 
the choir of hierarchs, O most glorious one.  
Having learned the dogmas of piety, O most wise and holy hierarch, thou didst 
become an emulator of the apostles, casting down the delusion of idolatry; wherefore 
as is meet, we bless thy sacred memory.  
Theotokion: Desiring to assume flesh, God made His abode within thee, finding 
thee alone to be the Theotokos who is holier than all; and He truly revealed thee to 
be both Mother and Virgin.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Ever moved by divine desire, and having mastered wisdom and understanding, O 
all-famed and holy hierarch, thou didst turn the people away from falsehood, teaching 
them to believe in the living God.  
Thou wast a shining example, leading all good men to the life on high by thy 
humility and meekness; wherefore, Christ made thee a shepherd of His people. Him 
do thou beseech, that He save all who hymn thee.  
By thy desire for God thou didst quell the uprisings of the passions, and by 
standing whole nights in prayer thou didst receive the gift of beholding the ineffable 
beauties of heaven, O Stephen.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother of God, thou wast shown to be the one who supra-
naturally gave birth to the Word of God, Whom begotten of the Father before all 
ages, in that He is good. Him Whom we now know transcendeth flesh, even though 
He is clothed in a body.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch: 
Receiving hierarchal election not for people or from them, but from God, O most 
wise Stephen, by thy teaching thou hast now made those who before were children of 
darkness into children and heirs of the Light. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
As one most wise, thou didst repulse the vain and foolish words * of the cruel and 
evil Pamoi, * and didst drive him away from the flock of Christ, as though he were a 
wolf, * and as an apostle thou didst teach the people; * wherefore, assembling today 
with love of wisdom, ** we most gloriously honor thy precious memory, O holy 
hierarch. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 14 ---
O thou who with the understanding given thee from on high * didst ponder well 
the things that are here, conceiving a desire for the things which lead to God, * like a 
deer thou didst hasten to streams of water; * and the people who from of old had 
been mired in the darkness of unbelief * thou didst make children and heirs of the 
light through baptism. ** Pray now unceasingly for them, O Stephen.  
Desiring neither glory nor riches, O holy hierarch, * thou didst seek the spiritual 
ability * to guide many by thy desire and lead them to Christ; * and this thou didst 
receive. * Wherefore, unceasingly entreat Christ God, ** that He save all who honor 
thy precious memory.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Come ye, and, assembling now with piety, O ye newly enlightened assemblies of 
the sanctified, render a fitting honor with psalms and praises to our father and 
benefactor, who hath spiritually begotten us through baptism unto regeneration, and 
hath led us from the darkness into the light, and let us cry out, exclaiming: O Lord, 
through the supplications of Stephen Thy favored one, save and have pity on all who 
piously and fervently hymn Thee!  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the first canon of the saint, 
and 4 from ODE VI of the second canon.  
Thou wast not afraid of the people who were then unbelievers, O holy hierarch, 
but boldly committed their temple and its idols to the fire; teaching them all to cry: 
There is none more holy than Thee, O Lord! (Twice)  
With thy courage and humility thou didst transform murderers into meek lambs; 
wherefore thou hast been crowned, O holy hierarch Stephen. (Twice) 
Receiving the pastoral staff, O most glorious hierarch Stephen, thou didst become 
a teacher for a new people, becoming all things to all men, like the apostle, that thou 
mightest lead all to Christ. (Twice)  
Thy tongue was a two-edged word wielded against the wicked sorcerer, O holy 
hierarch, cutting down his vile teaching; wherefore, we glorify thee with sacred 
hymns.  
Theotokion: The all-accomplishing Spirit descended upon thee, O all-immaculate 
one, and the Word of God made His abode within thee, ineffably assuming flesh, yet 
remaining immutable.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Afire with divine desire from the years of thy youth, O most wise Stephen, * thou 
didst take up the burden of Christ, * and, sowing the divine seed in the hearts of the 
people, * which had from of old been hardened by unbelief, * thou didst spiritual 
beget them evangelically; * wherefore, honoring thy most glorious memory, we be-
seech thee: ** Entreat Him Whom thou didst preach, that He save our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Thou wast found to be called not for only those who sought thee, O holy hierarch, 
* but, freeing all from the delusion of idolatry, * thou didst lead them to the Christian 
Faith putting to shame the sorcerer Pamoi, * wherefore, thou didst become the first 
bishop and teacher of Perm. * For this cause, we, thy spiritual children, as ones 
delivered by thee from idols, ** cry out to thee in hymns of thanksgiving: Rejoice, O 
Stephen, most wise teacher!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 318 (HEB. 7: 26-8: 2)  
Brethren: Such a high priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those 
high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: for 

--- PAGE 16 ---
this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests 
which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the 
Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this 
is the sum: We have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of 
the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, 
which the Lord pitched, and not man.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his 
tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW , § 24 (MT. 7: 24-8: 4)  
The Lord said: “Whosoever heareth these sayings of Mine, and doeth them, I will 
liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock: And the rain 
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it 
fell not: for it was founded upon a rock. And every one that heareth these sayings of 
Mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house 
upon the sand: And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and 
beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it.” And it came to pass, 
when Jesus had ended His sayings, the people were astonished at His doctrine: For 
He taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes. When He was come 
down from the mountain, great multitudes followed Him. And, behold, there came a 
leper and worshipped him, saying: “Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean.” 
And Jesus put forth His hand, and touched him, saying: “I will; be thou clean.” And 
immediately his leprosy was cleansed. And Jesus saith unto him: “See thou tell no 
man; but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses 
commanded, for a testimony unto them.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
