--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 24th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR SABBAS THE GENERAL  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Thou wast an invincible commander, * a valiant athlete, * and a universal beacon, 
* illumining the ends of the world with the dawning of thy miracles * and dispelling 
the heavy darkness of the demons, * O great Sabbas, * thou adornment of martyrs, * 
fellow citizen of the holy incorporeal ones, ** and intercessor for our souls.  
Incarcerated in prisons, * burned with fire, * tortured with many torments, * torn 
asunder upon a tree, * afflicted with winter’s cold, * and unceasingly inflicted with 
frequent wounds, * thou didst remain unshaken, O athlete, * receiving with fervor ** 
a blessed end in the waters.  
A comely youth wast thou, * O most noetically rich martyr, * ever marveled at by 
all; * fearlessly setting thyself apart * for the labors of suffering, * and with thy holy 
and great struggles * raising up standards of victory against all enemies. * Wherefore, 
O right wondrous one, ** we honor thee with praise.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Bedew my mind * with showers of the Most holy Spirit, O most pure one, * who 
ineffably gaveth birth unto Christ * the drop Who with His compassions washeth 
away * the countless iniquities of mankind; * dry up the upwelling of my passions, * 
and grant unto me a torrent * of ever-living nourishment, ** by thy supplications.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Or this Troparion, in Tone V: 
Abandoning O spiritual athlete, earthly rank and honor, * thou didst confess Christ 
God before the false and tyrannical emperors, * and for His sake, O glorious one 
thou didst undergo many sufferings. * Wherefore, splendidly adorned with the armies 
of heaven, * thou hast been crowned with a most beautiful wreath of victory * by the 
King Who reigneth over all. * Standing before Him, O Sabbas, ** pray thou that He 
save our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyr, in Tone II: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Delivering our nature from the gates of hell, O Lord, Thou didst enclose it in 
everlasting habitations, and having slain death, Thou hast poured forth life.  
Having forsaken an army on earth, O glorious Sabbas, for thy divine labors thou 
hast gloriously been numbered among the ranks and armies of heaven, glorifying 
Christ.  
Invested with power from on high, O wise and most glorious one, thou hast been 
revealed to be steadfast against the enemy and invincible, courageously overcoming 
their prowess.  
Ever-radiant, thou didst shine forth as a beacon amid the night of deception, 
righteously proclaiming Christ the Sun unto all and dispelling the darkness of 
ungodliness.  
Theotokion: The Son of God Who was born from thee, but begotten from the 
Father, hath by His resurrection unto life eternal, rescued from the underworld us 
who ever hymn thee, in that He is lovingly compassionate.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Laying low the power of the enemy and the dominion of death, Christ hath 
enlivened and strengthened our nature by His resurrection.  
The fervent love of Christ, setting thee divinely afire, O most wise one, separated 
thee from all mortal and corruptible things and showed thee to be an opponent of 
delusion.  
Recognizing the one Creator and Lord Who gave Himself as the deliverance of 
men, thou didst give thy blood for Him, O Sabbas, for the sake of future reward.  
Theotokion: The tyranny of death came to an end and the treasuries of hell were 
abolished by the resurrection of Him Who was born of thee, O most pure one, and 
the treasuries of life have been filled.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Shown to be an invincible commander, thou didst overcome the wiles of the 
barbarians, O glorious one; and, having suffered mightily, thou didst vanquish hordes 
of the invisible foe; wherefore, thou hast been crowned with a wreath of victory. O 
most blessed Sabbas, pray thou fervently on behalf of us who hymn thee with faith.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O Theotokos, fleeing to thy divine protection after God, * I humbly fall down and 
beseech thee: * Have mercy, O all-pure one, * for my sins have submerged my being, 
* and trembling O Sovereign Lady, I fear the torments to come, * O pure one, entreat 
thy Son, ** that I may be delivered from them.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
With the knife of thy true words thou didst valiantly cut through the webs of 
delusion, O most glorious Sabbas.  
The flowering beauty of thy body hath truly revealed the divine magnificence of 
thy soul, O athlete.  
With growing courage of soul and thy sufferings thou didst overcome the ancient 
foe, O glorious one.  
Theotokion: Rescuing mankind from death as from a wild beast, O Virgin, thy Son 
hath translated it to life.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
By the burial of Thy flesh thou didst bury him who warreth against us, O Christ, 
and having as God emptied hell, by Thy resurrection Thou hast resurrected the dead 
who have glorified Thee.  
Adorned with wisdom and beauty, thou didst recognize the Master of all creation; 
wherefore, having suffered for His sake, O Sabbas, thou hast been vouchsafed 
crowns.  
Receiving the mystical gifts of Christ and divinely adorned with His abundant 
splendor, O glorious one, thou wast revealed to be a beacon amid the world.  
Theotokion: Rising from the dead, the Wellspring of life Who was incarnate of 
thee, O Theotokos, hath poured forth life upon human nature and hath, as God, 
given it to drink of the waters of immortality.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Having destroyed death by death, O Christ Who wast voluntarily reckoned as dead 
for our sake, thou didst give life to the dead and delivered them from the bonds of 
death.  
Sprinkled with the divine blood of Christ, O glorious Sabbas, thou didst depart 
from the defilement of idolatrous sacrifices, being clad in the light of grace.  
Thou didst flee the winter of deception and at Christ’s call didst reach the tranquil 
spring, whereby thou hast been enlightened, O most glorious one.  
Theotokion: By His resurrection, O most pure one, thy Son hath restored us who 
have become corrupt through transgressions and transported us to heaven, making us 
godlike through grace.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Revealed to be an invincible athlete, * thou didst overcome the wiles of the 
barbarians, O glorious one, * and having contended most steadfastly, * thou didst 
vanquish a multitude of the invisible foes. * Wherefore, thou hast woven a wreath of 
victory. * Entreat Christ, O all-blessed Sabbas, ** on behalf us who honor thee with 
faith.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Christ, of His own will sleeping in the flesh as one dead in the tomb, hath 
awakened the dead who slept in Hades from ages past, and by His life-bearing 
resurrection hath raised them up who chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Holding the sword of divine words like a knife, O wise one, thou didst pierce the 
hearts of the impious and wound the deceitful iniquities of the adversary; and thou 
didst cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Though thou wast crippled by thine enemies, thou wast not shaken in soul nor 
cast down, for thou didst have Christ guiding thee and strengthening thee in 
steadfastness. To Him didst thou cry out and chant in thanksgiving, O Sabbas: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Thou didst trample the dead foe under thy feet, O athlete, and taking those 
deluded by him as plunder; thou hast presented them to the Master of all, as they cry 
aloud with understanding: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Weak human nature, clothed in mighty strength at the resurrection of 
thine Offspring, O most glorious Virgin, and arrayed with valor against death, doth 
glorify thee, the pure Mother of immortality and life. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 ODE VIII  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Having slain the originator of death by the death of Thy body, O Compassionate 
One, thou didst show him to all peoples as eternal death, thee do we supremely exalt, 
O Life and Incorruption!  
Cleansed of all the mire of ungodliness and the worship of idols by the laver of 
baptism, O athlete Sabbas, thou didst draw nigh in purity to the Creator, showing 
manful endurance in thy contests.  
Astonishing thy tormenters with thy honeyed discourse and thy sweet gaze, O wise 
one, thou didst win victories over them and cried aloud: Thee do we exalt supremely, 
O Lord, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: The Author of my life, confronting death in the flesh, slew it: And He 
hath given life to those who hymn thee with love, O Virgin, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Having rent apart the womb of hell, O Compassionate One, Thou didst empty it, 
in that Thou art mighty, filling the heavenly world which had been empty, by raising 
the dead, and giving them life; thereby exalting mankind with Thine understanding.  
Noetically hastening to the summit of the divine understanding of Christ, O 
athlete, thou didst leave delusion behind here below and mount unto Him on wings 
of suffering, zealously magnifying and glorifying Him as Supremely good.  
Considering the arrows of the torturers to be the darts of children, O most 
glorious Sabbas, wounding them with the power of Christ thou didst have Him as an 
ally ever helping thee. Him hast thou magnified unceasingly with faith and love.  
Theotokion: Thy Son and God, having risen from the tomb, shone forth, O 
Virgin, filling the whole world with divine splendor and glory, and with the effulgence 
of incorruption, He hath illumined those who with faith glorify thee as the radiant 
cloud of light.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY  
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Or this Troparion, in Tone V: 
Abandoning O spiritual athlete, earthly rank and honor, * thou didst confess Christ 
God before the false and tyrannical emperors, * and for His sake, O glorious one 
thou didst undergo many sufferings. * Wherefore, splendidly adorned with the armies 
of heaven, * thou hast been crowned with a most beautiful wreath of victory * by the 
King Who reigneth over all. * Standing before Him, O Sabbas, ** pray thou that He 
save our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
Revealed to be an invincible athlete, * thou didst overcome the wiles of the 
barbarians, O glorious one, * and having contended most steadfastly, * thou didst 
vanquish a multitude of the invisible foes. * Wherefore, thou hast woven a wreath of 
victory. * Entreat Christ, O all-blessed Sabbas, ** on behalf us who honor thee with 
faith.  
 
