--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 20th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER THEODORE TRICHINAS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O venerable father Theodore, * thou didst offer thyself as a choice gift unto God, 
* having acquired all-night vigilance and compunction, * divine instruction, * utter 
humility, * hope, faith and undiluted love, * watchfulness and loving-kindness, * true 
dispassion and prayer, ** which showed thee to be a most radiant pillar of light.  
O venerable father Theodore, * seeking with pious mind * to clothe thyself in the 
vesture of truth * and the raiment of salvation, * thou didst never cease to cover thy 
body * with rags of sackcloth; * and thus, strengthened by the power of the divine 
Spirit, * thou didst lay bare the wiles ** of him who stripped us naked.  
Being poor in spirit, thou didst bring thyself * as a living sacrifice, an acceptable 
whole-burnt offering * and a precious gift, O all-blessed one, * to God Who assumed 
our flesh * from the Virgin Mother * and beggared Himself for our sake. * 
Wherefore, thou hast received heavenly delight. * Pray thou ever to Him, we beseech 
thee, ** that He have mercy upon us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
The pre-eternal God, * taking flesh from thy blood, * hath shown thee forth, O 
pure one, * as an intercessor for all mankind. * Wherefore, deliver thy servants * from 
all misfortune * and every evil circumstance, * and grant that all who glorify and bow 
down before thee ** be deemed worthy of the splendor of the elect.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Cross * and voluntarily accepting 
suffering, O Jesus, * Thy Virgin Mother, O Master, * cried aloud: Woe is me, my 
sweet Child! * How is it that Thou dost endure * unjustly inflicted wounds, * O 
Physician Who healeth the infirmities of mankind, * delivering all from corruption ** 
in Thy tender compassion?  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
ODE I  
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Enriched with divine gifts, thou didst offer thyself to the Creator as a priceless gift, 
O father; wherefore, impart grace to my thoughts, for I praise thy radiant memory 
and thine angelic life today.  
Nurtured with divine beauty, with fasting thou didst take thy cross upon thy 
shoulder, O blessed Theodore, and, mortifying thy bodily passions, thou didst follow 
after Him Who for thy sake had endured voluntary crucifixion.  
Arraying thyself mightily against the enemy, and armed with the sword of the 
Cross, O father, having humbled thyself and been exalted in wisdom, thou didst bring 
him low. Wherefore, thou wast shown to be a victor and a peer of the saints.  
Theotokion: Saved for thy sake, O Virgin, with hymns we bless and honor thee as 
the Mother of God, most immaculate among women; and together we cry: Rejoice, O 
thou cause of our first parents’ restoration!  
ODE III  
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a lily * 
at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established 
Thou didst blossom like a fragrant rose in the bed of abstinence, O venerable and 
most glorious one, perfuming our hearts with thy divine life.  
Made strong by the might of the Savior, thou didst tread the narrow, hard and 
difficult path, O glorious one, attaining to the summit of Sion on high.  
Thy tomb is seen pouring forth fragrant myrrh by grace, O venerable and sacred 
father, proclaiming thee to be the sweet fragrance of God.  
Theotokion: Thy womb became the bridal-chamber of immortality, from whence 
the Lord and Bridegroom, shining forth, gathered to Himself the choir of the 
venerable, O most pure Virgin.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Approaching the Pure One with frequent supplications, in that thou wast pure, O 
Theodore, thou wast sanctified by the Spirit; hence, dwelling now with the angels, 
thou dost chant the thrice-holy hymn to the Master of all. Wherefore, entreat Christ, 
O venerable one, that He have mercy on those who honor thee with love.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O Theotokos, fleeing to thy divine protection after God, * I humbly fall down and 
beseech thee: * Have mercy, O all-pure one, * for my sins have submerged my being, 
* and trembling O Lady, I fear the torments to come, * O pure one, entreat thy Son, 
** that I may be delivered from them.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
With frequent wounds of abstinence thou didst wound the passions of Egypt, O 
Theodore, and guid to the land of heaven those who piously and venerably follow 
thee.  
With the embroidery of the virtues, O Theodore, thou didst fashion for thyself 
vesture pleasing and most pure, and having arrayed thyself therein, thou hast entered 
into the bridal-chamber on high.  
Bowed down through dehydration, thou didst labor to cover thy flesh with hair-
cloth, O Theodore; wherefore, noetic gladness shone forth upon thee through the 
divine Spirit.  
Theotokion: At the dread hour, O most pure and immaculate one, save and deliver 
me who am condemned, and rescue me from Gehenna, that I may bless and honor 
thee as is meet.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Having taken up the angelic life on earth, O venerable and divinely wise Theodore, 
by fasting and all manner of affliction thou didst slay the uprisings of the passions.  
Ever contemplating the hour of judgment, rising early thou didst drive from thy 
soul the sleep of despondency, adorned with divine love.  
Loving the mansions on high as a true monk, thou didst raise up on the earth 
houses for monastics; and having been established therein by thee, they honor thee, 
O venerable one.  
Theotokion: Thou alone hast given birth to the Creator and Lord of all, the 
hypostatic Life, O most pure one; and loving Him, the multitude of venerable fathers 
lived in holiness.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Illumined by higher visions, thou didst strip thy soul bare of all earthy attachments, 
O Theodore, and thou didst rest in God with unceasing instructions.  
All on earth have been enlightened by the splendor of thy radiant life, O blessed 
one, and they proclaim thee to be the brilliant star of the Sun of the East.  
Oppressed by frost and freezing cold, thou didst warm thyself with thy yearnings 
for God, O Theodore, dispelling the winter of the passions with divine fervor.  
Theotokion: The comely Word loved thee as one beautiful and comely, O pure 
one, and made His abode within thy womb, for the deliverance of us, the faithful.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
Thou hast been shown to be most wondrous in life, * O wise father Theodore, * 
and changing thy rags of haircloth, * which are more precious than any royal treasure 
on earth, * thou didst receive heavenly vesture in their place. ** Pray thou ever on our 
behalf, O venerable one.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
Becoming fragrant through thy virtuous vows, O Theodore, thou dost pour forth 
fragrant myrrh from thy precious relics upon us who honor thee with faith, O 
venerable one, perfuming our hearts.  
Like an innocent lamb pastured on the meadow of abstinence, O venerable one, 
thou hast made thine abode in the fold of heaven, where rejoicing with the Chief 
Shepherd, we beseech thee to ever be mindful of thy sheep.  
As a torch of valor set alight by the fire of the divine Spirit, with the drops of thy 
tears thou didst quench the furnace which burned thy body, O sacred father, 
becoming a light for those in darkness.  
Theotokion: The bush wrapped in fire yet remained unconsumed prefigured thee, 
O most immaculate one; for thou didst bear the fire of the Godhead, Who preserved 
thee unconsumed, and an incorrupt virgin even after giving birth, O pure one.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
With the flow of thy tears thou didst wash away the defilement of thy soul, and 
hast inherited a torrent of sustenance in the land of the meek, O venerable one, in 
that thou wast meek and guileless, and manifestly adorned with righteousness.  
Ever illumined by directing thy gaze toward God, thou didst rout passionate 
thoughts unopposed by the darkness of the flesh, O father, and thereby passed over 
to the light of dispassion.  
So thou mightest approach thy true desire, thou didst show thyself to be humble-
minded, long-suffering and a truly merciful ascetic, covering thyself with rags of 
haircloth, and stripping away the deception of the demons.  
Theotokion: Adorned with the beauties of the virtues, and arrayed in robes 
embroidered with gold, O Virgin, thou hast given birth to the Word Who is more 
beautiful than all the children of mankind. Him do the multitude of the venerable 
hymn throughout the ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Having crucified thy flesh with the fear of thy Master, thou didst die to the world, 
O father Theodore; and now, rejoicing, thou hast passed over to the life of the living, 
deified by communion and ever filled with light, O thrice-blessed one.  
Today we celebrate thy divine memory, a day of festivity, full of holiness; for thou 
hast truly been shown to be a child of the light and the day, and thou livest, rejoicing, 
in never-waning light.  
O radiant beacon, namesake of the gifts of God, lamp of divine radiance, never-
waning effulgence, phial of the virtues and steadfast pillar of monastics: by thy 
supplications deliver thy flock from all tribulation.  
Theotokion: Thy womb became the dwelling-place of the Light which hath 
illumined the world with the rays of divinity, O portal of the Sun of glory, most 
joyous among women, boast of the venerable, O all-holy and most blessed Virgin.  
 
