--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 29th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE 9 HOLY MARTYRS OF CYZICUS 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE VENERABLE MEMNON  
THE WONDER-WORKER  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O all-praised martyrs of Christ, * when once the mindlessness of the Greeks * held 
sway * and drew all * into the pit of iniquity, * ye did not leave the straight path * and 
did not join yourselves to ungodliness, * but suffered With valor of character ** and, 
slain by the sword, ye have inherited life.  
Celebrating with gladness their sacred memory, * with faith let us honor * and with 
hymns let us bless * Theognes, Rufus and Antipater, * Theostichus and Artemas, * 
Magnus and Theodotus, * the glorious Thaumasius and the godly Philemon, * who 
shone forth splendidly in their sufferings, ** enlightening those in darkness.  
O beautiful flowers of the martyrs, * ye sacred legion, * company assembled by 
God, * excellent congregation, * divinely chosen assembly, * holy choir, blessed 
council, * who struggled for the Trinity: * entreat the Trinity, beseech the Trinity for 
us, ** that we may receive forgiveness of sins.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in the same melody:  
O blessed and venerable Memnon, * having first purified thy soul * by ascetic 
labor, * thou didst become a pure and comely abode of the Spirit; * wherefore, thou 
dost expel evil spirits * and ever healest the infirmities * of those who have recourse 
to thee. * Pray thou to Christ ** on behalf of us who praise thee.  
O glorious and venerable Memnon, * having gained control over the passions of 
thy soul, * thou didst train a legion of monks, * zealously anointing them for the 
labors of asceticism, * and presenting them * before the Word Who seeth all things; * 
and having lived a blessed life * and been unsullied by defilements, ** with them be 
thou ever mindful of us who praise thee.  
O venerable and most noetically rich Memnon, * of old thou didst cause * a spring 
of water to pour forth, * unto the praise of the Lord and for the preservation of 
souls. * Thou hast saved ships from the depths of the sea, * by thy supplications thou 
hast preserved some from a plague of locusts, * and dost ever work countless 
miracles. * Pray thou to Christ ** on behalf of us who praise thee.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion. 
 Or this Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
The pre-eternal God, * taking flesh from thy blood, * hath shown thee forth, O 
pure one, * as an intercessor for all mankind. * Wherefore, deliver thy servants * from 
all misfortune and every evil circumstance, * and grant that all who glorify and bow 
down before thee * be deemed worthy ** of the splendor of the elect.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Cross * and voluntarily accepting 
suffering, O Jesus, * Thy Virgin Mother, O Master, * cried aloud: Woe is me, my 
sweet Child! * How is it that Thou dost endure * unjustly inflicted wounds, * O 
Physician Who healeth the infirmities of mankind, * delivering all from corruption ** 
in Thy tender compassion?  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
Delighting together in divine beauty, partaking abundantly of a torrent of 
sustenance, and deified by communion, O crown-bearing martyrs, deliver from cruel 
misfortunes those who call you blessed. 
Having shone forth like rays of the sun, O ye spiritual athletes, with the beams of 
your steadfast struggles, enlighten all with the effulgence of miracles, dispelling the 
night of the passions and driving away the gloom of the demons.  
Having been slain on earth with painful wounds, ye have passed over together to 
the life devoid of pain, O greatly suffering youths, wherefore, ye pour forth healings, 
easing all pain by your God-pleasing supplications, O most noetically rich martys. 
Theotokion: Through thy precious blood thou hast given birth to God, Who 
became incarnate in a manner past understanding and assumed an appearance like 
unto ours, O most immaculate Mother. Wherefore, all of us, the generations of 
generations, call thee blessed, thou confirmation of the holy martyrs.  
Canon of the venerable one, in the same tone:  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Shining with the divine grace of the most Holy Spirit, O life-bearing Memnon, by 
thy radiant supplication, purge the gloom of the passions from those who celebrate 
thine honored repose.  
O venerable one, taking up thy cross, thou didst follow after the Word Who was 
crucified for our sake, and by abstinence and laying on the ground thou didst mortify 
the movements of the flesh, O venerable one.  
Uniting thyself to God by fasting, prayers and tears, thou didst receive from Him 
the grace to heal infirmities and to expel evil spirits, O most blessed and divinely wise 
Memnon.  
Theotokion: Clothing Himself in human nature in His goodness, O pure and most 
holy one, God issued forth from thee twofold in activity and nature. Him do thou 
ever beseech, that He enlighten those who hymn thee.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
In nowise consenting to sacrifice to lifeless graven images, ye offered yourselves as 
living sacrifices to Him Who was sacrificed for our sake, O all-comely youths, O holy 
martyrs.  
Strengthened by the power of the Spirit, with the divine laws ye cast down the 
counsels and pursuits of the iniquitous; and having suffered lawfully, ye have received 
glory.  
Let those of great renown be praised: Artemas and Philemon, Theostichus and 
Magnus, the glorious Rufus, Antipater and Thaumasius, Theognius and Theodotus.  
Theotokion: All the weaponry of the enemy hath now been rendered moot, O all-
immaculate one, who hast given birth to Christ Who was pierced by the spear, and 
for Whom the martyrs, being wounded, did suffer.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
With the enlightenment of the virtues thou didst shine forth on the earth like the 
sun, O venerable one, illumining the souls of all with the grace of the Spirit.  
Thy loins girded, clothed in dispassion, O venerable Memnon, thou didst 
manifestly wield thy staff for the mortification of the passions.  
Having been compassionate to the poor, O venerable one, thou didst receive from 
God the great grace to heal incurable suffering.  
Theotokion: The Word of God made His abode within thine undefiled womb, O 
most pure one, and hath taken away all sin from mortal mankind.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
The radiant choir of sacred athletes, the beautiful company, the divinely assembled 
council, the band ten in number, having suffered mightily and trampled the tyranny of 
the enemy underfoot, have been numbered with the choirs of the angels and stand 
before the Lord.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
We all praise thee, O blessed one, as a radiant star illumining the world with virtues 
and rays of miracles; for thou wast a partaker of divine radiance, O Memnon, and 
hast passed over to the never-waning effulgence. Wherefore, we ever honor thy 

--- PAGE 5 ---
luminous and holy memory, glorifying the Savior, and we cry out to thee with faith: 
Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who honor thy holy 
memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, * we have been overcome by the 
storms of our uncountable sins, * and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, * we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. * Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee * to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O most pure one, * 
unto Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, * that those who worthily 
hymn thee ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Unto Him Who of His own will was sacrificed and hath slain death did ye offer 
yourselves as whole-burnt offerings, divinely slain victims, a perfect holocaust and 
acceptable sacrifices, O ye spiritual athletes. Wherefore, we call you blessed.  
Showing forth a great miracle, O ye spiritual athletes, ye straightened bent arms 
and delivered from dropsy a prominent man who had recourse to your shrine with 
love, O right wondrous ones.  
As is meet let those who suffered be blessed: Artemas and Antipater, Theostichus 
and Rufus, Magnus, Philemon and Theognes, with the glorious Theodotus, for they 
cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!  
Theotokion: He Who sitteth ineffably in the bosom of the Father sitteth as a babe 
in thine embrace, O Virgin; and the right victorious youths, emulating His blessed 
passion, elected to die.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having purified thy heart with streams of tears, O venerable one, thou didst cause 
waters to flow forth in a waterless place, O Memnon, God having glorified thee as 
His favorite.  
Shining forth like a star through thy most glorious life, O blessed one, by thy 
sacred wonders thou wast shown to be another heaven for those who cry out with 
faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Submitting to the laws of the Master, O venerable one, as a shepherd thou didst 
guide those under thee to Him Who gave thee the talant which, as a dutiful servant, 
thou didst greatly increase.  
Theotokion: My mind, which is drawn to the pleasures of the body, do thou make 
steadfast through thy mediation, I pray, O Theotokos who alone hast given birth to 
God the Bestower of good things.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
Setting fire to your minds like a noetic ember, ye truly consumed all the tinder of 
delusion, O blessed ones, and quenched the raging flames of idolatry with the dew of 
faith.  
Going forth to suffer for the indivisible Trinity, O spiritual athletes, it was as 
though ye were not separated in many bodies; wherefore, ye destroyed the whole 
legion of the devil.  
He who with zeal went to your precious reliquaries and was freed from the legion 
of the evil one hymneth your wonders, O godly martyrs.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to us as one who delivereth those who 
hymn thee from misfortunes and corrupting transgressions, passions, sorrows and 
evil circumstances, O Ever-virgin Theotokos.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
With thy mind fixing its pure gaze upon God, O blessed of God, thou wast shown 
to be above the pleasures of the flesh.  
As a physician of bodies, O most noetically rich father, with the grace of the Spirit 
drive away the bestial passions from all of our souls.  
Blessed art thou, and well is it with thee, O most blessed one, for thou hast 
vanquished the malice of the enemy and mortified the passions.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: Thou gavest birth to God, yet remained a Virgin, O Bride of God; 
wherefore rejoicing, the whole race of mankind calleth thee blessed.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 
The death of the divine athletes hath been revealed to be precious in Thy sight, O 
God of all, and honoring them now, Thou hast manifestly shown them to be 
unmercenary healing for the sick.  
Lifting up your hands and hearts to the highest with lofty intent and manly mind, 
O God-bearing martyrs, ye put down the assaults of the wicked one.  
Theotokion: Thy womb was shown to be like a granary holding the Grain of 
immortality, Who feedeth the souls of all the faithful and enlighteneth the martyrs.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
At the mere utterance of thy name the locusts and all the wrath of the demons 
have been driven away, O Memnon, for thou wast known to be pleasing unto God, 
Who hath greatly glorified thee, O father.  
Having vanquished the assault of carnal knowledge, thou didst receive the grace of 
the Spirit, to dispel infirmities and to heal souls sick with sin, O right wondrous one.  
O the wonder! How at the mere invocation of thee, O most glorious Memnon, the 
faithful who sail the seas are saved, beholding thee hastening to still the tumult of the 
waves.  
Theotokion: Mortify the wisdom of my flesh, O Virgin, in that thou didst conceive 
the Slayer of death and the Bestower of life and hast given birth to Him in a manner 
past all telling and comprehension, O most pure one.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
The steadfast and most splendid choir of the ten martyrs, * who confessed the 
three-Sunned Godhead, * cried out to Him at the tribunal: * “O Master, we offer our 
blood, souls and bodies to Thee * as an unblemished sacrifice! * Number us among 
Thy heavenly choirs, ** in that thou art our merciful God!”  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: The three youths in Babylon, * regarded the tyrant’s command as 
foolishness, * and cried aloud in the midst of the flame: * Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God of our fathers!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Your labors ever pour forth divine streams of healings, O right wondrous martyrs, 
drying up rivers of pain and washing away all the defilement of the passions.  
The spiritual athletes rejoiced with ineffable joy when they suffered, and, cut down 
by the sword, they chanted: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
O ye glorious spiritual athletes, ease for us the heavy burdon of our infirmities, the 
sufferings of our hearts, the pangs of our bodies and every sorrow which doth beset 
us.  
Theotokion: Having been shown forth as the great might of all the martyrs, O 
pure Mother of God, thou hast shown thyself to be the help of all those who hymn 
thee with sacred songs.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
With showers of tears thou didst extinguish the furnace of the passions, O blessed 
one, and now, with the fire of thy miracles and grace, thou dost truly consume the 
material harm of infirmities.  
Thou didst love thy Creator with all thy heart, O blessed and wise Memnon; 
wherefore, thou didst stand aloof from the flesh and the world, crying: Blessed art 
Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Planted like a tree by the waters of abstinence, O most noetically rich father 
Memnon, in due season thou didst produce the abundant fruit of working miracles.  
Thou didst cause the harm wrought by the locusts to cease by thy divine 
commands, O wise Memnon, and didst halt the waters of the river, crying and saying: 
Blessed art Thou, O my God!  
Theotokion: Deliver me from the tempest of my innumerable sins, O Maiden, 
thou only mighty help of the lowly and the cleansing of transgressions. Blessed art 
thou among women, O all-immaculate Sovereign Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
O passion-bearing martyrs, we offer joyous praises unto Him Who hath given you 
as great helpers to us who cry: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
Rooted well like branches on the rock of faith, the martyrs have brought forth the 
fruits of suffering for us who chant with faith: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the 
Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
O greatly renowned physicians of the passions, heal the suffering of my soul and, 
beseeching Christ our God, deliver me from Gehenna and the outermost darkness 
thereof.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth to Christ the Bestower of life Who hath 
crowned the lawfully suffering passion-bearing martyrs. Him do thou entreat, O 
Maiden, that He heal me who am vanquished by the law of sin.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Thou didst shine forth like the dawn, like a star, like the great sun, O divinely 
inspired Memnon, illumining with grace the souls of those who have set thee forth as 
an excellent guide, a sacred teacher and a wondrous instructor, who dost cry: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
When thou didst acquire humble wisdom through the grace of the Spirit, O most 
blessed one, thou didst deal a deep wound to the enemy who gave rise to death, 
casting his arrogant mind down to the earth and trampling underfoot his soul-
corrupting snares.  
Having lived a good life, O holy one, thou wast deemed worthy to behold the 
blessedness and everlasting delight of heaven and the splendors of the saints; and 
now thou dost cry out with joy: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The place which before was waterless is now filled with water, proclaiming thy 
faith in the Lord, O venerable one, and the grace of the miracles which thou didst 
perform, crying out to the Bestower of good things: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord!  
Theotokion: Vouchsafe visitation unto my lowly soul, which is afflicted with the 
weight of evils and is drowning, O Sovereign Lady, full of the grace of God, and 
show it to be utterly restored to health, that it may cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
“Lo! the gates of heaven have been opened for you who have suffered!” Christ 
said to the passion-bearers; “Enter in and, rejoicing, and receive everlasting rewards 
for your pangs, as befitteth those who have fought bravely!”  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Ye were beautiful in the wounds of your bodies and emulated the angels; and now 
ye stand before the Beauty of all, ever rejoicing and manifestly adorned with the 
communion of beautiful things, O most honored ones.  
Let us stand in the house of God, praising the sufferings of Antipater and 
Theostichus, Rufus and Philemon, and the wonders of the divine Thaumasius, 
Magnus and Artemas, and the invincibility of Theognius and Theodotus.  
Today hath the festival of the saints shone forth salvation upon us, and, 
celebrating it with supplication, let us cry out to them with faith: O radiant summit of 
the martyrs, illumine the hearts of us all!  
Theotokion: Clothed by thee in the purple robe of the body, the King issued forth, 
supremely adorned from thy womb, vanquishing all enemies and granting victory to 
the spiritual athletes, O only pure Ever-virgin.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Strengthened by the might of the Godhead, O divinely wise Memnon, thou wast 
able to overcome all the power of the enemy; wherefore, having received a crown as a 
victor, pray thou to Christ on our behalf.  
Streams of healings pour forth from thy shrine as from a well-spring, O venerable 
one, washing away pain and defilement by the power of the divine Spirit, and giving 
drink to the minds of those who honor thee.  
Today thy memorial doth enlighten every age and mind like the sun, O father 
Memnon, for thou hast accomplished the works of Light; and having now departed 
unto the never-waning Light, thou hast made thine abode with Him.  
Thou wast taken up into the eternal mansions, and beholding God as is meet, thou 
hast been numbered among the flocks of the venerable, O blessed Memnon. With 
them be thou ever mindful of those who commemorate thee here on earth.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, we joyously declare to thee the cry of the archangel: 
Rejoice, O annulment of the curse, glory of the venerable, boast of the martyrs, 
preaching of the prophets and salvation of mankind!  
 
