--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
 COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, THEODORE OF 
SYKEON, BISHOP OF ANASTASIOPOLIS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “O venerable father ...”: 
O venerable father, sacred Theodore, thou wast sanctified from thy mother’s 
womb, and like Jeremiah of old wast known to God. A star heralded thy nativity, the 
whole world hath truly been enlightened by the splendor of thy life, and the darkness 
of the demons hath vanished. Infirmities have been driven away from men of every 
age, and grace hath poured forth all manner of healings. Wherefore, we cry out to 
thee: Do thou ever entreat Christ, that He grant unto the world great mercy.  
O venerable father, right wondrous Theodore, having consumed all the tinder of 
sin with mighty abstinence and the fire of prayer, thou didst receive divine 
illumination, thou didst cause the grace of the Trinity to abide in thee, and didst 
become wholly radiant, emitting rays of healing, beholding things to come, as did 
Elisha of old, sundering the bonds of barrenness, driving away hordes of demons 
with the power of the divine Spirit, and beseeching Him, that He grant peace and 
great mercy to the whole world.  
O venerable father, most honored Theodore, thou sun who hast illumined the 
earth with thy works and countless signs, precious gift given to Christ God, excellent 
foundation of the priesthood, model of monastics, confirmation of those who have 
recourse to thee with faith, precious stone, house of the Trinity, bowl pouring forth 
an abyss of healings: pray thou ever to Christ, that He grant to the whole world peace 
and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
To whom hast thou likened thyself, O my soul, ever excelling in what is worse and 
mindlessly adding manifold stripes to thy wounds, giving no thought that thou wilt 
become wounded thy whole body over, or that the Judge is approaching, before 
Whom thou wilt have to stand to receive sentence and retribution for thy deeds? Yet, 
turning, fall down before the Virgin, crying: O Sovereign Lady, O Sovereign Lady, 
disdain not me who have angered the right merciful God Who was born of thee for 
the salvation of mankind and was crucified in the flesh!  
Stavrotheotokion: When thou didst behold hanging upon the Tree, * the planted 
Cluster of grapes * Whom, like a vine, thou didst bring forth, * with His divine side 
pierced by a spear, * thou didst exclaim crying aloud O most pure one: * “What is 

--- PAGE 2 ---
this, O my Son and God? * How is it that Thou Who dost heal all infirmities and 
sufferings, * hath undergone suffering, * though Thou art dispassionate according to 
Thy divine nature? * How have the thankless people thus rewarded Thee for Thy 
benefactions, O Benefactor?” * By His sufferings pray thou * that I may ever be free 
from sufferings, ** that I may glorify thee.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Known to be sanctified from thine earliest infancy, * and shown to be full of grace, 
* thou didst illumine the world with miracles, * and didst drive away a multitude of 
the demons, O sacred minister Theodore; ** wherefore, pray thou to the Lord on our 
behalf.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hierarch, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us chant unto God our Redeemer, * Who of old guided Israel * 
fleeing from the slavery of Pharaoh, * and fed them in the wilderness, * for He 
hath been glorified.  
The noetic Sun showed thee forth, O most wise one, as a divinely radiant star of 
the firmament of the Church ever emitting rays of miracles and destroying the 
darkness of the passions.  
The Creator, sanctifying thee from thy mother’s womb, as He did Jeremiah of old, 
O venerable father Theodore, made thee a right useful vessel of the Spirit, who 
drivest away evil spirits.  
With the sweat of thine ascetic endeavor thou didst quench the flame of the 
passions, O Theodore, and with the rain of thy prayers thou didst pour forth streams 
of miracles, clearly extinguishing the burning heat of ailments.  
Theotokion: From thy womb the uncultivated Cluster of grapes sprang forth, O 
pure Virgin Mother, exuding the sweetness of forgiveness and the gladness of 
immortality for those rendered foolish by the drunkenness of evils.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Having established the thunder * and fashioned the wind: * do Thou 
make me steadfast O Lord, * that I may hymn Thee in truth and do Thy will; * 
for there is none holy like unto Thee, O our God.  
How wondrous is thy life, O divinely wise and all-glorious Theodore, how 
awesome thy miracles, and how exalted thy union with God, thy yearning and thine 
unhindered ascent!  
Thou didst avert the assault of the passions by surrendering to pain, O most 
blessed Theodore, and didst thereby set at naught the wicked pursuit of the demons 
by the might of the most Holy Spirit.  
Having recourse to thy precious shrine, and hymning thee, O Theodore, we draw 
forth therefrom treasures of healing, depths of miracles and abundant gifts.  
Theotokion: In thee, O Virgin, have the laws of nature been renewed; for in a 
manner transcending nature and past all telling, thou hast given birth to the Creator 
and Master. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He save our souls.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Given by God to mankind as the namesake of gifts for deliverance from many 
ailments, thou didst work miracles, healing every disease and infirmity, and driving 
away hordes of demons by thy word alone. Wherefore, having worthily shepherded 
the Church of Christ, thou didst become a dweller with the apostles. O holy hierarch 
Theodore, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who 
honor thy holy memory with love.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, * we have been overcome by the 
storms of our uncountable sins, * and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, * we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. * Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee * to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O most pure one, * 
unto Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, * that those who worthily 
hymn thee ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord and I am afraid. * Having 
understood Thy works, * I am in awe of Thee O Lord, * for the earth is full of 
Thy praise.  
As a torrent manifestly filled to overflowing with divine waters, O father 
Theodore, thou givest drink to the whole Church with the gifts of the Spirit.  
Thou didst choke the enemy with the cords of thy pangs, O most blessed 
Theodore, manfully destroying his wicked armies with the sword of thy prayers.  
Meditating on the law of God, by the springs of abstinence thou didst grow a 
divine tree, bringing forth the goodly fruit of virtuous works.  
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be blessed by all generations, giving birth to 
Christ Who hath made blessed those who labor for Him, O pure Virgin Mother and 
Sovereign Lady.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Shine upon me, O Lord, * the light of Thy commandments, * for my 
soul riseth early to Thee and hymneth Thee: * For Thou art our God, * and 
unto Thee do I flee, O King of peace. 
The timeless Light hath shown thee to be an ever-burning candle and an 
inextinguishable lamp for those mired in the gloom of the passions and the darkness 
of many sins, O Theodore.  
From earliest childhood having the great-martyr George guiding thee to the path 
of good, thou didst zealously emulate him with love for the Lord, O venerable father.  
Possessing immaculate abstinence, impeccable patience, faith, hope, humility, love 
and superhuman endurance, thou hast acquired surpassing grace from God.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: With the sprinkling of thy mercy, O most pure one, give drink to my 
mind, which hath withered through the flame of sin, and light thou the lamp of my 
heart, which hath been extinguished thereby, O portal of the Light.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The tempest of evil thoughts, hath overwhelmed me, * dragging me 
down into the abyss of my numberless sins; * but, going before me, O good 
Helmsman, * govern me as Thou didst the Prophet, * and save me.  
Thou didst shake off the grief of mortals and direct all thy desire toward the 
Master, delighting in His beauty and the splendors which proceed therefrom.  
Drinking from a spring, thou didst cause the darkness of sin to dissolve, O father, 
and standing in the midst of the winds, thou didst endure their assaults like a bodiless 
being, warmed by divine grace.  
Approaching thy sacred shrine, we who honor thee with love are filled with the 
sweet fragrance of divine understanding, O wonderworking hierarch, and we are 
delivered from the foul stench of the passions, O venerable father.  
Theotokion: The threefold billows of the passions beat upon me, and the abyss of 
despondency assails my heart. O Virgin who hast given birth to Christ the Helmsman 
and Savior, deliver and save me by thy supplications.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Mounting the virtues as upon a fiery chariot O God-bearer, * thou didst ascend to 
the heavenly abodes. * Thou didst dwell like an angel with men, * and as a man thou 
joinest chorus with the angels. ** Wherefore, thou hast been shown to be * a divine 
receptacle of miracles, ** O venerable Theodore.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
As a true holy hierarch thou didst offer up in the Spirit the un-bloody sacrifice, and 
by the mortifying the passions, O most blessed one, thou didst with faith offer thyself 
to the Master as a sacrifice of sweet savor.  
Thou didst quench the fire of pleasures with the sweat of ascetic endeavor, and 
like Elijah, O wonder-worker, by thy prayers end the drought with showers of rain, 
opening the closed heavens by thy supplications.  
Sanctified from childhood, with the boldness of thy prayers, thou didst cause the 
wombs of the barren to bear many children, didst give sight to the blind, and didst 
enable the lame to walk, O thrice-blessed Theodore.  
Theotokion: God chose thee, the beauty of Jacob, and made His abode within 
thee; and He preserved thee a virgin after giving birth, as thou wast before 
birthgiving, O Virgin Birthgiver of God.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The earth and all that is therein, * the seas and all wellsprings, * the 
heaven of heavens, light and darkness, * frost and heat, ye sons of men, and ye 
priests, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages. 
Having established the ascents of thy soul upon the rock of patience, thou wast 
not overwhelmed by the assaults of the adversary, nor wast thou shaken by the 
attacks of the enemy; but thou hast hastened up to the heights of heaven, praying for 
those who honor thee in faith.  
A stream of all manner of healings issueth forth from thy shrine: washing away the 
defilements of the passions, and cleansing the mire of evils, O Theodore, and it giveth 
drink to the hearts of all the faithful who honor thee with love.  
Let the great Theodore now be praised: the namesake of divine gifts, the initiate of 
the mysteries of Christ, the adornment of fasters, the beauty of priests, the well-spring 
of miracles, the precious phial of the Spirit.  
Theotokion: The sacred voices of the prophets proclaimed thee in images as the 
door, the mountain, the tabernacle, the holy land, the cloud of the Light, from 
whence the Sun, Christ the Bestower of light, hath shone forth upon those in 
darkness and shadow, O Virgin.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: For the Mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His 
name; * and His mercy is upon those who fear Him * unto generation and 
generation. 
Like the dawn, the radiant day of thy feast hath appeared, enlightening the hearts 
of us who with faith praise thine honored pangs, O father Theodore.  
As a converser with the angels, the apostles, martyrs, the venerable, the righteous 
and the holy hierarchs, O father, in the heavens thou dost ever entreat Christ on our 
behalf.  
The day of salvation, the feast of gladness hath come! Let us hasten, O ye faithful, 
purifying our souls, for the holy hierarch Theodore doth summon us.  
Theotokion: Awesome is thy birthgiving, O Theotokos, Mother of Christ! 
Wherefore, we call thee blessed, O pure one, and we, the generations of generations, 
glorify thee with honor throughout all ages, amen.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Known to be sanctified from thine earliest infancy, * and shown to be full of grace, 
* thou didst illumine the world with miracles, * and didst drive away a multitude of 
the demons, O sacred minister Theodore; ** wherefore, pray thou to the Lord on our 
behalf.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: 
Mounting the virtues as upon a fiery chariot O God-bearer, * thou didst ascend to 
the heavenly abodes. * Thou didst dwell like an angel with men, * and as a man thou 
joinest chorus with the angels. ** Wherefore, thou hast been shown to be * a divine 
receptacle of miracles, ** O venerable Theodore.  
 
