--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR BASIL, BISHOP OF AMASEA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Made steadfast by the law of God, * O blessed and glorious one, * thou didst 
achieve control over all the passions, * and having manifestly made thy mind * the 
ruler thereof, * hast become a divine intercessor, * thou didst receive holy anointing 
as is meet, * and wast a guide for the reason-endowed flock, ** O adornment of 
hierarchs and martyrs.  
The iniquitous emperor * separated thee from thy flock like a sheep, * O most 
blessed Basil, * for thou didst preach Christ God, our King, * Who was slaughtered 
like a lamb; * and he unjustly slew thee * and commanded that thou be cast in to the 
sea, * thus obtaining for thee the kingdom of heaven ** and everlasting glory.  
Most gloriously didst thou set the steps of thy feet into the waters, * O glorious 
Basil; * for thy body, cast forth after thine end, * as thou didst foretell, * mightily 
traversed it, * and hath now been honorably entrusted to thy city of Amasea, * to be 
for it an unashamed advocate, * a river of healings, ** and the cleansing of divers 
ailments.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion;  
or this Theotokion, in Tone IV and the same melody:  
O all-pure one, * who hath contained the infinite God in thy womb * Who, in His 
love for mankind, hath become a man, * and hath received our substance from thee, 
* deifying it: * disdain me not who am now sorrowing, * but quickly take pity * and 
free me from divers enemies ** and the malice of the evil one.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, with 4 Troparia, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
By thy supplications, O glorious one, grant wisdom and discourse of 
understanding unto me who long to hymn thee and to praise thy divine struggles, for 
the sake of the love of Christ which thou didst mightily show forth.  
Having been anointed with the chrism of grace, thou didst show thyself to be a 
holy hierarch, O sacred one, worthily offering up to Christ un-bloody sacrifices, and 
thyself as a pure sacrifice through martyrdom.  
Arrayed in a purple robe because of the victory of thy sufferings, and adorned with 
a crown of blood, thou wast shown to have achieved control over the passions, O 
holy hierarch; and having driven falsehood away, thou reignest with Christ.  
Theotokion: He Who of old created mankind on earth was incarnate in thy womb 
and became a perfect man. Wherefore, we know Him to be perfect in two natures, O 
most immaculate Theotokos.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Thou didst bring thyself to Christ as an unblemished sacrifice, O wise one, wholly 
consumed by the fire of thy conscience and by suffering. (Twice)  
With discourse of wisdom Christ established thee unshakably as upon a 
foundation of rock, O glorious Basil, and He hath raised thee up as a wise pastor.  
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving, O most pure one, the race of mortals hath truly 
been released from the ancient curse. Wherefore, we honor the likeness of thy divine 
countenance, O Sovereign Lady.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”:  
Enlightened by the divine Spirit, with pastoral boldness and high wisdom thou 
didst put the pride of the tyrant to shame; and having traversed the abyss of 
falsehood, thou didst attain to the divine harbor. O venerable father, entreat Christ 
God, that He grant us great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only most pure Virgin Mother, 
* who hast surpassed the angels in purity. * With the divine waters of thy 
supplications cleanse me, * who more than all others am dust and defiled * by carnal 
transgressions, O pure one, ** and grant me great mercy. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
With the staff of thy teachings, O wise and most blessed Basil, thou didst guide the 
flock of Christ by the living water of the divine wellsprings and the pasturage of 
grace.  
With divinely wise words thou didst right boldly denounce the mindlessness of the 
iniquitous and infamous Lycinius, who was abominable to God, O martyr of Christ, 
and thou wast crowned with the trophy of honor.  
Thou didst lay an immovable foundation upon the rock of Faith, O wise 
hieromartyr, mightily enduring the threefold waves of the delusion of idolatry, 
destroying it by the power of Christ.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Mother of God, heal thou the broken state of 
human nature, in that thou hast given birth to the beginningless Word in two 
inseparable natures, the likeness of Whose flesh we venerate.  
ODE V  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Strengthened by Christ, O glorious and holy hierarch, thou didst denounce the 
delusion of idolatry, and didst mock the high priest thereof as a filthy bird, O wise 
martyr, mightily finishing the race of faith. (Twice)  
Like another Moses, thou didst manifestly part the sea of impiety with the staff of 
Faith, O most blessed Basil, leading the new Israel to the promised land, the light of 
divine knowledge.  
Theotokion: Possessing the divine likeness of thy countenance for veneration, O 
pure and most immaculate Theotokos, and rendered radiant by thine entreaties and 
help, with reason we all ever drive away the assemblies of the heretics.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
The devil, the cruel and iniquitous tyrant, was unable to endure the boldness of thy 
words, O glorious martyr, and he wickedly set Lucinius against thee. (Twice)  
Thinking to soften thy firmness and boldness with alluring promises, O holy 
martyr, the malicious tyrant was disappointed in his expectation, being mightily 
trampled beneath thy feet.  
Theotokion: By thy birth giving Eve hath been delivered from her pangs, O 
Theotokos; for thou hast given birth to the Redeemer of mankind, O most pure 
Sovereign Lady, our sole adornment.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
Having spurned the imperial edict, O Basil, * thou didst receive the kingdom of 
heaven; * and joining the chorus therein, * be thou mindful of us ** who honor thy 
memory, O hieromartyr.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O God of our 
fathers, * supremely praised, and blessed art Thou O Lord.  
The haughty enemy, who boasted greatly that he would destroy the earth as 
though it were the nest of a bird, was mightily vanquished by thine opposition, and 
manifestly fell headlong beneath thy sacred feet, O hieromartyr.  
Thou didst manifestly dispel the gloom of idolatry with the light of the Faith, O 
wise and blessed one, chanting praises to Christ, as the children did of old: O God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Neither alluring promises, nor threats in any way softened the firmness and 
strength of thy soul, O glorious hierarch Basil, and, unwounded, thou didst bear 
tribulations as though they were flowers.  
Theotokion: Thou didst transcend the laws of birthgiving, O pure one, having 
manifestly given birth to the Author of all creation. Wherefore, O most hymned one, 
we, the faithful, now most piously confess thee to be the true Theotokos.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Having felled deception beneath thy feet with arrows of wisdom, O most blessed 
hierarch, thou wast crowned by the divine Spirit with wreaths of victory as a most 
glorious champion of the Faith, crying aloud: Hymn ye the Lord, ye works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thou didst sever the neck of falsehood with the sword of faith when thy head was 
cut off, O glorious one, and thou hast received from Christ the crown of victory, 
crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thy body was broken, and thy head was most gloriously severed, O blessed one; 
and by the guidance of the Spirit of God thou didst traverse the immeasurable abyss. 
And now, dancing with the angels, thou didst glorify the Father, the Son and the 
divine Spirit.  
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving thou didst cut off the venom of the serpent who 
poisoned Eve, O most pure one, having given birth to the hypostatic Word in the 
flesh, awesomely uniting the hypostatic Word of the Father to thy womb, wherefore 
we venerate the likeness of His flesh.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Manifestly hastening to the safe harbor, O most glorious one, thou didst traverse 
the threefold waves of the storm of idolatry by the guidance of the Spirit; and as thou 
joinest chorus with the hosts on high, O blessed one, be thou mindful of those who 
honor thee. (Twice)  
Divinely joining chorus with the angels to rejoice in victory before the throne of 
the God and Master of all, O glorious Basil, thou dost mercifully watch over us who 
hymn thee, as a pastor and hierarch.  
Theotokion: In seedlessly giving birth to the beginningless Son and Word of God, 
O Virgin Mother, thou hast restored our whole nature which had grown old through 
the transgression of disobedience. Wherefore, we magnify thee unceasingly, O 
Sovereign Lady.  
 
