--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 27th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR SYMEON, THE KINSMAN OF 
CHRIST  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion. 
And 3 for the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
O Symeon, thou didst show thyself to be a most sacred priest, * a lawful athlete, * 
a true kinsman of the Creator, * a wondrous wonderworker, * a most radiant beacon, 
* a guide for the lost, * an immovable pillar of the honored Church, * an heir of the 
heavenly kingdom, ** and a peer of the angels.  
Through bodily sufferings, * through all manner of most painful torment, * and 
manifold struggles * thou didst draw nigh unto the cross, * emulating Christ Who was 
crucified of His own will, * O most glorious hierarch. * Wherefore, rejoicing and 
celebrating thy holy memory, O Symeon, * we receive release from our offenses ** 
through thy supplications.  
In a sacred manner * thou hast entered the celestial Church, * stained with blood 
in hallowed manner, O blessed one; * and thou standest before the Trinity, * shining 
richly with the effulgence emitted therefrom, * O most noetically rich hieromartyr. * 
Wherefore, O Symeon, celebrating today * thy radiant memorial, ** we illumine the 
senses of our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion in Tone IV:  
Bedew my mind * with showers of the Most holy Spirit, O most pure one, * who 
ineffably gaveth birth unto Christ * the drop Who with His compassions washeth 
away * the countless iniquities of mankind; * dry up the upwelling of my passions, * 
and grant unto me a torrent * of ever-living nourishment, ** by thy supplications.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee * nailed to the Cross, O Lord, * the ewe-lamb 
Thy Mother marveled * and cried out: “What is this that I see, * O my Son most 
desired? * How hast Thou been rewarded * by the unfaithful and iniquitous assembly 
* which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? ** Yet glory to Thine ineffable condescen-
sion, O Master!”  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
In sacred manner do we praise thee, * O sacred hierarch Symeon, * as the kinsman 
of Christ * and a steadfast martyr * who destroyed deception and kept the Faith. * 
Wherefore, celebrating today thy most holy memory, * we receive forgiveness of sins 
** through thy supplications.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the 
holy hieromartyr, with 6 Troparia, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: I will sing unto Thee, O Lord my God, * for Thou hast led Thy people 
out of the bondage of Egypt, * and hast drowned in the waters * the chariots 
and the might of Pharaoh. 
O sacred Symeon, standing, crowned, before the Master, ask thou forgiveness of 
sins for those who with love keep thy most sacred memory.  
Provided with the Cross as a mast, O all-glorious hierarch, thou didst truly sail 
through the storm of deception, propelled by the waters of the Spirit.  
With divine chrism did Christ, Who sprang forth from the tribe of Judah, anoint 
thee a priest for the people, O sacred Symeon, converser with the angels.  
Theotokion: In that thou wast above all creation, O Virgin, thou didst conceive in 
thy womb the Creator and God of all and hast given birth to Him for the salvation of 
mankind.  
ODE III  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
Wholly deified at the behest of God, O sacred Symeon, thou didst become radiant, 
shining with the effulgence of martyrdom.  
Thou didst shine forth like the dawn upon those in darkness, showing forth the 
Sun of righteousness Who shone forth upon all peoples from the cloud who is the 
Virgin Maiden.  
Thou didst despise the pleasures of the world, O father, and didst become a 
magnificent adornment of hierarchs, and wast deemed worthy of heavenly glory by 
thy suffering.  
Theotokion: The praises of the law have been wholly annulled within thee, O all-
immaculate Birthgiver of God; for as is well known, God became a man through thee 
for our sake.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
The Church, having acquired the divinely eloquent Symeon as a great star, is 
enlightened, crying aloud: Rejoice, O honored leader of martyrs! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion in Tone IV: 
Stretching forth thy most pure arms, * O Virgin and Mother * shelter those who 
put their trust in thee * and who call out to thy Son exclaiming: ** O Christ grant 
unto us all Thy great mercy. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding thy Son lifted up upon the Tree, O most pure one, 
with thy maternal womb wounded with pain, thou didst piteously cry aloud: “Woe is 
me! How is it that Thou hast set, O my timeless Light?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: For the sake of love for Thine image, * O compassionate One, * Thou 
didst ascend the cross * and the nations melted away. * For Thou, O Lover of 
mankind, * art my strength and my praise. 
Performing the sacred rites, offering the un-bloody sacrifice to Him Who was 
sacrificed for thee, thou wast slaughtered like a lamb, and didst thereby bring thyself 
to Him, O divinely wise and most noetically rich apostle.  
The mountains of ungodliness were reduced to dust in thy presence, O holy 
hierarch, and all the hills of the demons melted away when Christ strengthened thee.  
O most blessed one thou who possessed a most exalted life, wast lifted up upon a 
tree, in accordance with thy desire, emulating the suffering of God Who hath raised 
up the world.  
Theotokion: Foreseeing thy birthgiving, O most pure one, Habbakuk described 
thee beforehand as a mountain overshadowed, from whence our one God would 
come forth.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Do Thou O Lord send down upon us * Thine enlightenment, and free 
us * from the gloom of transgression, O Good One, * granting us Thy peace. 
Of thine own will, O blessed one, didst thou commit thyself to be wholly 
consumed by the fire of martyrdom, and wast thereby mystically preserved as a sweet 
savor, O blessed Symeon.  
Thou didst fervently commit thyself to suffer like an innocent lamb, emulating 
Christ Who suffered in the flesh for our sake and done away with the passions.  
As a temple of the divine Spirit, O most wise one, by the power of thy prayers 
thou didst cast down the temples of the idols, guiding the lost to the Light.  
Theotokion: On our behalf, O most pure Maiden, entreat Christ Who clothed 
Himself in material flesh through thy pure blood, restoring fallen mankind.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
Thou wast instructed most gloriously by the divine Effulgence Who guided thee 
toward the divine life, O most noetically rich apostle, and thereby thou hast been 
revealed to be full of ineffable understanding, O holy hierarch.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
The Church of God rejoiceth, having thee, O Symeon, as another river issuing 
forth from Eden, filled to overflowing with the life-giving waters of the Spirit.  
Thou didst sit upon thy lofty throne as a successor to James and one who shared 
in his ways, illumining thine episcopacy with martyrdom, O blessed one.  
Theotokion: O Bride of God, heal thou the incurable sufferings of my soul, in that 
thou hast given birth for mankind’s sake unto Christ Who hath healed our sufferings 
by His own passion.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
Today, the Church, possessing the divinely eloquent Symeon * as an exceeding 
great star, shineth, crying aloud: ** Rejoice, O honored crown of martyrs!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Ardently surrendering thy body to torture for Christ, thou wast not daunted, 
neither didst thou weaken, O wondrous one, crying aloud: Blessed is the God of our 
fathers!  
Aflame with divine love, O most blessed one, thou wast stronger in mind than 
material fire, crying aloud: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Thou wast lifted up upon a cross like the Master, O father, adorned with a 
comparable manner of suffering, wherefore thou chantest in gladness: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O Virgin Maiden, Mother of God, thou wounding of the demons, 
goodly adornment of the angels and salvation of mankind: deliver my lowly soul from 
all the deceptions of the enemy.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: He Who was nailed to the Cross in the flesh, * hath shown it to be a 
weapon for our salvation, * O ye children, exalt Christ our God throughout the 
ages.  
Receiving all the splendor of the Comforter in thy pure heart, O Symeon, thou 
didst destroy the lightless darkness of the demons, illumining the faithful.  
Having dried up the sea of grievous heresy with the streams of thy divine 
doctrines, thou hast watered every soul which produceth the grain of faith.  
Thou wast shown to be a priest, O martyr, entering the temple of God with thy 
blood, where thou dost ever gaze upon the unblemished Lamb Who was slaughtered 
for thy sake.  
Theotokion: That our race may hymn thee who art magnified with voices of 
thanksgiving, O Bride of God, protect and preserve us from all harm.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IX 
Irmos: Thy birthgiving was revealed to be incorrupt, * God came forth from 
thy womb, * and He appeared upon earth in mortal flesh * and dwelt among 
mankind; * Wherefore we all magnify thee, O Theotokos. 
Thou wast shown to be a pillar of fire, O most blessed one, leading a new people 
out of the falsehood of Egypt, bringing them across to the land of divine promise, O 
most honored hieromartyr.  
Thou didst have the dual names of Simon and Symeon, having theologized before 
the ungodly concerning the Word Who is of two natures, thus drawing nigh unto thy 
cross. Wherefore, assembling, we all call thee blessed.  
Today the Church doth celebrate the memorial of thy feast, O Symeon, prayerfully 
honoring thee with the divine James whose cathedra thou didst receive, O sacred one.  
Theotokion: With divine light illumine me, and show me to be a habitation of 
light, O Virgin, dispelling the darkness of my passions and the profound night of 
pleasures, O most pure Birthgiver of God.  
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
In sacred manner do we praise thee, * O sacred hierarch Symeon, * as the kinsman 
of Christ * and a steadfast martyr * who destroyed deception and kept the Faith. * 
Wherefore, celebrating today thy most holy memory, * we receive forgiveness of sins 
** through thy supplications.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Today, the Church, possessing the divinely eloquent Symeon * as an exceeding 
great star, shineth, crying aloud: ** Rejoice, O honored crown of martyrs!  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, § 131 (I COR. 4: 9-16)  
Brethren: God hath set forth us, the apostles, last, as it were appointed to death: 
for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools 
for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are 
honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and 
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-place; And labor, 
working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: 
Being defamed, we entreat, we are made as the filth of the world, and are the off 
scouring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as my 
beloved sons I warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet 
have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel. 
Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §56 (13: 54-8)  
At that time, Jesus came into His own country, and taught the people in their 
synagogue, insomuch that they were astounded, and said, Whence hath this man this 
wisdom, and these mighty works? Is not this the carpenter’s son? is not his mother 
called Mary? and his brethren James, and Joses and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, 
are they not all with us? Whence hath this man all these things? And they were 
offended in him, But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honor, save in 
his own country, and in his own house. And he did not many mighty works there 
because of their unbelief.  
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
