--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 25th DAY OF THE MONTH OF APRIL  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE & EVANGELIST MARK  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion, and 5 for the 
Evangelist, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
The writer of divinely uttered words, * the great instructor of Egypt, * O ye 
faithful, let us hymn as is meet, crying aloud: * O wise Mark, disciple of Christ, * 
cease thou never to guide us all by thy teachings and supplications, ** to the life 
which is untroubled. (Twice)  
Thou wast the companion of Paul, the chosen vessel, * and with him didst 
traverse all of Macedonia; * and being in Rome the disciple of Peter, * thou wast 
shown to be a recounter of sweet things; * and thou didst repose in Egypt, having 
suffered in a godly manner, ** O Mark, thou friend of Christ. (Twice) 
Withered and barren souls didst thou revive * with the radiant sprinkling of the 
Gospel, * wherefore, O divine Mark, * today Alexandria doth celebrate thy memory 
with us * and offereth praise unto thee, ** bowing down before thy relics.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Grace was poured forth into thy mouth, O apostle Mark, and being a shepherd of 
the Church of Christ, thou didst lead the reason-endowed sheep to believe in the 
consubstantial Trinity, in one Godhead 
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JAMES (1:1-12)  
James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which 
are scattered abroad, greeting. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers 
trials, knowing this, that the testing of your faith worketh patience. But let patience 
have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, lacking nothing. If any of 
you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, Who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth 
not, and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that 
wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed. For let not that 
man think that he shall receive anything of the Lord. A doubleminded man is 
unstable in all his ways. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted; but 
the rich, in that he is made low, because as the flower of the grass he shall pass away. 
For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withereth the grass, and its 
flower falleth, and the grace of the fashion of it perisheth; so also shall the rich man 

--- PAGE 2 ---
fade away in his ways. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he is 
tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to those who 
love Him.  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JAMES  
Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be 
tempted with evil, neither tempteth He any man; but every man is tempted, when he 
is drawn away by his own lust, and enticed. Then when lust hath conceived, it 
bringeth forth sin; and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death. Do not err, my 
beloved brethren. Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh 
down from the Father of lights, with Whom is no variableness, neither shadow of 
turning. Of His own will begot He us with the word of truth, that we should be a 
kind of first fruits of His creatures. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be 
swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath; for the wrath of man worketh not the 
righteousness of God. Wherefore, put away all filthiness and overflowing of 
wickedness, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your 
souls. But be ye doers of the word and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. 
For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like a man beholding his 
natural face in a mirror; for he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway 
forgetteth what manner of man he was. But whosoever looketh into the perfect law 
of liberty, and continueth in it, he being not a forgetful hearer but a doer of the work, 
this man shall be blessed in his deed. If any man among you seem to be religious, and 
bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man’s religion is vain. Pure 
religion and undefiled before God the Father is this: to visit the fatherless and widows 
in their affliction, and to keep oneself undefiled by the world.  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JAMES (2:1-13)  
My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with 
respect to persons. For if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring, in 
fine apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment, and ye have respect 
to him who weareth the fine clothing, and say unto him, “Sit thou down here in a 
good place;” and say to the poor, “Stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool,” 
are ye not then partial in yourselves, and are become judges with evil thoughts? 
Hearken, my beloved brethren; hath not God chosen the poor of this world to be 
rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom which He hath promised to those who love 
Him? But ye have despised the poor. Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you 
before the judgment seats? Do not they blaspheme that worthy name whereby ye are 
called? If ye fulfill the royal law according to the Scripture, Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself, ye do well; but if ye have respect of persons, ye commit sin, and 
are convicted by the law as transgressors. For whosoever shall keep the whole law, 
and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. For he who said, Do not commit 
adultery, said also, Do not kill. Now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou 

--- PAGE 3 ---
art become a transgressor of the law. So speak ye, and so do, as they who shall be 
judged by the law of liberty. For he shall have judgment without mercy, who hath 
shown no mercy; and mercy rejoiceth against judgment.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the holy evangelist, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
O divinely wise Mark, * thou wast the pen of a most wise and swiftly writing 
scribe, * recording in a divinely inspired manner * the incarnation of Christ, * clearly 
proclaiming the words of eternal life. * Pray thou that those who hymn thee * and 
honor thy glorious memory ** be assigned thereto.  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  
O all-praised Mark, * preaching Christ * thou didst pass over the world like the 
sun, * destroying all the darkness of polytheism * with beams of faith. * And now, 
pray thou that our souls * be granted peace ** and great mercy.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
O apostle Mark, * in those lands where before * the ignorance of ungodliness had 
increased, * thou didst preach, dispelling the darkness of Egypt * with the 
enlightenment of thy words, * O most noetically rich and divine preacher. * And 
now, pray thou that our souls ** be granted peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Come ye all, and with psalms and hymns let us praise the preacher of the mystery 
of heaven, the servant of the Gospel; for he hath been revealed to be a river of the 
noetic paradise, watering spiritual furrows with heavenly showers, and showing them 
forth as fertile for Christ God Who, through his supplications, granteth cleansing, 
enlightenment and great mercy unto all.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion 
Troparion of the holy evangelist, in Tone III:  
O holy apostle and evangelist Mark, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant 
remission of sins ** unto our souls 
Or this Troparion, in the same tone: 
Thou wast an apostle of Christ who learned from the pre-eminent Peter, * and 
didst shine like the sun upon the lands of the Alexandrians, * being their adornment. 
* Through thee was Egypt freed from deception, O blessed one, * who as the 
Church’s pillar of fire dost illumine all with thy teaching of the Gospel. * Wherefore, 
honoring thy memory, we keep splendid festival, ** O divinely eloquent Mark, entreat 
God, that He grant unto our souls, remission of sins. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion from the Pentecostarion, (Twice); 
 Glory ..., that of the holy evangelist, in Tone III: 
O holy apostle and evangelist Mark, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant 
remission of sins ** unto our souls 
Or this Troparion, in the same tone: 
Thou wast an apostle of Christ who learned from the pre-eminent Peter, * and 
didst shine like the sun upon the lands of the Alexandrians, * being their adornment. 
* Through thee was Egypt freed from deception, O blessed one, * who as the 
Church’s pillar of fire dost illumine all with thy teaching of the Gospel. * Wherefore, 
honoring thy memory, we keep splendid festival, ** O divinely eloquent Mark, entreat 
God, that He grant unto our souls, remission of sins. 
Both now ..., that from the Pentecostarion.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Having ascended to the summit of virtue, O divine Mark, as a godly preacher 
thou hast thundered down upon us the great mysteries of the dogmas of salvation. 
Wherefore in faith we entreat thee, O most blessed one; free us from every sorrow, 
offense and misfortune.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having ascended ...”: 
As the Sun of righteousness Christ emitted thee to enlighten the whole earth with 
thy wondrous gospel, O glorious apostle and evangelist Mark, by thy godly supplica-
tions and thy divine and never-waning light, illumine and enlighten all who celebrate 
thy holy memory with faith.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O apostle of Christ and 
evangelist Mark, and we honor the pangs and labors wherewith thou didst 
struggle in the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the 
work of His hands.  
 
 Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  

--- PAGE 5 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Filled with inspiration from on high and illumined with divine splendor, O apostle, 
thou wast deemed worthy to recount the miracles, doctrines and dogmas of Christ in 
thy glorious gospel, being an eye-witness of grace, and a beholder of the mysteries of 
God. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love 
honor thy sacred memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and 
their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 50 (LK. 10: 1-15)  
At that time; the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two 
before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come. Therefore 
said he unto them, The harvest truly is great, but the labourers are few: pray ye 
therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth labourers into his harvest. 
Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Carry neither purse, 
nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by the way. And into whatsoever house ye 
enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace 
shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again. And in the same house remain, 
eating and drinking such things as they give: for the labourer is worthy of his hire. Go 
not from house to house. And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat 
such things as are set before you: And heal the sick that are therein, and say unto 
them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But into whatsoever city ye enter, 
and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, Even 
the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you: 
notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. 
But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that 
city. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had 
been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great while 
ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre 
and Sidon at the judgment, than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to 
heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell. 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Thou didst follow after Christ, O godly Mark, and despising the world, hid His 
teachings in thy heart, and wast thereby revealed to be His apostle and evangelist. 
Wherefore, going unto the darkened souls in Egypt, thou didst enlighten them with 
the commandments of the Savior, that they might believe in the consubstantial 
Trinity.  
Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the 
apostle and evangelist, with 8 Troparia, in Tone I: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it shattered 
the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the deep.  
O blessed one, who like a skillful fisherman hast drawn men forth from the deep 
of transgressions with thy net, illumine my soul with radiant splendors, and grant that 
I may praise thy memory as is meet, O divinely revealed evangelist Mark.  
The pre-eternal and supremely perfect God, Who with the Father is equally 
beginningless, appeared on earth incarnate as a man, and showed thee forth, O 
blessed one, as His fellow-laborer in grace and His most wise servant, who art 
strengthened by His power. 
Thou wast a disciple of the most wise Peter, and was greatly enriched thereby, O 
all-glorious Mark, showing thyself to be an initiate of the divine mysteries, and one 
who followed in his glorious footsteps.  
Theotokion: The Angel of Great Counsel, having assumed flesh, manifested 
Himself to the world through the Virgin Mother, and showed thee forth, O father 
Mark, as a disciple adorned with virtues, a divine herald proclaiming His words.  
Katavasia from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
Thy friend Mark, O Christ, proclaiming Thee, the hypostatic Wisdom, hath 
thereby enlightened the whole world O Lord, with thine abundantly splendid rays, O 
Lover of mankind. 
O Christ, Who lovest mankind, Thine eyewitness Mark, having received an ever-
flowing stream of wisdom resounding like a river, hath watered the ends of the earth 
with the light of divine knowledge, truly revealing Thy prophecy.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Manifestly following Peter, O wise one, as his disciple thou didst copy the Gospel, 
receiving from him the light of theology and clearly proclaiming the coming of God 
in the flesh, O apostle.  
Theotokion: Thou didst cause the temples of the demons to quake, O Thou Who 
wast aforetime borne to Egypt in the Virgin’s arms, and thither Thou didst send 
Mark, that all might know of Thy divine mystery and that Thou hadst become man.  
Kontakion and Ikos from the Pentecostarion 
Sessional Hymn of the evangelist, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Having ascended to the summit of virtue, O divine Mark, as a godly preacher 
thou hast thundered down upon us the great mysteries of the dogmas of salvation. 
Wherefore in faith we entreat thee, O most blessed one; free us from every sorrow, 
offense and misfortune.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain overshadowed 
by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy One of Israel * 
would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and restoration. 
Thy sound hath gone forth into all the earth, O most wise one, and the power of 
thy words manifestly extendeth to the ends of the world, like David splendidly 
preaching our salvation and renewal.  
Like lightning Thy most wise apostle hath appeared to the world, O Savior, 
announcing the joy of truth, illumined with the divine radiance of effulgence, unto 
our salvation and renewal.  
Thy feet were adorned prophetically, for ineffably hast thou announced unto us 
the Peace that hath manifestly revealed Himself in the flesh to the ends of the world, 
unto our salvation and renewal.  
Theotokion: The Word sat upon the cloud of the Virgin and, in that He is 
merciful, He made foolish the counsels of Egypt and hath destroyed thoughts 
adverse to God through the teachings of the divine Mark, unto our salvation and 
renewal.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O Christ, 
* and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * enlighten with the 
light of thine understanding * the hearts of those who with right worship hymn 
Thee.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou didst let fall the sweetness of piety, the shower of thy divine words, casting 
light over all in bright beams, clearly revealed by the grace of the noetic Sun, O all-
blessed and God-pleasing Mark.  
From the house of the Lord thou didst pour forth a wellspring watering barren 
hearts abundantly with spiritual streams, teaching them to bring forth fruit instead of 
barrenness, O apostle.  
Thou wast the son of the great Peter, and illumined by his teaching thou didst 
enlighten the souls who approached thee fervently, O blessed apostle, seer of God.  
Theotokion: O Christ Who shone forth from the Father before all creation, and 
wast born of the Virgin as a man, Thou wast sent to the Egyptians. For them, O 
Wise One, Thou didst anoint Mark who hath taught them the mysteries of divine 
knowledge.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to deliver 
us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save Thy people 
O our God, * for Thou art the strength and restoration of the weak. 
Thou didst set at naught the scorn of the wicked, O Lord, and didst put down 
their prideful arrogance, showing forth Thine apostle as a conqueror by Thy might, 
for Thou art the strength and restoration of the afflicted.  
By thy words, O wise Mark, thou didst preach the Fashioner of creation, the 
Crown of hope wherewith we are now crowned, and which, to our glory, hath been 
wrought of the nature of the flesh.  
O glorious one, the pre-eminent Peter clearly instructed thee to mystically record 
the precious Gospel, showing thee to be a servant of divine grace, for thou didst 
shed the light of divine knowledge upon us.  
Theotokion: Through the Virgin Mother of God didst Thou enlighten Egypt 
which aforetime was in darkness, entering it as an infant, O Lord; and Thou didst 
reprove its vanity through the teachings pf the divinely eloquent Mark, O Thou Who 
lovest mankind.  
Kontakion of the evangelist, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Receiving from on high the grace of the Spirit, * thou didst destroy the snares of 
the orators, O apostle, * and, hunting all the nations, * thou didst lead them to thy 
Master, O all-glorious Mark, ** preaching the divine Gospel  
Ikos: A disciple of the pre-eminent apostle, with him thou didst preach Christ the 
Son of God, rendering steadfast upon the rock of truth those who were shaken by 
falsehood. Do thou also make me steadfast thereon, and set aright my steps, that, 
delivered from the snares of the enemy, I may glorify thee without faltering, for thou 
hast enlightened all, O wise Mark, preaching the divine Gospel.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; * 
for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so hath He 
wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou praised and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Illumined with divine rays, thou dost mystically, by reflection, emit radiant beams, 
O most blessed Mark, for thou didst preach the Word incarnate, the Timeless One, 
the praised and supremely glorious God of our fathers.  
O Maker of all, having armed thy divinely eloquent disciple with divinely effective 
power, Thou didst make of him a wonderworker, for he hath dispelled affliction and 
healed wounds, preaching Thee, the supremely praised and supremely glorious God.  
Having as teacher the divine Peter, the first in rank among the choir of the 
apostles, thou didst show thyself to be like unto him, for thou didst bring order to all 
the fullness of the Church of the supremely praised and supremely glorious God of 
our fathers.  
Theotokion: Following the saying of Isaiah, O most glorious one, thou didst 
thyself set up a pillar in Egypt: the scripture of thy Gospel, for Him Who, without 
seed, was born of the Mother of God, proclaiming our supremely praised and 
supremely glorious God.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone more 
brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed: Bless 
the Lord all ye works of the Lord, * hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Christ, the Word begotten of the Father before all ages, Who clothed Himself in 
human nature, didst thou preach, O glorious one; and thou didst cry aloud: O all ye 
works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt the Lord throughout all ages!  
O glorious one, thou didst glorify Christ Who gaveth Himself as deliverance from 
our offense and passion and raised up the fallen; and thou didst cry: O all ye works 
of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt the Lord throughout all ages!  
Submitting to the most wise teaching of Peter, O Mark, thou didst most wisely 
commit to writing the precious Gospel for the faithful who cry aloud: O all ye works 
of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt the Lord throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Bearing Emmanuel as an infant, the Virgin stood before the 
Egyptians, to whom Mark is set like a radiant star, crying aloud: O all ye works of the 
Lord, hymn and supremely exalt the Lord throughout all ages!  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy pure 
birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * quench the 
raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may unceasingly 
magnify Thee. 
Having reached the ineffable wellspring of the three-sunned radiance O divinely 
revealed one, and most manifestly delighting in the divinity therein, which is beyond 
the mind of mortals, thou dost now unceasingly rejoice with the angels O most 
blessed one. 
As on who was familiar with the teachings of Peter, and his godly preaching, thou 
dwellest now in the heavenly mansions with him, O most blessed and godly spoken 
one, do thou pray for us O apostle Mark. 
The Light, thrice-radiantly joined and strangely unified, didst thou piously preach, 
a right worthy one, illumined by a ray of grace. Wherefore, we entreat thee: Ever 
offer supplication in our behalf.  
Theotokion: The honored apostle Mark was given as a holy hierarch to the 
Egyptians, to whom the Lord of glory had also come, incarnate as a babe through 
the pure Virgin Mother of God; and Him do we magnify as is meet.  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Having been taught heavenly wisdom, thou didst destroy with thy tongue the nets 
of the orators and the deceptions of the astrologers, O most glorious apostle Mark; 
and as a disciple of Peter thou didst preach the words of the Gospel to the world. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Praises, 6 stichera:  
3 from the Pentecostarion, and 3 for the evangelist, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
O all-blessed Mark, * thou didst drink from a sweet stream, * the pure river of 
peace * which doth flow most splendidly from Eden, * flooding the face of the earth 
with the waters * of thy preaching of the Gospel * and pouring forth divinely 
inspired teachings ** upon the firmament of the Church.  
O Mark most glorious, * in times past Moses drowned * the Egyptians in the sea, 
* but thou, O most wise one, * didst lead them forth from the sea of deception * by 
the power of Him Who had come to them in the flesh * and utterly destroyed the 
works of their hands ** with His lofty arm.  
O Mark most sacred, * abiding in the light of the Spirit, * thou wast wholly 
spiritual; * and now, O spiritually rich apostle, * deified by adoption and through 
abundant visions * and exceedingly blessed radiance, * thou hast attained the summit 
of thy mystery, ** the longed-for goal.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O fisherman most wise, holy disciple, husbandman of the Savior and recounter of 
His sufferings, thou who didst traverse the world with faith, and, having gathered the 
deluded gentiles, didst lead them to God: as a sweet-smelling fragrance of incense 
hast thou been wafted up to the heavens. Wherefore, standing before the Judge, pray 
that we be delivered from our transgressions and from torment on the day of 
judgment.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion 
Great Doxology, Troparia, litanies and dismissal.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 troparia: 4 from the appointed ode of the canon from the 
Pentecostarion; and 4 from ODE III of the canon of the evangelist.  
Thy friend Mark, O Christ, proclaiming Thee, the hypostatic Wisdom, hath 
thereby enlightened the whole world O Lord, with thine abundantly splendid rays, O 
Lover of mankind. 
O Christ, Who lovest mankind, Thine eyewitness Mark, having received an ever-
flowing stream of wisdom resounding like a river, hath watered the ends of the earth 
with the light of divine knowledge, truly revealing Thy prophecy.  
Manifestly following Peter, O wise one, as his disciple thou didst copy the Gospel, 
receiving from him the light of theology and clearly proclaiming the coming of God 
in the flesh, O apostle.  
Theotokion: Thou didst cause the temples of the demons to quake, O Thou Who 
wast aforetime borne to Egypt in the Virgin’s arms, and thither Thou didst send 
Mark, that all might know of Thy divine mystery and that Thou hadst become man.  
Troparion of the evangelist, in Tone III:  
O holy apostle and evangelist Mark, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant 
remission of sins ** unto our souls 
Or this Troparion, in the same tone: 
Thou wast an apostle of Christ who learned from the pre-eminent Peter, * and 
didst shine like the sun upon the lands of the Alexandrians, * being their adornment. 
* Through thee was Egypt freed from deception, O blessed one, * who as the 
Church’s pillar of fire dost illumine all with thy teaching of the Gospel. * Wherefore, 
honoring thy memory, we keep splendid festival, ** O divinely eloquent Mark, entreat 
God, that He grant unto our souls, remission of sins. 
Kontakion of the evangelist, in Tone II:  
Receiving from on high the grace of the Spirit, * thou didst destroy the snares of 
the orators, O apostle, * and, hunting all the nations, * thou didst lead them to thy 
Master, O all-glorious Mark, ** preaching the divine Gospel  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
GENERAL EPISTLE OF ST. PETER, § 63 (1 PET. 5: 6-14)  
Brethren: Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that He 
may exalt you in due time: casting all your care upon Him; for He care~h for you. Be 
sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, 
seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the 
same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world. But the God 
of all grace, Who hath called us unto His eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that he 
have suffered a little while, make you perfect, establish, strengthen, settle you. To 
Him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. By Silvanus, a faithful brother 
unto you, as 1 suppose, I have written briefly, exhorting, and testifying that this is the 
true grace of God wherein ye stand. The church that is at Babylon, elected together 
with you, saluteth you; and so doth Mark my son. Greet ye one another with a kiss of 
charity. Peace be with you all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, § 23 (MK. 6: 7-13)  
At that time: the Lord called unto Him the twelve, and began to send them forth 
by two and two; and gave them power over unclean spirits; and commanded them 
that they should take nothing for their journey, save a staff only; no scrip, no bread, 
no money in their purse: but be shod with sandals; and not put on two coats. And He 
said unto them, In what place soever ye enter into a house, there abide till ye depart 
from that place. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart 
thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against them. Verily I say 
unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of 
judgment, than for that city. And they went out, and preached that men should 
repent. And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick, and 
healed them.  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
