--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY & RIGHT-BELIEVING KING BORIS, EQUAL OF 
THE APOSTLES, ENLIGHTENER OF THE BULGARIANS, WHO WAS GIVEN THE 
NAME MICHAEL IN HOLY BAPTISM  
Note: If the superior elect to serve a vigil to this saint, we chant the Stichera of Saint 
Athanasius the Great, Patriarch of Alexandria, at Little Vespers. 
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 4 from the Pentecostarion. 
And 4 of the righteous one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
With the threat of the Dread Judgment, O Lord, * Thou didst frighten Boris, * 
great among kings; * therefore, whereupon he spurned the idols * and ceased 
worshipping them, * casting himself and his people at Thy feet. * Wherefore, we 
glorify Thy loving dispensation, * O almighty Jesus, ** Thou Savior of our souls. 
(Twice)  
Having instructed Boris * through his sister and the mother of Constantine, O 
Lord, * in that Thou art good and an Abyss of wisdom; * Thou didst grant him to 
partake of spiritual food * in place of the darkness of the idols * and the bitter 
sweetness of sin. * Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving dispensation, * O almighty Jesus, 
** Thou Savior of our souls.  
After his baptism, O Lord, * Thou didst send to King Boris, * like seeds upon the 
ploughed earth, * Slavic teachers of the Faith, * who enlightened the people * and 
established them in Orthodox piety. * Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving dispensation, 
* O almighty Jesus, ** Thou Savior of our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O right-believing King Boris, having searched for the righteousness of God, thou 
didst bestow alms upon the poor and shine forth in deeds equal to those of the 
apostles, wherefore thou didst obtain the grace to eat from the tree of life; and having 
tasted thereof, thou wast filled with the Spirit, and received everlasting life and 
heavenly glory. Wherefore, pray thou to Christ our God, that He confirm thy people 
in Orthodoxy and save our souls.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion. 
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE THIRD BOOK OF KINGS  
Solomon stood up in front of the altar before all the congregation of Israel; and he 
spread out his hands toward heaven: and he said: “O Lord God of Israel, there is no 

--- PAGE 2 ---
God like Thee in heaven above and on the earth beneath. If the heaven and the 
heaven of heavens will not suffice Thee, how much less even this house which I have 
built to Thy name? Yet, O Lord God of Israel, Thou shalt look upon my petition, to 
hear the prayer which Thy servant doth pray to Thee in Thy presence this day, that 
Thine eyes may be open to this house day and night, even toward the place of which 
Thou didst say: ‘My name shall be there, to hear the prayer which My servant prayeth 
at this place day and night.’ And Thou shalt hearken unto the prayer of Thy servant, 
and of Thy people Israel, which they shall pray toward this place; and Thou shalt hear 
in Thy dwelling-place in heaven, and Thou shalt do and be gracious.”  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Let my soul rejoice in the Lord; for He hath clothed me with the robe of salvation, 
and the garment of joy: He hath put a crown on me as on a bridegroom, and adorned 
me with ornaments as a bride. And as the earth putting forth her flowers, and as a 
garden its seed, so shall the Lord, even the Lord, cause righteousness to spring forth, 
and exultation before all nations. For Zion’s sake I will not hold my peace, and for 
Jerusalem’s sake I will not rest, until her righteousness go forth as light, and My 
salvation burn as a torch. And the gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and kings thy 
glory: and one shall call thee by a new name, which the Lord shall name. And thou 
shalt be a crown of beauty in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of 
thy God. And thou shalt no more be called Forsaken; and thy land shall no more be 
called Desert: for thou shalt be called My Pleasure, and the land Inhabited: for the 
Lord hath taken pleasure in thee, and thy land shall be inhabited. And as a young man 
liveth with a virgin, so shall thy sons dwell in thee: and it shall come to pass that as a 
bridegroom will rejoice over a bride, so will the Lord rejoice over thee.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Be enlightened, be enlightened, O Jerusalem, for thy light hath come, and the glory 
of the Lord hath arisen upon thee. Behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and there 
shall be gross darkness on the nations: but the Lord shall appear upon thee, and His 
glory shall be seen upon thee. And kings shall walk in thy light, and nations in thy 
brightness. Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold thy children gathered: all thy 
sons have come from afar, and thy daughters shall be borne on men’s shoulders. 
Then shalt thou see, and fear, and be amazed in thine heart; for the wealth of the sea 
shall come round to thee, and of nations and peoples; and herds of camels shall come 
to thee, and the camels of Madiam and Ginpha shall cover thee: all from Saba shall 
come bearing gold, and shall bring frankincense, and they shall publish the salvation 
of the Lord. And all the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered, and the rams of Nab moth 
shall come; and acceptable sacrifices shall be offered on My altar, and My house of 
prayer shall be glorified. Who are these that fly as clouds, and as doves with young 
ones to Me? The isles have waited for Me, and the ships of Tharsis among the first, to 

--- PAGE 3 ---
bring thy children from afar, and their silver and their gold with them, and that for 
the sake of the holy name of the Lord, and because the Holy One of Israel is 
glorified. And strangers shall build thy walls, and their kings shall wait upon thee: for 
by reason of My wrath I smote thee, and by reason of mercy I loved thee. And thy 
gates .shall be opened continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; to bring in to 
thee the power of the gentiles, and their kings as captives. For the nations and the 
kings which will not serve thee shall perish; and those nations shall be made utterly 
desolate. And the glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, with the cypress, and pine, 
and cedar together, to glorify my holy place. And the sons of those who afflicted thee, 
and of those who provoked thee, shall come to thee in fear; and thou shalt be called 
Sion, the city of the Holy One of Israel. Because thou hast become desolate and 
hated, and there was no helper, therefore I will make thee a perpetual gladness, a joy 
of many generations. And thou shalt suck the milk of the gentiles, and shalt eat the 
wealth of kings: and shalt know that I am the Lord Who saveth and delivereth thee, 
the Holy One of Israel.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera:  
In Tone II: Abraham, the friend of God, raised his hand against his only-begotten 
son, to slay him as a wholeburnt offering to God; and for the sake of the Faith of 
God the right-believing Boris did not spare his first-born son, who in his foolishness 
blasphemed against Christ. Wherefore, he offered as a sacrifice the Orthodox piety of 
his whole nation and the repentance of his heart with contrition; and the Lord 
accepted them as a right-acceptable sweet savor, and exalted him as one chosen from 
among His people.  
In Tone IV: Constantine, great among emperors, vanquished the tyrant by the 
power of the Cross, and therefore came to love the Christian Faith. And thou, O 
right-believing King Boris, having made thy heart steadfast in the love of Christ, didst 
by the power of the Cross crush the audacious revolt of the pagan nobles against the 
most pure Faith of God. Wherefore, calling thee blessed, we earnestly pray: By thy 
supplications preserve thy native land and thy people from the assaults of the enemy.  
Glory..., in Tone V: 
Having united thyself to the King of kings through baptism, O right-believing 
King Boris, and led thy people to Him, thou didst grow into a perfect man through 
piety, and in the measure of thy growth didst become an equal of the apostles; for, 
receiving the Slavic teachers of the word of God into thy land, thou didst unshakably 
establish Orthodoxy in the land of Bulgaria; and when thy soul still thirsted for the 
living God, thou didst set aside the scepter of thy kingship, making thine abode in the 
wilderness, living in holiness and righteousness. And upon reaching the end of thine 
earthly life, thou didst passed over into everlasting bliss, where thou dost never forget 
thy people, praying unceasingly to the Lord for the salvation of our souls.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion:  

--- PAGE 4 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the righteous one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
When God desired to lead the Slavic people * up out of the darkness of the 
madness of idolatry * into the light of salvation, * He chose thee as His crowned 
apostle, * and set thy heart alight with the fire of His love, * that, like a deer running 
to a spring of living water, * thou mightest hasten and, having drunk of the water of 
baptism, * become the saving cause of enlightenment ** for all thy people.  
Verse: I have raised up one chosen out of My people; * I have found David my 
servant. 
When the grace of Christ was poured out upon thee, * and the Faith of the 
kingdom grew exceedingly within thee like leaven, * and the love of God had made 
thy whole soul captive, * then didst thou conduct the affairs of the kingdom * arrayed 
in a purple robe by day, * but in the hours of the night patiently endure thirst, * and 
fall prostrate before the Lord, * clad in a hairshirt and repenting, ** send up 
supplications for thyself and thy people.  
Verse: Wherefore God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness * 
more than thy fellows.  
When God desired to transform thee * from a crowned apostle into a monk 
through a change of ministry, * He brought upon thee a grievous illness, * and by the 
fear of death instructed thee * to set aside thy kingship and take the monastic tonsure; 
* and, delighting in fasting and prayer, * and assisting the seven disciples of the holy 
Cyril and Methodius in the copying of books, * thou didst pass over to heaven, ** 
pouring forth miracles from thy relics.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Receiving the name of the Archangel Michael at baptism, O right-believing King 
Boris, like thy namesake thou didst join battle against the ancient serpent, and, having 
vanquished him by the power of the Cross, thou didst free thy people from his 
tyranny; and having made thine abode in the wilderness, thou didst live like an angel; 
and when thou didst reach the end of thy life, thou didst dwell with the angels. 
Wherefore, as thou hast boldness before the Lord, we beseech thee: By thy 
supplications protect thy people and the Church from incursions of aliens!  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion: 
At the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the righteous one (Twice) in Tone VI:  
Full of the fear of God, * and enlightened by holy baptism, * thou didst become a 
habitation of the Holy Spirit, * O right-believing King Boris; * and having established 
the Orthodox Faith in the land of Bulgaria, * thou didst set aside the scepter of 
kingship, * making thine abode in the wilderness, * and flourishing in ascetic 
struggles, * where thou didst find grace before the Lord. * Wherefore standing now 
before the throne of the Most High, * pray thou, that He grant unto us who entreat 
thee ** salvation for our souls.  
And the Troparion from the Pentecostarion, once.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone VI:  
Full of the fear of God, * and enlightened by holy baptism, * thou didst become a 
habitation of the Holy Spirit, * O right-believing King Boris; * and having established 
the Orthodox Faith in the land of Bulgaria, * thou didst set aside the scepter of 
kingship, * making thine abode in the wilderness, * and flourishing in ascetic 
struggles, * where thou didst find grace before the Lord. * Wherefore standing now 
before the throne of the Most High, * pray thou, that He grant unto us who entreat 
thee ** salvation for our souls. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion from the Pentecostarion.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith...”: 
Having received the confession of the divine Faith from the most illustrious 
Photius and been instructed in knowledge and action, thou dost raise us up to piety 
by thy bold supplications. O right-believing King Boris, entreat Christ God, that we 
be granted great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
Having received the name of an angel, thou didst live angelically in thy kingship 
and in the wilderness; wherefore, God raised thee up to be His excellent favorite, a 
peer of the apostles and fellow laborer with the venerable and the righteous; and for 
thy sake He moveth us to cry unto Him: Glory be to thee, O our God!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion. 
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy King Boris, equal 
of the apostles, and we honor the holy memory of thee who trampled the idols 
underfoot and hast enlightened the whole land of Bulgaria with holy baptism.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the 
work of His hands. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having earnestly sought divine wisdom, thou didst find it within the gates of the 
Orthodox Church of Christ; wherefore, turning away from Rome, thou didst receive 
the persecuted teachers of the pious tongue of Slavonic learning, and water the thirsty 
earth of thy people with the waters of everlasting life. O right-believing King Boris, 
entreat Christ God, that He establish us upon this unshakable foundation and grant 
forgiveness of sins unto those who with love honor thy precious memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I have raised up one chosen out of My people; * I 
have found David my servant.  
Verse: Wherefore God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness 
more than thy fellows.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 35 (IN. 10: 1-9)  
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He 
that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, 
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of 
strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things 
they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before Me are 
thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by Me if any 
man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.”  
After Psalm 50, we chant this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
By thee was fulfilled the prophesy of thy kinsman, the martyred Prince Boyan of 
Enravota, who foretold that the Christian Faith would increase in the land of 
Bulgaria, and that the sign of the Cross would be planted, and temples raised up to 
the true God, wherein honorable priests would offer up the sacrifice of praise and 
confession unto the life-creating Trinity. Wherefore, bearing witness to these things 
and giving thanks unto God, we now bless thee, O right-believing King Boris, as the 
chosen vessel of the judgments of God.  
Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the 
righteous one, with 8 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “Forsaking his kingship, Boris 
received the kingdom”, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Traveling the royal path with thy people, straight from the Egypt of idolatry to the 
Red Sea of baptism, in thanksgiving thou didst chant with faith to our Redeemer and 
God.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Even though the pharaoh-like opposition of the pagan nobles sought to hinder thy 
path and turn it back to bondage to the demons instead of freedom in Christ, yet 
thou, going on to victory, didst chant unto our Redeemer and God.  
With steadfast understanding thou didst hasten to the new law of piety given by 
God, O holy king, like Abraham slaying all the ungodly, and chanting with 
compunction unto our Redeemer and God.  
Theotokion: In the unburnt bush the great Moses foresaw our liberation through 
thy birthgiving, O pure one. Instruct us, who have been delivered, that we unceasingly 
chant with joy unto our Redeemer and God.  
Katavasia from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Thou didst take the firm rock of the Faith as thy foundation; wherefore, by their 
uprising the gates of hell could not shake thy heart, which was made steadfast in the 
Lord, and thy horn was uplifted against thine enemies.  
Those who raised their voices against God have fallen, but thou, having achieved 
the victory with God-pleasing humility and by the power of the Cross, wast exalted as 
the father of thy whole nation and a child of the heavenly Father.  
Desiring the good things promised to those who love God, thou didst consider all 
things as but dung; and undertake the great struggle of a peer of the apostles, 
contending against all the passions until, having finally obtained victory, thou didst 
please God.  
Theotokion: The abundance of the grace of God was poured forth upon the 
human race through thy wondrous birthgiving, O most pure one; for He Who was 
born of thee dragged down the prince of this world into Hades and freed us from his 
authority.  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Pentecostarion. Sessional Hymn of the righteous one, in 
Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “The portals of tender compassion ...”: 
The tender compassion of the compassion of God was poured forth upon the 
land of Bulgaria through baptism, like the gentle rain upon the fleece of Gideon, and 
hath not departed until all hath been watered. Wherefore, the seeds of the kingdom 
have put forth shoots and produced a harvest for the granaries of the Most High 
when, like a father leading his children, the right-believing King Boris had himself and 
his people baptized.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Having heard report of the Lord Who calleth all to salvation, thou didst take up 
the yoke of Christ, accepting baptism with sincere conviction; and while during the 
day thou didst with piety conduct the affairs of the kingdom arrayed in a purple robe, 
at night thou didst pray to God clad in a hairshirt.  
Thy virtue went forth into all the land of Bulgaria and raised thee up as a model 
for all thy people; wherefore, they lovingly submitted to thine authority, not only out 
of fear, but in the fullness of conscience.  
Where the sin of ungodliness is rife, there doth grace abound, according to the 
words of the apostle; and after baptism thy God-fearing soul shone forth with the 
light of the Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness Who hath come from Theman.  
Theotokion: When the time of God’s good will arrived, O most pure one, thou 
didst receive from the archangel the joyous announcement that through thee God 
desired to be born: a Light unto the nations and the Glory of Israel.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Fulfilling all things needful, that the light of God’s commandments might shine 
forth upon thy newly baptized people, thou didst receive into thy land the Slavic 
teachers and didst show them thy favor, aiding them in their apostolic task.  
Sending Clement and Nahum to Okhrid, having John the exarch in Preslav with 
Constantine, and Theodore Dukas, and Khrabr, thou didst flourish in discourse like a 
palm-tree, and like a cedar of Lebanon didst thou increase.  
When thou didst richly adorn the souls of thy people with Slavic books, giving the 
grace of the Word as drink unto those who thirsted, they who dwelt in the land of 
Bulgaria learned righteousness, and the ungodliness of idolatry finally ceased.  
Theotokion: Through thee hath fire devoured adversaries, O most pure one, for 
thou hast given birth to Christ Who alone is our Savior, Who hath freed us from 
slavery and by His death granted us life.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Having forsaken darkened Rome, thou didst turn thy gaze toward the most radiant 
Orthodoxy of the East; and accepting the instruction of the holy Patriarch Photius, 
didst learn how it behooveth man to dwell in the house of God.  
Desiring to establish the legitimacy of the Church of Bulgaria, thou didst turn to 
the Council of Constantinople; and having received an archbishop from them, didst 
lay a firm foundation of autocephaly unto the ages.  
The Lord hath truly made this day whereon thou didst most beautifully finish all 
thy works, O right-believing King Boris; wherefore, it is meet that we rejoice in the 
Lord, celebrating thy memory.  
Theotokion: O Queen of heaven, most holy Virgin, as thou hast great boldness 
before thy Son, by thine intercession free us from the beasts of the nethermost 
regions, and save us, as God saved the Prophet Jonah.  
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”: 
O chosen leader of God Most High, * Who by the power of the Cross triumphed 
over the uprising of darkness * and planted piety in thy land, * as thou hast boldness 
before the Lord, * by thy supplications preserve thy posterity, that we may cry to thee: 
** Rejoice, O King Boris, equal of the apostles, baptizer of the land of Bulgaria!  
Ikos: While the Sun of righteousness shone forth in Bethlehem and the most 
radiant dawn broke upon the earth, the people of Bulgaria, like the laborers of 
Christ’s parable, sat in the darkness of the shadow of death, bereft of the works of 
salvation; yet in the mercy of His providence the Lord found them at the ninth hour, 
and chose King Boris to be His overseer. By him He brought them to the vineyard of 
His Church through the gate of baptism, and granted them recompense equal with 
those who had labored before them. Wherefore, thanking God, we cry aloud unto 
His favored one: Rejoice, O King Boris, equal of the apostles, baptizer of the land of 
Bulgaria!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Planting the Faith like an apostle, thou didst erect temples to the true God in thy 
land, where honored priests could preach and celebrate the mysteries for those who 
cry: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Great joy did God grant thee when the relics of fifty holy martyrs were unearthed 
in Tiberiopolis, and miracles were worked; and they were borne unto Bregalnitsa, 
unto all the people who cry: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Seeing the fulfillment of thy desires, in that piety was planted by thy labors, the 
Church was adorned with the assembly of an independent hierarchy, and the Slavonic 
language was sanctified by the divine services, thou didst most fervently give thanks 
unto God, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Deprive us not of thy mercy, O Theotokos, for the sake of King 
Boris who was beloved of thee, and who glorified thy Son and thee among the 
Bulgarians, who cry: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
When thou didst fall into a grievous illness, thy heart burned to please God the 
better, and thou didst renounce thy kingship; and, having been clad in the monastic 
habit, with unceasing prayer thou didst supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages.  
Having raised up a monastery to the great-martyr Panteleimon, thou madest thine 
abode therein, and aiding the seven disciples of the holy Cyril and Methodius, with 
the others thou didst tirelessly labor in copying books, supremely exalting Christ 
throughout all ages.  
The exceedingly glorious Lord granted thee progress of spirit, and thou didst 
become a model of the Christian struggle, instructing thy people by thine action 
rather than by word alone, and supremely exalting Christ throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: O most radiant cloud who bedewest the fire and coolest the flame, 
bedew me with grace and cool me who am burning with sin, that with thanksgiving I 
may supremely exalt thy Son throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Having guided thy people along the path of salvation and finished thy work, thou 
didst receive a blessed end for thine earthly life; and having passed over to the 
kingdom of heaven, thou prayest unceasingly for us all.  
We bless thee, the equal of the apostles for the land of Bulgaria, who by holy 
baptism and the Slavonic language led thy people to the light of the Christian Faith, 
praying unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
We have glorified thee with human discourse, though thou art worthy of angelic 
praises; yet, be thou condescending, and accept the love of our hearts, and be for us a 
mediator before the Lord, praying unceasingly on behalf of us all.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: O Bride of God, chosen from among all generations, humble the 
mighty in the pride of their hearts and exalt the humble, fill the hungry with all 
manner of good things and send the rich empty away; for thou art able to accomplish 
all things whatsoever thou dost desire, O most hymned Lady.  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
O brethren, with hymns let us all honor the right-believing Boris, the apostle who 
is our kinsman, who hath united us to God through baptism and instructed us in 
Orthodoxy, and who hath wrought for us the way of salvation, which he himself 
traversed; and thereby led all of us, the faithful, up to the kingdom of heaven.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Praises, 6 Stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion, and these 3, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O right-believing King Boris, seeing that thy land of Bulgaria was like a goat amid 
the sheep of Christ, thou didst harbor a desire to bring about its rebirth. Wherefore, 
having illumined it with holy baptism, thou didst lead it into the pious company of 
the Christian peoples which surrounded it, and, having instructed it with the word of 
the Gospel, thou didst lead them to the feet of Christ the Savior. Him do thou 
beseech, that He save and enlighten our souls.  
O right-believing King Boris, heeding the admonition of Paul, who said: In the 
Church I would rather speak five words with mine understanding, that others 
listening may benefit!, thou didst diligently seek and find teachers for thy people; and 
bringing them to thee with all honor, thou didst entrust to them the labor of the 
apostolate of Christ the Savior. Him do thou beseech, that He save and enlighten our 
souls.  
O right-believing King Boris, having, like Solomon, experienced the vanity of the 
world, and setting aside the scepter of thy kingdom, thou didst receive the monastic 
habit and, struggling ascetically in the wilderness of Preslav, didst flourish in holiness 
and righteousness, for which cause thou hast passed over into eternal bliss. In the 
miracles wrought by thy relics thou hast glorified Christ, Whom do thou beseech, that 
He save and enlighten our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Come, ye multitudes of Bulgaria, and, assembling today, with chanted praises let us 
bless the right-believing King Boris, saying: Rejoice, O thou who by thine apostolic 
labor didst bring thy people to Christ and use thine earthly kingdom to win that of 
heaven! Rejoice, thou who didst advance the preaching of the word of God which 
could be understood, and like the preeminent Peter preferred the stillness of Tabor to 
a kingdom! Rejoice, O King Boris, equal of the apostles, who from earthly glory 
passed directly to that of heaven, praying unceasingly for us, that our souls be saved!  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Great Doxology & Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the appointed ODE of the canon from 
the Pentecostarion, and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the righteous one.  
Thou didst take the firm rock of the Faith as thy foundation; wherefore, by their 
uprising the gates of hell could not shake thy heart, which was made steadfast in the 
Lord, and thy horn was uplifted against thine enemies.  
Those who raised their voices against God have fallen, but thou, having achieved 
the victory with God-pleasing humility and by the power of the Cross, wast exalted as 
the father of thy whole nation and a child of the heavenly Father.  
Desiring the good things promised to those who love God, thou didst consider all 
things as but dung; and undertake the great struggle of a peer of the apostles, 
contending against all the passions until, having finally obtained victory, thou didst 
please God.  
Theotokion: The abundance of the grace of God was poured forth upon the 
human race through thy wondrous birthgiving, O most pure one; for He Who was 
born of thee dragged down the prince of this world into Hades and freed us from his 
authority.  
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone VI:  
Full of the fear of God, * and enlightened by holy baptism, * thou didst become a 
habitation of the Holy Spirit, * O right-believing King Boris; * and having established 
the Orthodox Faith in the land of Bulgaria, * thou didst set aside the scepter of 
kingship, * making thine abode in the wilderness, * and flourishing in ascetic 
struggles, * where thou didst find grace before the Lord. * Wherefore standing now 
before the throne of the Most High, * pray thou, that He grant unto us who entreat 
thee ** salvation for our souls.  
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone VIII:  
O chosen leader of God Most High, * Who by the power of the Cross triumphed 
over the uprising of darkness * and planted piety in thy land, * as thou hast boldness 
before the Lord, * by thy supplications preserve thy posterity, that we may cry to thee: 
** Rejoice, O King Boris, equal of the apostles, baptizer of the land of Bulgaria!  
 
 Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, §49 (ACTS 26: 1-5, 12-20)  
In those days, Agrippa said to Paul: “Thou art permitted to speak for thyself.” 
Then Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself: “I think myself happy, 
King Agrippa, because I shall answer for myself this day before thee touching all the 
things whereof! am accused of the Jews: especially because I know thee to be expert 
in all customs and questions which are among the Jews: wherefore I beseech thee to 
hear me patiently. My manner of life from my youth, which was at the first among 
mine own nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews who knew me from the beginning, if 
they would testify, that after the most straitest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee. 
Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and commission from the chief 
priests, at midday, O king, I saw in the way a light from heaven, above the brightness 
of the sun, shining round about me and those who journeyed with me. And when we 
were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto me, and saying in the 
Hebrew tongue: ‘Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick 
against the pricks.’ And I said: ‘Who art thou, Lord?’ And He said: ‘I am Jesus Whom 
thou persecutest. But rise, and stand upon thy feet: for I have appeared unto thee for 
this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of these things which thou 
hast seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee; delivering thee 
from the people, and from the gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, to open their 
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto 
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among those who are 
sanctified ‘by faith that is in Me,’ Whereupon, O King Agrippa, I was not disobedient 
unto the heavenly vision: but showed first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, 
and throughout all the coasts of Judaea, and then to the gentiles, that they should 
repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance.”  
Alleluia, in Tone I: I have raised up one chosen out of My people; I have found 
David My servant.  
Verse: O Lord, in Thy strength the king shall be glad, and in Thy salvation shall 
he rejoice exceedingly.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 35 (MIDPOINT) (JN. 10: 1-9)  
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: He 
that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, 
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of 
strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things 
they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, “Verily, 

--- PAGE 14 ---
verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before Me are 
thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by Me if any 
man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.”  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world. 
