--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 3rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS TIMOTHY & MAURA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Assembling, all ye who love the martyrs, * let us together praise with faith today * 
Maura and Timothy, * valiant among the martyrs, * who suffered mightily * and slew 
the adversary, * who loved Christ * and hated the world, ** the worthy inhabitants of 
the noetic Sion.  
O Timothy, thou didst undergo * the binding of thy body, * the plucking out of 
thine eyes, * the driving of spikes into thine ears, * and being weighed down with a 
heavy stone; * yet didst cast down the enemy, * being borne up to divine glory, O 
glorious one. * Wherefore, assembling with faith, * with supplications we praise thee, 
** O glory and boast of the martyrs.  
With radiant effulgence * thou didst cast the enemy into darkness, * suffering in 
purity, O glorious Maura; * for enduring trampling by horses, * and the cutting off of 
thy fingers, * being burned with torches * and crucifixion for a time, * thou hast 
passed over to divine rest, ** where the choir of the martyrs ever rejoiceth.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor the pangs of Timothy 
and Maura”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VI:  
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
O ye sacred people, in sanctity let us honor the sacred and honored festival of the 
sacred spiritual athletes, that by their entreaties we may be delivered from misfor-
tunes.  
Striving, that they might receive from Christ crowns of sacred victory, the valiant 
martyrs manifestly chose to die rather than live; wherefore, they have received glory.  
Undaunted by the pain of the flesh and unafraid of either the tortures or fire of the 
persecutors, O martyred spiritual athletes, ye manfully proclaimed Christ before the 
tribunal.  
Theotokion: The transcendent Word, receiving human essence from thy pure 
blood, O pure one, hath deified us and delivered us from corruption; wherefore, we, 
the faithful, ever glorify thee.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Opening the books of God to the people in a sacred manner, and enlightening 
their hearts, O Timothy, warrior of Christ, rejoicing, thou didst enter upon honored 
martyrdom.  
Setting thy soul aflame with divine desire, O martyr, thou didst patiently approach 
the fire of tortures; wherefore, the divine dew of Christ cooled thee, O blessed one.  
Thy mind enlightened by thy gaze directed toward God, thou didst not feel the 
touch of the cruelly heated iron implements, O glorious martyr Timothy.  
Theotokion: Though He is dispassionate by nature, thy Son, O pure Virgin, 
received flesh of thy pure blood, and by His suffering on the Cross hath delivered me 
from the passions.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”:  
Having endured multifarious wounds * and received crowns from God, * pray ye 
to the Lord on behalf of us * who celebrate your most sacred memory, * O Timothy 
all-great and all-glorious Maura, * that He grant peace to our city and people; ** for 
He is the confirmation of the faithful.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Worshiping God, the wise Timothy and the glorious Maura cast falsehood into 
darkness; and having endured martyrdom, they have been enlightened beyond the 
rays of the sun, and have become concelebrants with the angels. Yea, we glorify them 
with faith.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Having desired great glory, ye were deemed worthy of it, becoming children of the 
divine Light, O great martyrs of Christ, ye peers of the angels.  
Joining the ranks of the saints, and having thine ears attuned to the divine laws, O 
glorious Timothy, thou didst mightily endure the deprivation of thy hearing.  
Having uplifted thee upon a tree, the vain-minded ones weighted thy head down 
with a stone, O glorious Timothy; yet Christ strengthened thee who art adorned with 
divine suffering.  
Ye truly spurned those who ran the course of inconstancy, O blessed ones, and 
gave yourselves over to pangs; wherefore, ye have received the good things prepared 
from of old.  
Theotokion: O divinely joyous and pure one, thou abode of purity, dwelling-place 
of the Master of all and fulfillment of all the prophets: have pity on those who hymn 
thee.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
O divinely blessed Maura, thou didst listen lovingly to the luminous discourses of 
thy spouse, and, rejecting the darkness of evil, didst become light through martyrdom.  
Arming thyself with the divine Spirit, O honored Maura, rejoicing, thou didst go 
forth to do battle with the deceiver; and having vanquished him, thou hast received 
crowns of victory, O martyr.  
The honored Maura, confessing Thee alone, O Jesus, as the Lord Who fashioned 
man with Thy hands, had her fingers severed, manfully enduring an unjust torture.  
Theotokion: Still thou the tempest of my thoughts, the uprisings of my passions 
and the turmoil of perils, O divinely joyous Virgin, and save me who hymn thy 
mighty works.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Equipped with the Cross as mast and sail, O holy martyrs, with faith ye safely 
traversed the deep of perils and came to rest in the havens of God.  
Having heated a brazen cauldron, the ungodly ones cast thee into whilst thou 
confessed Christ, O Maura; but thou didst remain unharmed, and they found that 
thou hadst been cooled by the dew of the Spirit.  
Bound, O martyrs, ye manfully loosed all the bonds of the enemy, and, putting off 
the flesh, ye have utterly bound your souls to Christ with love, O ever all-memorable 
ones.  
Theotokion: O most good Sovereign Lady who hast given birth in the flesh to the 
supremely good God, bless thou my heart, which hath been afflicted with the 
passions, that with faith and love I may magnify thee.  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Burned allover with torches, the most glorious Maura did not feel pain, bearing the 
fire of the love of Christ in her heart and crying aloud to Him with fervor: O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Shaking the slumber of evil from thine eyes, O Timothy, thou didst endure the 
blinding of thine eyes, gazing upon Christ with the eyes of thy heart, and chanting: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Having disdained things below, the divine martyrs have inherited a dwelling-place 
on high. Let them be honored with sacred hymns, that they may chant unceasingly 
with us: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O all-hymned Virgin who hast given birth to the all-hymned God, 
those who hymn thee do thou show forth as partakers of light, and by thy 
supplications deliver them from Gehenna and fire, and from all the malice of the 
enemy.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Keeping the laws of the Almighty, O valiant martyrs and heirs of Christ, ye did not 
submit to the dominion of the iniquitous, nor did ye offer worship to the wicked 
demons.  
Manifestly joined together in an excellent union, together ye took the easy yoke of 
the Lord upon your necks, O martyrs, and have thereby been admitted to the flocks 
of the martyrs.  
Having suffered for many days upon the tree of a cross, O all-praised ones, ye 
portrayed the honored suffering of Him Who of His own will suffered for our sake. 
Him do we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
Stretched out, ye endured pangs and a most violent death, O holy ones; wherefore, 
ye have passed over to the life which is devoid of pain, hymning Christ throughout all 
ages.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been adorned, O Virgin, having given birth to Christ the 
Lord Who is most comely in beauty, and Who illumineth the faithful with divine rays. 
Him do we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Ye have been deemed worthy to behold the glory of Him Who in His loving-
kindness abased Himself, O all-praised ones; for ye kept His laws and came to share 
in His sufferings. Wherefore, assembling, we piously honor you.  
O wise ones, ye spent as many days nailed to your tree as in His loving-kindness 
Christ spent hours on His Cross. And confessing Him as the Ruler of all, ye 
surrendered your spirit into His hands.  
The army of the angels and the blessed choir of the prophets, apostles, martyrs 
and the venerable assembled to witness your departure from life, O martyrs; and the 
Master of all crowned you with wreaths of victory, in that He is supremely good.  
O valiant and wise spiritual athletes of Christ, beg ye forgiveness of sins, 
correction of life and the avoidance of all evils for us who honor you with love and 
celebrate your honored festival.  
Theotokion: Illumine me with thy light, O Virgin who art divinely joyous among 
women, and deliver me from eternal fire, that I may magnify thee, and glorify thee, 
and fittingly hymn thy mighty works.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Having endured multifarious wounds * and received crowns from God, * pray ye 
to the Lord on behalf of us * who celebrate your most sacred memory, * O Timothy 
all-great, and most glorious Maura, * that He grant peace to our city and people; ** 
for He is the confirmation of the faithful.  
