--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 3rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
 COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER THEODOSIUS, ABBOT OF THE 
MONASTERY OF THE CAVES,  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
True and blameless, venerable and guileless, * and abstaining from every evil thing 
* wast thou known to be, O blessed one, * truly adorned with the virtues, and radiant 
in piety. * Wherefore, we bless thee, and, rejoicing, we celebrate today ** thy holy and 
honored repose. (Twice)  
Let us all bless with faith, and praise * him who was blameless and most 
honorable, * a most lofty tower un-toppled by the machinations of the enemy; * the 
great Theodosius, * the favorite of Christ and His most pure Mother, ** who 
earnestly entreats Him to save our souls from misfortunes.  
Thou didst explain the monastic life, * shining forth like the sun from the land of 
Russia; * for, having protected thy body with abstinence, * by prayers and vigils thou 
didst mortify the movements of the passions. * Wherefore, we beseech thee, O most 
blessed Theodosius: ** Fail us not, helping and visiting us, thy servants.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Come ye today in gladness, O company of the faithful! Come ye all-joyously to the 
honored church! Let us hymn the God-bearing fathers, let us clap our hands on the 
most radiant memorial of those whom Christ our God hath glorified. Wherefore, 
with a joyful voice and a pure conscience let us cry aloud, saying: Rejoice, O earthly 
angel and heavenly man, O most blessed Anthony, dweller with the venerable! 
Rejoice, golden-rayed star of the East, O father Theodosius, thou beacon and pastor 
of monastics! Rejoice, O our boast, ye helpers and joy of the whole world, who with 
the angels abide in the light of the Holy Trinity Who hath crowned ye all! Earnestly 
pray that God deliver from enemies visible and invisible, and from every misfortune, 
us who celebrate your most festive memorial with faith and love.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Thy feast hath been revealed to be a dawn and a radiant morn, * illumining the 
hearts * of us who praise with faith * thine honored struggles, ** O father 
Theodosius.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
The day of salvation hath appeared, * the feast of gladness! * Let us hasten, O ye 
faithful, * having purified our souls, ** to hymn the most blessed Theodosius.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Having found Anthony upon the earth * to be like the sun resplendent with the 
virtues, * thou didst show thyself to be a most radiant star. * Remember before the 
Master those who hymn thee, ** O venerable Theodosius.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Rejoice, thou who hast received * the Joy of the world, * Christ, the Bestower of 
life, * and brought an end to the grief ** of our first mother, O Virgin.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Exalted in virtue, having loved the monastic life from childhood, * and valiantly 
attaining thy desire, thou didst dwell within a cave; * and having adorned thy life with 
asceticism and splendor, * thou didst abide in prayer like one of the incorporeal 
beings, * shining like a radiant beacon in the land of Rus. ** O father Theodosius, 
entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion. 
And 5 for the venerable one, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “O venerable father ...”:  
O venerable and God-bearing father Theodosius, having struggled mightily 
through thy transitory life, by hymnody, fasting and vigils thou didst become a model 
for thy disciples. Wherefore, joining chorus now with the incorporeal ones, thou dost 
unceasingly glorify Christ, the Word of God, Who came from God, the Redeemer 
Who bowed His head upon the Cross and thereby delivered the human race from 
falsehood. Him do thou beseech, Him do thou entreat, O venerable one, that He 
grant peace and great mercy unto the world. (Twice)  
O venerable and God-bearing father Theodosius, thou wast truly deemed worthy 
of a godly life, finding it through purity and ascetic endeavor; for having completed 
thy life and having left all things behind, thou didst pass over to that true life, where, 
together with the incorporeal ones thou dost unceasingly glorify Christ Who ineffably 
received flesh from the Virgin, and cast down Hades raising up the dead from all 
ages. Him do thou beseech, Him do thou entreat, O venerable one, that He grant 
peace and great mercy unto the world. (Twice) 
O venerable and God-bearing father Theodosius, in that thou didst love and 
acquire purity of soul, the grace of the all-holy Spirit dwelt within thee like the purest 
light, and thereby radiantly illumined thee by noetic progress, and the unceasing 
glorification of Christ, the one God in two essences, Who suffered in the flesh upon 
the Cross, yet remained dispassionate in His divinity. Him do thou beseech, Him do 
thou entreat, O venerable one, that He grant peace and great mercy unto the world.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Come, let us all hasten to the divine memorial of our father Theodosius; for 
receiving his calling from on high when he was yet a child, he was given a name by 
the priest which is interpreted as ‘the gift of God’. Wherefore, having become a 
teacher of the Orthodox Faith for Christ-loving princes, the steadfast defense of 
noblemen, the kind-hearted father of orphans, the fervent aid of widows, the comfort 
of the sorrowful, the treasure of the poor, the ladder upon which the choir of 
monastics are led up to the heights of heaven, and a well-spring of ever-flowing 
waters for those who in simplicity have recourse unto him, he prayeth unceasingly, 
that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 

--- PAGE 4 ---
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete amour, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, then these Stichera: 
In Tone I: Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, and, assembling today, let 
us piously celebrate the most glorious and honored memory of the great father, the 
beacon of the whole world, and let us honor him gloriously, saying: Rejoice, O 
Theodosius, dweller with the venerable and the righteous! Rejoice, thou who brought 
together a most radiant company of honorable fathers! Rejoice, faithful servant and 
steward of the habitation of the Mother of God, whose excellent temple thou didst 
build unto the glory of God! And chanting therein, we beseech thee: Pray thou, that 
the Lord deliver us from all trials and misfortunes, and from the incursion of 
barbarians, and that He save our souls.  
In Tone II: O disciple of the Master, divinely wise father Theodosius, harp struck 
by God, divinely eloquent mouth, warrior of the Spirit, good shepherd, boast of the 
venerable: thou didst seek after God and wast illumined by His divinely luminous 
effulgence; thou didst converse with God amid unceasing purification and radiance, 
and, having cleansed thy thoughts with springs of tears, thou wast shown to be a 
most brilliant and splendid pillar of fire. O all-blessed boast of monks, glory of the 
fathers and servant of the Trinity: by thy mediation do thou now preserve us all.  
O venerable father Theodosius, thou didst take pity upon those languishing in 
thirst amid burning heat, and as an excellent minister, emulating thy Master, thou 
didst divinely reward them, performing signs: increasing their wine and filling their 
empty granaries with grain at thy command, and filing to overflowing with honey a 
vessel nearly empty. Having learned the secret things of the spirit, thou didst adorn 
the Church, while enduring sufferings like a martyr, by granting multitudes of 
healings, and showing love for the poor, and pity to all in thine undertakings, yet 
confining thy belly to bread and water, emulating the life of the incorporeal beings 
while in the flesh, for which sake we offer thee glory, praying: Forsake us not, and 
preserve thy servants by thy supplications!  
Two most radiant beacons shone forth in Russia: Anthony and Theodosius. For 
the one by the word of God bedewed the earth, bringing down fire from heaven, and 
manifestly proclaiming things to come, having received the grace of the Trinity. And 
the other loosed rain from heaven, denouncing the prince for his hatred of his 
brethren and his unjust love of power; and, beholding the Lord face to face, thou was 
seen, like Elijah, suspended in the air above the monastery amid fiery light, lifting up 
thy hands and making supplication unto God. And now, joining chorus with the 
angels, they pray for us, that with them we may be deemed worthy of the true light, 
and that our souls may be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Having preserved intact that which was created according to the image of God, 
and through fasting set thy mind as master over the pernicious passions, thou didst 
ascend, as far as thou wast able, to that which is in accordance with the likeness of 
God; for, manfully doing violence to thy nature, thou didst strive to subject that 

--- PAGE 6 ---
which is lower to that which is higher, and to enslave the flesh to the spirit. 
Wherefore, thou hast been revealed to be an example of monastics, a most excellent 
rule of virtue. And now, O Theodosius our father, seeing clearly and not in images, 
thou dost gaze in purity upon the Holy Trinity in the heavens, praying directly for 
those who honor thee with faith and love.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O divinely wise father Theodosius, * having drawn closer to God in thought * 
from thy mother’s womb, * thou didst care exceedingly for the almighty King, * 
offering Him the worthy fruits * of thy struggles, O venerable one, * adorned with 
the wreaths of virtues. * Wherefore, thou didst acquire the gift of good things, ** O 
right wondrous one.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Thou wast an instructor of monastics * and the most radiant star of the Russian 
land, * shining miracles forth upon that whole country; * for God chose thee 
beforehand * from thy youth, O father, * as a shepherd for His reason endowed 
sheep. * Wherefore, the choir of the venerable hath received thee; * with them pray, 
we beseech thee, ** that He grant forgiveness of sins unto thy flock.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Rejoice, O all-hymned Virgin, * who by a pillar of fire indicated the field * where 
thou didst desire * that thy godly flock should be pastured! * Theodosius straightway 
erected a church there, * adorned for thee and most wondrous; * and therein all of us, 
the faithful, celebrate thy dormition, * O most pure Theotokos, ** standing round 
about the shrine of thy favored one.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
O Theodosius our father, we honor thee, the instructor of a multitude of monks, 
for we have truly learned to walk aright in thy steps. Blessed art thou who labored for 
Christ and denounced the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels, fellow-
heir with the venerable and the righteous: with them pray thou to the Lord, that our 
souls find mercy.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Exalted in virtue, having loved the monastic life from childhood, * and valiantly 
attaining thy desire, thou didst dwell within a cave; * and having adorned thy life with 
asceticism and splendor, * thou didst abide in prayer like one of the incorporeal 
beings, * shining like a radiant beacon in the land of Rus. ** O father Theodosius, 
entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved. (Twice) 
And the Troparion from the Pentecostarion, (Once).  

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion from the Pentecostarion, (Twice);  
Glory, that of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Exalted in virtue, having loved the monastic life from childhood, * and valiantly 
attaining thy desire, thou didst dwell within a cave; * and having adorned thy life with 
asceticism and splendor, * thou didst abide in prayer like one of the incorporeal 
beings, * shining like a radiant beacon in the land of Rus. ** O father Theodosius, 
entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., that of the Pentecostarion.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Following the calling of thy Lord, thou didst forsake the world and all the beauties 
thereof, O most blessed Theodosius, enduring bodily affliction, diligently strengthen-
ing thyself in a cave, in a grievous and narrow place, thou didst manfully expel hordes 
of demons. Wherefore, with faith we ever praise thy memory with hymns. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Abundantly watering thy soul with streams of tears, O wise father, thou didst reap 
the most fertile grain of the virtues; and as a shepherd of sheep, O venerable one, 
thou didst nurture them on the grass of abstinence. Wherefore, departing gloriously 
from this life, thou hast joined the choirs of the fathers, O Theodosius. For this cause 
we cry aloud unto thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto 
those who with love honor thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion. 
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We bless thee, O venerable father 
Theodosius, and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and 
converser with the angels.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Truly sanctified from thy mother’s womb, O blessed Theodosius, thou didst live 
on earth like an angel; for, having mortified the flesh, in the cave thou didst fittingly 
emulate the life of Anthony, and wast shown to be a favorite of the Trinity, O blessed 

--- PAGE 8 ---
one. Wherefore, by the zeal of thy godly life thou hast united the choirs of monastics, 
O glorious one. O our God-bearing father, entreat Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (IM. 6: 17-23)  
At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre 
and Sidon, which came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that 
were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude 
sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He 
lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the 
kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye 
that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when 
they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your 
name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, 
behold, your reward is great in heaven.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Having mounted to heaven on the swift divine chariot of the virtues, thou didst 
reach the city in the highest through asceticism, ascending from earth to the all-
beauteous Jerusalem on high, receiving as is meet, the reward for thy pangs and 
struggles; and rejoicing now with the ranks of heaven, O most blessed one, thou hast 
inherited the everlasting good things as an inhabitant of the kingdom. Pray thou to 
the Savior of all, O God-bearing Theodosius, that He grant peace to the world and 
save our souls.  
Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and 2 canons 
of the venerable one, with 4 Troparia each.  
ODE I  
Canon I of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Having attained the God-pleasing struggle, O father Theodosius, thou wast 
revealed to be a God-seer; wherefore, pray thou unto God Whom thou didst please, 
that He banish the darkness of mine ignorance and inspire me with blessed discourse, 
that I may hymn thee.  
From thy mother’s womb thou didst cleave unto God, O venerable one, like the 
most wise Paul and the Prophet Jeremiah of old; wherefore, divine grace through the 
lips of the servant of God gave thee thy name, O Theodosius.  
Having obeyed the commandments of the Savior from thy youth, O wise one, and 
considered this life to be as naught, desiring to bear the Cross on thy shoulders thou 
didst spurn all earthly things, looking to the things of heaven, O Theodosius.  
Theotokion: The Word of God Who assumed flesh from thy most pure womb, O 
most holy Virgin, hath shone upon all with the love of divine knowledge, and having 
ascended into the heavens, hath deemed Theodosius worthy of celebration in the 
choirs of mortals and of angels.  
Canon II of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Illumined by the most radiant beams of God, O father Theodosius, enlighten my 
mind by thy supplications, that I may hymn thy divine memory with splendor.  
From thy youth thou didst offer thyself to the one God, from Whom thou didst 
receive the abundant grace of miracles; wherefore, thou didst become a wellspring of 
incorruption for thy flock.  
Thou hast been revealed to us as a new Abraham, offering sacrifice unto God-the 
Lamb Who hath truly taken away the sins of the whole world, making prosphera with 
thine own pure hands.  
Theotokion: The Word of God Who existed before the morning-star hath 
revealed Himself to us as a man, assuming flesh for our sake from the most pure 
Virgin; and having issued forth from her, preserved her free of harm.  
Katavasia from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE III  
Canon I of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Thy divine and blessed soul enriched with the spiritual gifts of incorruption, O 
holy one, compelled thee to behold the tomb of the Lord; but another path wast 
chosen for thee from on high by the dispensation of God.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Desiring to be a perfect, true and blameless sacrifice of the Lamb Who taketh away 
the sin of the whole world by His most pure blood, O blessed one, thou didst offer 
unto Him the un-bloody sacrifice.  
Becoming an acquirer of rules from the height of thy youth and a ruler over thy 
mind O father, thou didst flee the abyss of the world and receive instruction from the 
divine Spirit.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O thou who alone hast given birth to the Lord of all! 
Rejoice, thou who hast proclaimed joy unto all! Rejoice, O tabernacle and unquarried 
mountain, thou confirmation of the faithful, O only all-hymned one!  
Canon II of the venerable one  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Theodosius heard the voice of the Gospel and hastened to the church; and 
desiring to bear the Cross of the Lord upon his shoulder, he forsook all passionate 
attachment to the world, and followed after Him.  
When thy mother, who gave thee birth, tested thee by commanding thee to 
remove thy garment, she beheld a horrible sight: thy sides wet with blood from the 
iron chains thou didst wear.  
With a great desire to behold the tomb of the Lord, O blessed Theodosius, thou 
wast held back by the dispensation of God, and didst become the companion of the 
venerable Anthony.  
Theotokion: In a manner past understanding thou alone from all ages didst 
conceive God, the Creator and Fashioner, O thou who alone hast given birth unto 
the Word of God  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Pentecostarion.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
In a manner surpassing human understanding, O venerable one, thou wast 
revealed to be a sacred garden of God set in the midst of the house of the Lord on 
earth, giving the fruit of thy pangs unto thy disciples; for from thy mouth thou didst 
bring forth the grace of the Spirit, having become an example of ascetic struggles and 
a model for those who love the Lord. Him do thou never fail to entreat, that those 
who hymn thee be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE IV  
Canon I of the venerable one  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 

--- PAGE 11 ---
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
The grace of God increased within thee, O father, when thou didst behold her 
who gave thee birth weeping and lamenting exceedingly, yet standing before her as 
she shed streams of tears, thou didst remain an unshaken and immovable pillar.  
The most wicked enemy strove, through cruel men, to drag thee away from the 
comely place of refuge which thou didst desire, O Theodosius; yet accounting him as 
naught, thou didst drive away his hordes by thy supplications, chanting: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lover of mankind.  
Refreshed by the rain of the Spirit and watered by the Well-spring of life, thou 
didst produce divine grain through the tongue of Anthony thy guide; and feeding the 
multitudes, thou didst truly become like the inexhaustible granary of Joseph.  
Theotokion: Who is able to describe the depths of thy wonders as is meet, O pure 
one? For through thee the whole world, offering thee praise, findeth mercy and is 
delivered from grievous misfortunes and divers evils, enemies and perils.  
Canon II of the venerable one  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
When thy mother learned that thou wast living in a cave with the blessed Anthony, 
thou didst comfort her when she came to thee, weeping, and exhort her to flee the 
evil of the world.  
Thou wast truly a blameless priest of God, O sacred father, offering up the un-
bloody sacrifice, and chanting with a pure heart, ever keeping festival in the Lord.  
Ask for us deliverance from sins, O servant of God and intercessor, for we thy 
flock, cry out to thee; preserve us who hymn thee from the temptations of the enemy.  
Theotokion: The Word of God, Who shone forth from the Father, sanctified thy 
most pure womb, and in His surpassing goodness hath delivered the human race 
from the ancient curse. 
ODE V  
Canon I of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Thy correction shone forth in struggles of virtue, for that which from old was a 
poor hovel thou didst render spacious, leading many ascetics unto God, Who 
granteth them an abundance of all things, by thy supplications.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
By the radiant beams of thy struggles, a multitude of demons were driven from thy 
dwelling-place; for the grace of the Spirit of the Creator of all accompanied thee and 
revealed thee as glorious, O Theodosius.  
In the midst of the church thou didst hymn the compassionate Savior; wherefore, 
He sent down to thee His abundant compassions, alleviating the grief of want and 
pouring forth ever-flowing gifts upon thy flock.  
Theotokion: Thou wast higher than the hosts on high, O thou who art full of the 
grace of God, having conceived the Word Who created all things by His word, and 
having given birth to Him Who was ineffably begotten of the Father before all time.  
Canon II of the venerable one  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Thou wast a pure basin adorned with the flowers of the virtues, O father 
Theodosius, from whence thou dost pour forth upon thy flock a fountain of teaching 
sweeter than honey and the honey-comb.  
With virtuous struggles thou didst mortify carnal nature, O wise father 
Theodosius; wherefore, Christ showed thee forth as a shepherd in the place which He 
chose to be a pasture for the pure Virgin.  
Thou wast an instructor of monks and a shepherd of sheep tended in the pasture 
of the Mother of God; wherefore, God hath granted thee twofold joy, O Theodosius, 
through the supplications of the pure Mother of God.  
Theotokion: He Who dwelleth in the heavens found thee to be a sacred abode, 
and of His own will made His dwelling within thy womb; wherefore, standing in thy 
house, with cries of thanksgiving we ever hymn thy most pure birthgiving.  
ODE VI  
Canon I of the venerable one  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Through prayers, the keeping of vigils and the chanting of psalms thou didst 
continually render thy soul a divine garden of paradise, manifestly causing the life-
bearing and precious Tree of the Savior and Lord to grow therein.  
It was thy will to acquire sacred humility, emulating the poverty of the Master, O 
blessed one; and willingly treading that path, thou didst accept to pass by a sacred 
place through the command of a slothful servant, whereupon thou wast recognized 
and rendered homage by those who met thee.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Emulating Him Who washed the feet of His disciples, O divinely wise one, thou 
didst consent to draw water and bear it upon thy shoulders, and hewing and carrying 
wood with thine own hands, didst reveal thyself to be a guide in monastic labor.  
Theotokion: Through thee, O Theotokos, the most crafty foe was slain, having 
brought destruction upon all creation through corruption, but through thee the dead 
have been led up to life again; for thou didst truly give birth to the Lord, the Life of 
all.  
Canon II of the venerable one  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Having truly built a church for the Mother of God, thou hast assembled therein a 
choir of a multitude of monastics, who hymn thine honored memory with love.  
Pouring forth a well-spring of healings upon all who with faith have recourse to 
thy protection, O venerable one, thou dost cause holiness to gush forth, and illumine 
men’s hearts, dispelling the deception of the demons.  
Lift up thy hands unto Christ God, O venerable father, and by thy supplications 
preserve thy flock which thou didst radiantly gather together in the Spirit, and who 
hymn thy memory.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O all-hymned one who hast given birth to the all-hymned 
God of all! O pure one, show those who hymn thee to be partakers of the light, and 
deliver them from everlasting fire.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
We honor today the blessed Theodosius, * the star of Rus, who shone forth from 
the East and arrived in the West; * for he hath enriched this whole land and all of us * 
with miracles and goodness ** by the establishment and grace of the monastic rule.  
Ikos: Who can describe thy struggles, O father? Who can recall the multitudes of 
thy labors and wondrous miracles? For while yet in the flesh thou didst behold one of 
the incorporeal beings conversing with thee in fleshly form, offering thee a gift: gold 
sent by God. Thou wast revealed to surpass all in humility and a meek demeanor, and 
to be filled to overflowing of spiritual wisdom. Wherefore, receiving the Spirit within 
thee, thou wast seen to be in the light, shining like the sun. With the brilliance of thy 
monastic rule, O venerable and godly Theodosius, enlighten me who hymn thee.  
ODE VII  
Canon I of the venerable one  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Everyone who fleeth with faith to thy supplications, O blessed one, is never put to 
shame; but, receiving the grace of his petition, O father, he returneth and danceth, 
singing: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst show thyself to be a father and helper of orphans, the hope of widows, 
and the uplifting of all the sick, O father; wherefore, we chant: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Thou wast the adornment of monastics and a path of salvation for men; for, 
enriching all by thy discourses on the divine mysteries, thou didst teach them to say: 
O God of our fathers blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O Christ, for our salvation Thou didst appear incarnate from the 
Virgin’s womb; wherefore, knowing Thy Mother to be the Theotokos, we chant with 
thanksgiving: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon II of the venerable one  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
The grace of God increased within thee, O father, overshadowing thee with the 
Spirit and enlightening thy heart; and thereby thou didst teach men to chant: O God 
of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thy discourse explaining the dispensation of the mysteries hath gone forth into all 
lands, unto those who ever chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The diverse aspects of the grace of the Spirit rested on thee, O father, revealing 
most glorious miracles unto those who chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Theotokion: Fleeing beneath thy protection, O Sovereign Lady, we are delivered 
from evils; for having thee as our hope, all of us, the faithful, pray: Disdain not thy 
servants, O Virgin Theotokos.  
ODE VIII  
Canon I of the venerable one  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Thou wast shown to be like a prophet of God gazing into the future, O 
Theodosius; for, inspired by the Spirit, thou didst command him who bore the 
Gospel scripture unto thee to bear it away, and he cried aloud unto thee, confessing 
with a pure mind the sacrifice to the most pure Theotokos.  
The right-believing prince who sustained the whole land hastened to thy dwelling-
place, like a deer to a spring of water, that he might receive the ever-flowing 

--- PAGE 15 ---
sustenance of incorruption; wherefore, desiring to dine with him, O blessed one, thou 
didst command thy vessel to fill completely with honey when thy patron informed 
thee of its lack.  
The angelic hosts hymned thy struggles, O Theodosius, and the choir of the 
venerable praised thy way of life, O thou splendid adornment and joy of monks; 
wherefore, rejoicing now therewith, thou art filled with gladness, chanting 
melodiously: O ye Youths bless, O ye priests praise, O ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Thee do I set forth as an invincible protector and ally of my life, O 
most pure Theotokos: be thou mine aid against misfortunes and tribulations, and 
deliver thine unworthy servant, who doth chant with love: O ye Youths bless, O ye 
priests praise, O ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon II of the venerable one  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
The choir of thy disciples, standing round about thy shrine with their abbot, 
hymneth Christ, having received thy labors which are worthy of God, Whom we 
supremely exalt throughout the ages.  
Rejoicing, thou didst follow Christ God the Crucified, mortifying thy body with 
manifold labors and pangs; and thou didst acquire true faith and love, having rejected 
the world and come to love Christ alone.  
The shrine of thy relics, O father Theodosius, poureth forth health with divine 
power and healeth sufferings of soul and flesh; wherefore, we hymn thy memory as is 
meet.  
Theotokion: We now exclaim to thee the cry of Gabriel: Rejoice, O most blessed 
Lady, full of the grace of God, for whose sake we have been delivered from the 
ancient curse; for thou art the mediator of the salvation of all.  
ODE IX  
Canon I of the venerable one  
Irmos: All are awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * for the 
Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man in the 
Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure Theotokos. 
Today thy memorial hath shone forth upon us like the sun, O venerable one, and 
rejoicing, we venerate thy shrine, standing round about it as though a divine ark, with 
the ranks of heaven we hymn thy repose with faith, O Theodosius.  
Rejoice, O land of Rus, having received from the Lord a treasure which cannot be 
taken away: Theodosius, the great helper blessed of God the fervent aid. And do 
thou, O first among the cities of Russia, rejoice with the choir of fasters.  
We have gathered now in festival on the day of thy memorial, to hymn the Lord 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Who assigned thee the goodly struggles which thou endured; wherefore, we beseech 
thee, O holy and wise one, that thy flock, which thou didst acquire by thy 
supplications, may be delivered from the temptations of the enemy.  
Save me, O Savior Who alone art our Redeemer, as Thou didst accept the fervent 
repentance of the harlot and the prodigal and the sighing of the publican. O Christ, 
be merciful to me, a prodigal, through the supplications of thy favored one, and 
banish the multitude of my sins.  
Theotokion: O Savior Who wast born from, and Who preserved, her who gave 
Thee birth without corruption, even after birthgiving: Take pity on me when Thou 
shalt sit to judge my works, overlooking my sins and iniquities, in that Thou art 
sinless and merciful, and the Lover of mankind.  
Canon II of the Venerable One  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
O father, through faith thou hast united thy children. As a worthy shepherd of 
shepherds, O venerable one, grant them to be enlightened with the virtues, and pray 
that we be granted forgiveness of sins and correction of life.  
Living a life equal to that of the holy fathers, thou wast a servant of the most pure 
Virgin, O blessed and most excellent pastor of monastics, true pillar of the Orthodox 
Faith, the hope of the faithful and the trust of those who chant in the house of the 
Mother of God.  
Sanctified by the power of the Almighty, thou didst overcome the snares of the 
enemy, driving away their hordes and granting health to the sick; wherefore, rejoicing, 
we ever honor thy memory.  
Theotokion: Ineffably conceiving Him Who shone forth from the Father without 
mother, thou hast given birth to Him, O Mother of God, pure and all-hymned Virgin. 
Entreat thy Son und our God, O most holy one, on behalf of us, thy servants.  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Receiving the light of the consubstantial Trinity within thy heart, O Theodosius, 
thou father of fathers, strengthening thyself in the cave with the great Anthony, thou 
didst illumine the pious, O dweller with the angels. With them be thou mindful of 
those who with faith hymn thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the venerable one in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Wholly wounded by faith and the love of Christ, * O blessed one, * following after 
Him thou didst reject the world, * thy homeland and family, * hastening to the 

--- PAGE 17 ---
venerable Anthony, * from whom thou didst learn ineffable things: * that which ear 
hath not heard entered into thy heart. * With him do we hymn thee, ** honoring thee 
in sacred manner, O Theodosius. (Twice)  
Thou didst desire an undefiled life, * patience, love and humility, * all-night vigil 
and abstinence, * thereby mortifying the lusts of the flesh. * Wherefore, receiving 
divine knowledge, * thou dost now rejoice with the choirs of the venerable. * Forget 
us not, O blessed one, * asking forgiveness of sins on behalf of those ** who hymn 
thee as is meet.  
When the enemy, the author of evil * set brigands upon thy flock, O venerable 
one, * desiring to destroy those therein, * seeing the church suspended aloft, they 
departed, * terrified by the grace given thee by God, O saint. * For they heard in the 
church the sound of ineffable angelic hymnody. * Rejoicing now with them, * be thou 
mindful of us who with faith ** hymn thy radiant and honored memory.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth. 
Wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, having destroyed 
hordes of demons and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst 
blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask peace for our 
souls.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the appointed ODE of the canon from 
the Pentecostarion, and 4 from ODE VI of the Canon I of the venerable one.  
Through prayers, the keeping of vigils and the chanting of psalms thou didst 
continually render thy soul a divine garden of paradise, manifestly causing the life-
bearing and precious Tree of the Savior and Lord to grow therein.  
It was thy will to acquire sacred humility, emulating the poverty of the Master, O 
blessed one; and willingly treading that path, thou didst accept to pass by a sacred 
place through the command of a slothful servant, whereupon thou wast recognized 
and rendered homage by those who met thee.  
Emulating Him Who washed the feet of His disciples, O divinely wise one, thou 
didst consent to draw water and bear it upon thy shoulders, and hewing and carrying 
wood with thine own hands, didst reveal thyself to be a guide in monastic labor.  
Theotokion: Through thee, O Theotokos, the most crafty foe was slain, having 
brought destruction upon all creation through corruption, but through thee the dead 
have been led up to life again; for thou didst truly give birth to the Lord, the Life of 
all.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Exalted in virtue, having loved the monastic life from childhood, * and valiantly 
attaining thy desire, thou didst dwell within a cave; * and having adorned thy life with 
asceticism and splendor, * thou didst abide in prayer like one of the incorporeal 
beings, * shining like a radiant beacon in the land of Rus. ** O father Theodosius, 
entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone III:  
We honor today the blessed Theodosius, * the star of Rus’, who shone forth from 
the East and arrived in the West; * for he hath enriched this whole land and all of us * 
with miracles and goodness ** by the establishment and grace of the monastic rule. 
  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 334 (HEB. 13: 7-16)  
Brethren: Remember those who have the rule over you, who have spoken unto 
you the word of God: Whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation: 
Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. Be not carried about with 
divers and strange doctrines. For it is a good thing that the heart be established with 

--- PAGE 19 ---
grace; not with meats, which have not profited them that have been occupied therein. 
We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle. For 
the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high 
priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that He might 
sanctify the people with His own blood, suffered outside the gate. Let us go forth 
therefore unto Him outside the camp, bearing His reproach. For here have we no 
continuing city, but we seek one to come. By Him therefore let us offer the sacrifice 
of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to His name. 
But to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well 
pleased.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation 
for Himself.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 43 (MT. 11; 27-30)  
The Lord said to His disciples: All things are delivered unto Me of my Father: and 
no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save 
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that 
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn 
of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For 
My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
