--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 5th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY & GLORIOUS MARTYR IRENE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Splendidly arrayed, O most honored one, * in a robe empurpled with thy blood, * 
thou didst hasten to Him Whom thou didst desire, * the King, Creator and Lord of 
all, * from Whom thou hast truly received a crown of victory. * With Him thou 
reignest now * as a virgin and martyr, ** O greatly suffering one.  
Thou didst endure the raging of the burning fire, * O all-praised one, * and the 
laceration of thy whole body, * looking forward to heavenly rewards * which Jesus 
alone hath prepared * for those who love Him and fervently desire Him * as the most 
comely Bridegroom of our souls, ** O most honored one.  
Reveling in the love of Christ, * thou didst despise the gods of the pagans * and 
their inanimate graven images, O glorious Irene. * To those who watched thee thou 
didst show thyself to be * a most manifest pillar of the knowledge of God, * in that 
thou didst suffer, * didst finish thy race ** and preserve the Faith undefiled.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Irene, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion from the Pentecostarion, (Twice);  
Glory ..., that of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Irene, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering, * in Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Both now ..., that from the Pentecostarion.  
Canon of the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof is:  
“Cover me with thy supplications, O martyr Irene”, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: I will sing unto Thee, O Lord my God, * for Thou hast led Thy people 
out of the bondage of Egypt, * and hast drowned in the waters * the chariots 
and the might of Pharaoh. 
In that Thou art the crown of the passion-bearer, O Christ, by her prayers grant 
peace to the world and unfading glory to those who hymn Thee.  
Shining with the radiance of virginity and adorned with the beauty of thy 
martyrdom, O Irene of great renown, thou standest before thy Bridegroom.  
Entreat thy Bridegroom, O divinely wise Irene, that He be merciful to the 
Churches and grant forgiveness of sins unto those who honor thee.  
Theotokion: In a manner past understanding and all telling, O holy Virgin, thou 
hast given birth to God the Word, Who became flesh and is like unto us.  
ODE III  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
Sensing the sweet fragrance of Him Who emptied Himself, and receiving Him 
Who hath perfumed the whole world with grace, O glorious one, thou didst take wing 
toward the desire of Him. (Twice) 
In thy struggles thou didst have God as a helper defending thee, O all-wise one; 
wherefore, crowned, thou didst vanquish the tyrant. O all-praised one, thou wast an 
unshakable pillar of virtue, an abode of piety and courage, and a vessel of chastity.  
Theotokion: Hastening toward thee, death was staunched, striking against Him 
Who was born of thee, O all-immaculate one; wherefore, we call thee the first-fruits 
of immortality.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Adorned with the beauties of virginity, * O virgin Irene, through thy suffering * 
thou hast been rendered most beautiful, * dyed in thine own flowing blood, * casting 
down the delusion of ungodliness. * Wherefore, thou hast received the honors of 
victory ** from the hand of thy Creator.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
When thou wast separated from thy body after much suffering, O martyr, great 
peace bedewed thee; for, rejoicing on high, the Bridegroom in the heavens received 
thee, all-illumined and radiant in thy suffering, and He led thee, rejoicing, into the 
divine bridal-chamber.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Proclaiming the advent of Thine appearance on earth, O Christ God, * 
the prophet cried aloud with gladness: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
He Who granted peace to thee, seeing thee helping Him for the sake of peace, 
filled thee with manly understanding and strength, O martyr, thou namesake of peace.  
Overcoming thy womanly weaknesses with strong fervor, O most blessed martyr, 
thou didst steadfastly denounce those who worship falsehood.  
Showing forth divine patience, thou didst east down the arrogance of the tyrants, 
crying out to thy Bridegroom: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
With never-silent hymnody and entreaties to the Master; O divinely wise one, thou 
didst sing, and hastening to Him, thou dost behold ineffable glory.  
Theotokion: Saved by thee, O most pure one, we cry aloud to thee with joy and 
gladness: Rejoice, O most honored Virgin! Rejoice, O most hymned Theotokos!  
ODE V  
Irmos: Do Thou O Lord send down upon us * Thine enlightenment, and free 
us * from the gloom of transgression, O Good One, * granting us Thy peace. 
With manly mind thou didst manifestly confess Christ, the God of all; and with 
steadfast discourse, put to shame the adversary, O passion-bearer.  
Thou didst desire to pursue the sufferings of Christ, and, suffering like the Master, 
thou didst fervently follow Him, O most noetically rich martyr.  
Leading legions of martyrs to Christ by thy wisdom and divine discourse, O 
glorious one, thou hast truly taught them the sacred mysteries through thy words of 
faith.  
Theotokion: Having learned of the mystery of thy conception and thine ineffable 
and divine birth giving, O Virgin, we now hymn thee with all honor, O all-hymned 
Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
Thou didst set aright the fall of Eve our first mother, O passion-bearer, casting 
down the power of the enemy and vanquishing his arrogance with divine grace.  
Having acquired strength of mind, O Irene, thou didst oppose the tyrants with 
valor of soul, and hast thereby been crowned by Christ God with a wreath of victory.  
With the blood of thy suffering thou didst make thy natural beauty yet more 
comely, O pure martyr, having steadfastly undertaken valiant struggles, O goodly 
virgin.  
Theotokion: He who beheld God revealed beforehand the mystery of thy 
birthgiving, O pure Ever-virgin Theotokos, in the image of the bush which burned 
yet was not consumed.  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Pentecostarion  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Standing, crowned, before the throne of thy Master, O martyr, preserve those who 
cry out with faith: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou hast been counted worthy to dance in the mansions of heaven, O right 
wondrous martyr Irene, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Desiring to obtain the beauty of Him whom thou lovest, O Irene, thou didst 
endure the pangs of martyrdom, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
Theotokion: Following the words of thy lips, O Mother of God, we bless thee 
with faith, crying out to thine Offspring: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Thou didst suffer valiantly, O blessed Irene, casting down the tyrant, and having as 
thine invincible aid the power of thy Master assisting thee; wherefore thou didst cry 
aloud: Hymn ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Wounded with youthful love, thou didst follow after thy Bridegroom, bearing His 
sufferings and wounds on thy body, and crying aloud: Hymn ye the Lord, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Thine endurance amid torments mocked those who place their trust in vanity and 
ungodliness, O crown-bearer Irene; and thou didst chant with faith: Hymn the Lord, 
ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: The Wisdom of God, the Fashioner of all, making His abode within 
thy womb, O Mother of God, made thee a temple, noetic and animate, for Himself, 
and hath saved the world, which crieth out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout the ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Dancing around thy Bridegroom in the highest, O good virgin Irene, ask peace for 
the world and forgiveness of sins on behalf of those who with faith keep thy radiant 
and sacred memory.  
Christ hath caused thee, as a martyr and virgin, to dwell within His bridal-chamber, 
where thou dost rejoice with the virgins and the armies of martyrs, O all-praised and 
crowned Irene. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed.  
Opening the gates of heaven, He Who alone reigneth over all, the Giver of justice, 
received Thine all-immaculate soul, O namesake of divine peace. Wherefore, we all 
call thee blessed.  
Theotokion: As thou hast unashamed boldness before thy Son, O most 
immaculate one, entreat Him to send peaceful order upon the world, and oneness of 
mind upon all the Churches, that we may all magnify thee.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Irene, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Adorned with the beauties of virginity, * O virgin Irene, through thy suffering * 
thou hast been rendered most beautiful, * dyed in thine own flowing blood, * casting 
down the delusion of ungodliness. * Wherefore, thou hast received the honors of 
victory ** from the hand of thy Creator.  
 
 
