--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE TRANSLATION OF THE PRECIOUS RELICS OF 
OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS NICHOLAS, ARCHBISHOP OF MYRA IN LYCIA, 
FROM MYRA TO BARI IN ITALY 
AT VESPERS: 
“Blessed is the man ...,” we chant the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” we chant 3 Stichera from the Pentecostarion. 
And 5 for the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII,  
Spec. Mel.: “Hastening to heaven ...”: 
Having attained unto the heaven of exalted virtues, thou wast revealed to be a 
wonder-worker in Myra, O glorious one. And though reposing bodily in Bari, thou 
dost visit the faithful everywhere in spirit, rescuing all from misfortunes, and receiving 
honor as is meet, thou art glorious among hierarchs, O blessed favorite of Christ. 
Wherefore crying out to thee now in supplication, we say: O holy hierarch Nicholas, 
entreat the Savior of all, to bring peace to the world and to save our souls! (Twice)  
Assembling, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, with hymns of supplication 
let us joyously praise the honored translation of our defender, who enlighteneth all 
the ends of the earth with miracles, divinely bringing comfort to the sorrowful, and 
delivering the oppressed; who borrowed by the mercy of God, and received 
recompense an hundredfold. To him let us all cry aloud: O holy hierarch Nicholas, 
entreat the Savior of all, to bring peace to the world and to save our souls! (Twice)  
By thy virtues thou hast reached the abode of the angels, and dost stand before 
Christ, thy Master, Whose obedient servant thou wast. And from thy shrine thou dost 
gush forth myrrh, helping the faithful with thy miracles, leading the pious to God. 
Not from Bari do we now invoke thee, but from the Jerusalem on high, where with 
the apostles, prophets and hierarchs thou dost rejoice in gladness. O divinely wise 
Nicholas, entreat the Savior of all, to bring peace to the world and to save our souls!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Assembling, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us hymn the adornment 
of hierarchs, the glory of the fathers, the wellspring of miracles and great defender of 
the faithful, saying: Rejoice, O protector of Myra, honored primate and steadfast pillar 
of its Church! Rejoice, O most radiant beacon, illumining the ends of the earth with 
wonders! Rejoice, divine joy of the sorrowful and fervent intercessor for the 
oppressed! And now, O blessed Nicholas, cease not to entreat Christ God on behalf 
of those who with faith and love honor thine ever-gladsome and most illustrious 
memory.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion. Entrance.  
Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom; but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord; but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace; but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret; but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths; but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them; but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish; but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 

--- PAGE 3 ---
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple 
mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul 
pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This 
the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His 
grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, then these Stichera:  
In Tone II: Though the land of Myra is silent, O father Nicholas, yet the whole 
world, enlightened by thee with the fragrance of myrrh and a multitude of wonders, 
doth cry aloud with hymns of praise; and the condemned who have been saved by 
thee, together with those in Myra and us here, all cry aloud, chanting: Pray thou that 
our souls be saved!  
In Tone IV: O father Nicholas, thou art a phial full of the myrrh of the Holy 
Spirit, for in Myra didst thou emit the fragrance of divine perfume. Yet as thou wast 
like unto the apostles of Christ, thou hast traversed the world in the words of thy 
miracles. Wherefore, though far away, thou dost still appear as close, manifesting 
thyself in dreams, and saving from death those condemned by an unjust verdict. And 
in a manner most glorious dost thou even now save those who cry aloud to thee amid 
their many tribulations. Wherefore, by thy prayers deliver also from grievous assaults 
us who ever praise thee.  
In Tone VIII: The fruit of thy valorous deeds, O venerable father, hath 
enlightened the hearts of the faithful. For who, having heard of thy boundless 
humility, patience, serenity, and consolation of the destitute and the sorrowful, hath 
not marveled? Thou didst instruct all in a godly manner, O hierarch Nicholas, and 
hast now been crowned with an unfading wreath. Intercede thou on behalf of our 
souls.  
O Nicholas, in this transitory life thou didst hasten to praise the Lord, and He hath 
glorified thee in the true and celestial life. Wherefore, in that thou hast boldness 
before Him, pray that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O good servant of the faithful, laborer in the vineyard of Christ; thou didst bear 
thy daily burden and increase the talent entrusted to thee; and thou didst not envy 
those who came after thee. Wherefore, as the portals of heaven are open to thee, 
enter thou into the joy of the Lord, and intercede for us, O holy Nicholas.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Let us bless Nicholas, * the most glorious hierarch, * the never-setting star of the 
most radiant Sun, * the noetic heaven * which testifieth of the saving glory of God, * 
the divine preacher, * the enlightener of the heathen, * the river flowing with the 
abundant waters of knowledge, ** watering the hearts of the faithful.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Thy passage was by sea * from Myra in Lycia * to the city of Bari, O hierarch; * 
for, with the permission of the Master of all, * thy coffin was taken from thy grave * 
by a monk who piously served at thy tomb * and rendered thee honor; * passing from 
the East to the West, ** O most glorious Nicholas.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Having sanctified * the waters of the sea * by thy voyage to the city of Bari, * thou 
didst pour forth myrrh, O glorious one, * healing incurable sufferings, * becoming its 
refuge, * defender and redeemer, * O hierarch Nicholas, ** pray thou to the Savior 
and King of all.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O man of God and faithful servant, minister of the Lord, man of divine desires, 
chosen vessel, pillar and foundation of the Church, heir of the Kingdom, cease not to 
cry unto the Lord on our behalf.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The day of splendid solemnity hath arrived; * and the city of Bari doth rejoice, * 
and with it the whole world exulteth * with hymns and spiritual odes. * For today we 
celebrate the sacred feast * of the translation of the precious and much-healing relics 
* of the hierarch Nicholas the wonder-worker. * For like the never-setting Sun, * he 
shineth with brilliant beams of light, * driving away the darkness of temptations and 
misfortunes * from those who with faith cry aloud: * Save us, O Nicholas, ** for thou 
art our intercessor!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS:  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion from the Pentecostarion, (Twice);  
Glory ..., that of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The day of splendid solemnity hath arrived; * and the city of Bari doth rejoice, * 
and with it the whole world exulteth * with hymns and spiritual odes. * For today we 
celebrate the sacred feast * of the translation of the precious and much-healing relics 
* of the hierarch Nicholas the wonder-worker. * For like the never-setting Sun, * he 
shineth with brilliant beams of light, * driving away the darkness of temptations and 
misfortunes * from those who with faith cry aloud: * Save us, O Nicholas, ** for thou 
art our intercessor!  
Both now ..., that from the Pentecostarion again.  
After the 1st Psalter chanting, the Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion, (Twice).  
After the 2nd Psalter chanting, the Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Thou didst make thy hierarch wondrous among the nations, O Master, having 
bestowed upon him the grace of miracles: dispelling divers ailments from all mankind, 
setting loose those in fetters, delivering the oppressed from grievous circumstances. 
To him do we cry out in supplication: O holy Nicholas, deliver us from our enemies. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion; or the following Theotokion:  
Theotokion: Who can describe the multitude of mine impure thoughts and the 
tempests of my wicked notions, O all-immaculate one? Who can recount the assaults 
of mine incorporeal foes and their malice? Yet by thine entreaties grant me 
deliverance from them all, O good one.  
After the Polyeleos, the Megalynarion: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch 
Nicholas, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ our God 
on our behalf.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the World. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee O God! (Thrice)  
Then, the Sessional Hymn of the Polyeleos, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Having sanctified thyself with, a perfect life, thou wast shown to be a hierarch of 
God Most High; and, strengthened by Him, thou didst stop the mouths of the 
heretics. Wherefore, magnifying Christ God, we joyously celebrate the translation of 
thy relics. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 6 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion; or this Theotokion: 
Theotokion: O pure Virgin Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, thou sole 
intercessor and protection of the faithful: from tribulations, sorrows and cruel 
circumstances deliver all who place their trust in thee, O Maiden, and save our souls 
by thy divine supplications.  
The first antiphon of the Hymn of Ascents, in Tone IV.  
The Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death 
of His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 35, (JN. 10: 1-9).  
The Lord spake unto His disciples saying: Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that 
entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, 
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of 
strangers. This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things 
they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves 
and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by me if any man enter 
in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
O heir of God, fellow communicant of Christ, minister of the Lord, holy Nicholas; 
as was thy name, so also was thy life. For the radiance of thy countenance bore 
witness to thine intellect, shining forth in the innocence of thy spirit; and thy serenity 
proclaimed thy meekness. Thy life was glorious, and thy repose is with the saints. Pray 
thou on behalf of our souls.  
ODE I  
The Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
Accept Thou the song of my lips, O Christ my Benefactor, and cleanse Thou my 
tongue, being not mindful of my manifold sins; that I may extol in song the 
honorable life of Thy hierarch, in the memorial of the translation of his relics.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Having received the gift of wonder-working, and crowns of patience, and being 
adorned with thy hierarchal office, do thou beseech God, O our Father, that He grant 
forgiveness of transgressions unto us who glorify the translation of thy relics.  
O Father, shepherd of the flock of Christ, thou hast been sent to other sheep, of 
the Latin tongue, that thou mayest astonish all with thy wonders and lead them to 
Christ. O blessed one, pray thou unceasingly on our behalf.  
Theotokion: The heathen nations formerly far removed have drawn nigh unto 
God through thy birthgiving, O Theotokos; and, deified and set free from the ancient 
curse by thy blood, I have been given rebirth by thee.  
Another Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
Illumine my soul and heart, I pray thee, O Bestower of light and Fashioner of 
creation. Grant unto me the gift of praising in song Thy most honored favorite, by 
whom do Thou deliver the world from misfortune.  
Having acquired heavenly wisdom, thou didst invest it as a talent entrusted to thee; 
for, having set at naught the guile of those opposed to God, thou didst enlighten the 
people with divine instruction.  
Theotokion: From a Maiden hath the Infant been born, pre-eternal and preserved 
in perfection, Whom thou didst preach in two Natures and one Hypostasis, O 
divinely blessed one.  
Katavasia from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE III 
Canon I  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Guileless in a manner and meek in demeanor, possessed of an angelic life, O 
divinely blessed Nicholas: cease not to pray to Him Who is the Lover of mankind, on 
behalf of us all.  
What city doth not have thee as a helper, O blessed one? What soul uttereth not 
thy name? And what place dost thou not visit in spirit, astounding all with thy 
wonders, O Nicholas?  
Though the city of Bari hath received thy body, yet thy spirit dwelleth in the 
heavenly Jerusalem, where exalting with the prophets, apostles and holy hierarchs, 
thou dost pray on our behalf to Him Who alone is the Lover of mankind.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: Beg thou enlightenment for me who am engulfed in darkness because 
of my many sins, O most pure Lady, for thou hast given birth to the Light of the 
whole world; and drive far from me the gloom of the passions, O divinely blessed 
one.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
The grieving have found great consolation; they that are in darkness have acquired 
the light; and those assailed by sorrows have in thee received deliverance from evils, 
O most sacred father.  
O holy hierarch Nicholas, thou wast the mouth of God: having delivered all from 
the maw of the diabolic wolf, O glorious one, thou hast borne them unto the Creator 
as a gift, granting healing unto all.  
Theotokion: O most pure Mother of God; the Word Who chose for Himself a 
servant, the hierarch Nicholas, as a teacher of His people, did will to be borne of thee 
alone in the flesh, in a manner beyond all telling.  
Kontakion from the Pentecostarion, with its Ikos; and the Sessional Hymn of the 
holy hierarch, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
The translation of thy precious relics is for us an occasion of splendid celebration, 
O Nicholas, holy hierarch of the Lord whom we piously praise, joyously honoring 
thee, the light of the never-setting Sun, thou adornment of the faithful. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn, or Hypacoi, from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE IV  
Canon I  
Irmos: Thou didst mount Thy steeds O Lord, * Thine apostles, * and taking 
their bridles in Thy hands, * Thy chariot became salvation unto those who 
sing with faith: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Enlighten my heart and dispel from it the gloom of sin, O holy hierarch who art 
illumined by the light of the Most High, that I may joyously hymn the holy translation 
of thy relics.  
Having ascended the ladder of the virtues, O blessed one, thou wast revealed to all 
the world as a wonder-worker, O Nicholas; for which sake the people of Bari 
removed thy holy relics from Myra.  
Faithful priests rejoice in thee, and Christ-loving princes call upon thee as an aide 
in battle; and we, unworthy though we are, exhort thee to pray to God on our behalf, 
O Nicholas.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 
Theotokion: The depth of thy mystery doth astound the ranks of the angels, O 
Theotokos, and thine icon doth cast the demons into confusion; and honoring thee as 
the Mother of God, we bow down before it.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
O herald of God, through partaking of the primal light of God, thou wast shown 
to be a secondary luminary, enlightening with thy splendor those who are in darkness, 
in that thou art a lover of virtue, soaring aloft in glory.  
Deliver thy flock from the tempests of sins, from waves of tribulation and 
hostility, guiding us ever to the calm haven by thy saving prayers.  
Theotokion: He to Whom thou hast given birth in an ineffable manner is by 
nature the unutterable Light of the Most High, Who is abundantly rich in mercy, and 
hath enriched us, impoverished though we be, with the gifts of God. 
ODE V 
 Canon I  
Irmos: Disperse, O Word, the darkness from my soul, * O Christ God, the 
Light-Giver, * Having driven out the primordial darkness of the abyss, * grant 
unto me the light of Thy commandments, * that early in the morning I may 
glorify Thee. 
Thy cathedra was in Myra, but thy body was transported to Bari; yet in spirit thou 
dost dwell with the apostles in heaven, in that thou art their successor. With them 
pray for us who hymn the translation of thy relics.  
O hope of all Christians and great defender of the oppressed, healer of the 
afflicted, consolation of the grieving and intercessor before the Lord for the human 
race: beg thou peace for our land, and save us from the incursions of the aliens.  
Through thine intercessions, O Nicholas, do thou enliven my soul which hath 
drowned because of its many passions and hath been slain by the fall; and guide it to 
repentance, that with all the faithful I may glorify the translation of thy relics.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou hast nourished as a babe Him Whom the myriads of 
angels and multitudes of the seraphim fear, and before Whom all reason-endowed 
creatures tremble; and, beholding Him in thine arms, we ever worship Him, as is 
meet.  
Canon II  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Having acquired beautiful feet through the working of many wonders, thou didst 
bring glad tidings of good things to all, freeing all from the ancient enmity by thy 
divine teaching, do thou save us, O sacred hierarch.  
By the will of God, thou didst embark upon the crest of the sea, arriving at the city 
of Bari, having traversed the deep in the company of many pious men, O blessed 
Nicholas.  
Theotokion: We shall truly glorify thee, O Virgin Mother of God, as the shield of 
the faithful, crying out to thee as did the angel: Rejoice, thou who art blessed and full 
of grace, awesome rumor and report, wondrous place of rest for the Master of all 
creation!  
ODE VI 
 Canon I  
Irmos: As Thou didst deliver the prophet from the depths * of the abyss, O 
Christ God, * so deliver me also from my sins, * O Lover of mankind, * and 
guide my life, I pray Thee.  
We have abundantly received health of body and cleansing of soul from thy divine 
church as from a pool, O holy hierarch Nicholas; for through grace wonders pour 
forth upon those who with unfeigned faith trust in thee.  
As thou art the most glorious favorite of Christ, O father, deliver thy servants, who 
honor the translation of thy holy relics, from all manner of danger, from grievous 
misfortunes and the sorrows that beset us.  
Blighted by the frost of sin and driven by the wind of life, let me be warmed by thy 
prayers, gazing upon the likeness of thy divine image; for thou art a second sun, O 
father Nicholas, thou servant of Christ.  
Theotokion: The earthly mind cannot comprehend heavenly mysteries; neither can 
a created being attain to knowledge of the Creator: for the birth of the Lord from the 
Virgin surpasseth man’s understanding, but entreating her with faith, we shall receive 
forgiveness of sins.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Save us by thy guidance, O Nicholas, preacher and teacher of the nations, as one 
who hast led to salvation the people of God, and Who appeared in the flesh for the 
benefit of many.  
O thou who didst have the sea as thy way and the waters as thy paths: beseech the 
Lord, that we may navigate the sea of life unharmed, and may reach the heavenly 
kingdom by the waters of our tears.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Thou art the portal of the King of the heavens and the temple of His 
glory, O all-hymned Virgin. Open thou the gates of mercy, and lead us into the abode 
of heavenly glory by thy supplications.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Thy relics have moved like a star, from the East unto the West, * O holy hierarch 
Nicholas; * and the sea hath been sanctified by thy passage. * The city of Bari 
receiveth grace through thee, * for thou hast been shown forth for us * as a wonder-
worker: ** illustrious, most wondrous and merciful.  
Ikos: Let us now praise with hymns the holy hierarch, pastor and teacher of the 
people of Myra, that by his supplications we may be enlightened. For he hath been 
revealed to be wholly pure, incorrupt of spirit, bringing unto Christ an unblemished 
sacrifice, pure and well-pleasing unto God, in that he is a hierarch pure of both body 
and soul. Wherefore, he hath been manifest as a true intercessor and champion of the 
Church, a wonderworker, illustrious, most wondrous, and merciful.  
ODE VII  
Canon I  
Irmos: On the plain of Dura the tyrant once placed a furnace * to torment the 
God-bearers; * and therein the three youths chanted hymns unto the one God, 
* and the three together, chanted saying: * O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
Today the angels of God rejoice and a multitude of demons lament; for He hath 
delivered the people from temptation and driven away the spirits of darkness. 
Wherefore, thou, O Nicholas, art worthily called a victor; for which cause we chant 
unto the Lord: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
They that are held in the grief of sickness, who are heavy laden with divers 
afflictions, hastening to thy shrine with faith, have received thy mercy, and departing 
in haste, joyfully chant unto the Lord: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The assemblies of the people stand before thee, O blessed one, and the teachers 
Of the Church rejoice in thee. Kings glorify thee as their defender; and we entreat 
thee, O Nicholas: Save us who chant unto the Lord: O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Theotokion: O how can I chant unto my Savior, Whom even the angels praise 
with trembling? But do thou, O Mother, direct me, and by thy compassion move the 
mercy of thy Son to have pity on us who set our hope on thee. As thou dost beseech 
Him on our behalf, deliver us from torment.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
By thy word grant healing to the whole human soul which, like salt, hath lost its 
savor through the vanity of temporal things; and teach us to chant unto the Lord: O 
supremely hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
O most glorious are the wonders which thou hast wrought! For healing infirmities 
and delivering from misfortunes, thou dost command all to chant unto the Lord: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O pure Birthgiver of God, thou art the defender and rampart of our 
lowliness, and we, thy servants, ever cry unto the Lord: O supremely hymned God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII 
 Canon I  
Irmos: Seated upon the throne of glory, * and unceasingly glorified as God, * 
O ye angels and heavens bless, ** hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!. 
The angels of the heavens accept thee as a minister, and the prophets greet thee as 
a fellow servant. The Lord Himself receiveth thee. And we sinners ask of thee mercy.  
Great is the authority given thee by God, O Nicholas: the sea is subject to thee; the 
winds obey thee; and the nations, beholding thy most glorious wonders, submit 
themselves to thee.  
O Savior, Thou hast shown Thy holy hierarch Nicholas to be more glorious than 
Moses, delivering from all tribulation the New Israel, the Christian peoples.  
Theotokion: In that thou art the Mother of God, ask for us forgiveness of sins, O 
Sovereign Lady, and stretch forth thy hand unto me, who am sunk in the abyss of 
despair, that raised up by hope, I may exalt thee supremely throughout all ages.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Thou didst grow as a sweet-smelling flower in the land of Myra, O glorious one, 
wafting gifts of healing like fragrant perfume upon all who praise thee chanting: O all 
ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  
Having poured out the sweetness of God’s grace like oil from the Mount of 
Olives, thou didst traverse the sea on a path made safe by the grace of the Lord, to 
Whom we sweetly cry: O all ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: Having given birth, yet remaining ever Virgin, the choirs above were 
astonished; for thou didst bear the Word, Who, though a man, remained unaltered by 
His divinity, and to Whom we sing: O all ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX 
Canon I  
Irmos: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, * Who hath exalted the horn of 
salvation on our behalf * in the house of His child David, * wherein the 
Dayspring from on high hath visited us, * and guided us on the path of peace.  
Blessed be the Lord our God, for He hath glorified His holy hierarch, who 
gusheth forth streams of wonders, and who worketh healing throughout all lands, and 
those of Myra and of the Latins, visiting us with mercy.  
Thou didst fall into an honorable sleep and permit thy body to go to Bari for the 
good of all; for by thy supplications thou art an ever-vigilant defender on behalf of all 
who call upon thee with faith, O Nicholas.  
Theotokion: At a loss for words, I am unable to fittingly praise thee, who art 
higher than the heavenly hosts and more honorable than all creation, who hast given 
birth to God the Creator in the flesh. Entreat Him, O Theotokos, to have mercy 
upon us on the day of judgment.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Thy memorial is an occasion of festivity for us this day. The choir of the apostles, 
the assembly of martyrs and the spirits of the righteous rejoice; and we, the faithful, 
glorify thee with hymns, crying aloud: O holy hierarch of Christ, deliver us from all 
sorrows!  
Thy most glorious memory hath shown forth upon us, illumining the faithful with 
splendor, O wise Nicholas, holy hierarch of Christ. Wherefore, we beseech thee: be 
thou mindful of us all, and by thine intercessions deliver us from all the temptations 
of the adversary.  
Theotokion: Mortify our carnal passions and lusts, O pure Birthgiver of God; still 
thou the tempest of our passions; calm the tumult of our thoughts; and strengthen 
the hearts of those who honor thee as their defender, O most pure and blessed one.  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Great are thy wonders, O most holy Nicholas, for thou didst appear in a dream to 
the divinely wise Constantine, and thereby save the three generals condemned to 
death though innocent. Thus do thou save us also from sudden and everlasting death, 
O most holy Nicholas, hierarch of the Lord.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch:  
In Tone I: Having gazed steadfastly upon the heights of the intellect, and beheld 
the abyss of hidden wisdom, thou didst enrich the world with thy teachings, O father. 
Ever pray to Christ on our behalf, O holy hierarch Nicholas.  
O man of God, faithful favorite and steward of His mysteries, man of spiritual 
desires, living pillar and animate image: the Church of Myra received thee with delight 
as a divine treasure and intercessor for our souls.  
In Tone II: O holy hierarch Nicholas, Christ God revealed thee to thy flock as a 
rule of faith and a model of meekness, for thy divine and worthy deeds resplendently 
shine forth everywhere, emitting the fragrance of thy myrrh, O intercessor for 
orphans and widows. Wherefore, pray thou unceasingly, that our souls be saved.  
O father Nicholas, the shrine of thy relics over-floweth with myrrh, and thou didst 
appear to the Emperor in a dream, and by thine apparition didst save from death, 
bonds and imprisonment the condemned men unjustly sentenced. Now, as then, 
revealing thyself by thy presence, pray thou for our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
Let us sound the trumpet with the clarion-call of hymns. Let us who keep festival 
make haste and exult, rejoicing. Let kings and princes hasten to the solemn 
supplication of our God-bearing father, who appeared to the Emperor in a dreadful 
dream, urging him to release the three warriors who were imprisoned without cause. 
Let the pastors and teachers laud the shepherd who emulated the Good Shepherd. 
And, assembling, let us praise the physician of the afflicted, the redeemer of those 
amid misfortunes, the helper of the sinful, the treasure of the poor, the consoler of 
the sorrowful, the companion of travelers, the pilot of those who sail the seas, who 
hasteneth everywhere and to everyone most earnestly. And praising the great 
hierarch, let us say: O most holy Nicholas, go thou before us and deliver us from our 
present tribulations, and by thy supplications save thou thy flock.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion. Great Doxology;  
After the Trisagion, the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The day of splendid solemnity hath arrived; * and the city of Bari doth rejoice, * 
and with it the whole world exulteth * with hymns and spiritual odes. * For today we 
celebrate the sacred feast * of the translation of the precious and much-healing relics 
* of the hierarch Nicholas the wonder-worker. * For like the never-setting Sun, * he 
shineth with brilliant beams of light, * driving away the darkness of temptations and 
misfortunes * from those who with faith cry aloud: * Save us, O Nicholas, ** for thou 
art our intercessor!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion from the Pentecostarion.  
Litanies, and the dismissal. The faithful are anointed with holy oil from the saint’s 
lamp. First Hour, and final dismissal.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY  
At the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the appointed ODE of the canon from 
the Pentecostarion, and 4 from ODE III of the first canon of the holy hierarch.  
Guileless in a manner and meek in demeanor, possessed of an angelic life, O 
divinely blessed Nicholas: cease not to pray to Him Who is the Lover of mankind, on 
behalf of us all.  
What city doth not have thee as a helper, O blessed one? What soul uttereth not 
thy name? And what place dost thou not visit in spirit, astounding all with thy 
wonders, O Nicholas?  
Though the city of Bari hath received thy body, yet thy spirit dwelleth in the 
heavenly Jerusalem, where exalting with the prophets, apostles and holy hierarchs, 
thou dost pray on our behalf to Him Who alone is the Lover of mankind.  
Theotokion: Beg thou enlightenment for me who am engulfed in darkness because 
of my many sins, O most pure Lady, for thou hast given birth to the Light of the 
whole world; and drive far from me the gloom of the passions, O divinely blessed 
one.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The day of splendid solemnity hath arrived; * and the city of Bari doth rejoice, * 
and with it the whole world exulteth * with hymns and spiritual odes. * For today we 
celebrate the sacred feast * of the translation of the precious and much-healing relics 
* of the hierarch Nicholas the wonder-worker. * For like the never-setting Sun, * he 
shineth with brilliant beams of light, * driving away the darkness of temptations and 
misfortunes * from those who with faith cry aloud: * Save us, O Nicholas, ** for thou 
art our intercessor!  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: 
Thy relics have moved like a star, from the East unto the West, * O holy hierarch 
Nicholas; * and the sea hath been sanctified by thy passage. * The city of Bari 
receiveth grace through thee, * for thou hast been shown forth for us * as a wonder-
worker: ** illustrious, most wondrous and merciful.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The saints shall boast in glory * and they shall 
rejoice upon their beds.  
Verse: Sing unto the Lord a new song; His praise is in the Church of the saints.  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 335 (13: 17-21)  
Brethren: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they 
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and 
not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 

--- PAGE 16 ---
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, that 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work 
to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation 
for Himself.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, § 24 (6: 17-23).  
At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and 
Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that were 
vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to 
touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his 
eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. 
Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: 
for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall 
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as 
evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, 
your reward is great in heaven.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
