--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY PROPHET ISAIAH  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR CHRISTOPHER 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy prophet, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Purified by the burning ember of the Godhead * of the Incarnate One, * the great 
and glorious Isaiah * confirmed his prophecy, * and having been deemed worthy to 
behold divine glory * by the great richness of his virtue and purity, * he standeth forth 
as a herald * proclaiming the coming salvation to the nations ** and the appearance 
of God.  
Having cleansed mind and thought, * O right wondrous Isaiah, * as a rightly 
pleasing harp of the Spirit, * ever plucked * by His action and inspiration, * thou wast 
tuned with divine wisdom, O most glorious one, * beholding Him Who sitteth * 
upon an exalted throne, ** and learning things divine.  
Having seen and been taught * of the divine seraphim who unceasingly glorify * 
the single dominion * of the Godhead in three Hypostases, * thou wast assured of the 
grace of prophecy, * O wondrous one; * wherefore, celebrating thy most sacred 
memory, * we bring thee before Christ ** as a most powerful advocate.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
O most glorious Christopher, * thou pillar named after Christ, * precious 
adornment of grace: * having cast down the dominion of the mighty, * thou didst put 
the tyrants to shame * and proclaim Christ, thy Creator, to be thy true King; * and by 
His divine power * thou hast received from heaven a divine crown ** and abiding 
glory.  
Illumined with unapproachable divinity, * ineffable grace * and constant 
effulgence, * destroying the gloom of idolatry, * thou didst resplendently cast down 
the arrogance of the iniquitous; * and, assailed by fire and wounds, * thou didst cast 
down at the tribunal * the archer who was thy foe, ** and wast revealed to be 
victorious.  
The hosts of the armies on high * marveled at thee, * the ranks of the martyrs 
rejoiced with thee, * the assemblies of the righteous cried out together, * and from on 
high God crowned thee with His divine hand. * Wherefore, we cry aloud: * Through 
the supplications of Christopher * save all who celebrate his divine festival, ** in that 
Thou art compassionate.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the holy prophet, in Tone II:  
Celebrating the memory * of Thy Prophet Isaiah, O Lord, * through him we 
entreat Thee: ** Save Thou our souls!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Arrayed in vesture dyed with thine own blood, * thou standest before the King of 
hosts, O ever-memorable Christopher; * therefore, with the incorporeal ones and the 
martyrs * thou dost sing thrice-holy and awesome melodies. ** Wherefore, by thy 
supplications save thou thy flock.  
Both now ..., Troparion from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canons of the holy prophet and martyr, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: I will sing unto Thee, O Lord my God, * for Thou hast led Thy people 
out of the bondage of Egypt, * and hast drowned in the waters * the chariots 
and the might of Pharaoh. 
Troparia of the holy prophet  
Enlighten me, O word my God, and guide me, that I may radiantly praise the 
glorious and honored festival of Thy divine prophet.  
The divinely sounded trumpet of Isaiah, sounding forth unto the earth, hath 
summoned the children of the Church to celebrate his memory.  
Having steadfastly made the passions of thy body subject to the thoughts of thy 
soul, O God-bearer, thou hast been deemed worthy to behold the glory of the 
Almighty.  
Troparia of the holy martyr  
Come, all ye Christ-bearers, and let us piously hymn today the memory of 
Christopher, the divinely wise witness to the Truth.  
Having manfully struggled against falsehood, O passion-bearer, strengthened by 
the might of Christ thou didst trample underfoot the threats of the tyrants.  
Theotokion: O most pure Theotokos, the glorious Isaiah, foreseeing thee as a 
staff, proclaimed the incarnate Word Who would come forth from thee like a flower.  
ODE III  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
Troparia of the holy prophet  
Receiving the full radiance of the Spirit, O glorious one, thou didst proclaim the 
ineffable mystery of the dispensation of the Word.  
Thou wast caught up to the heights of heaven, and didst show forth the radiance 
of piety, denouncing the impotence of the vanity of idolatry.  
Isaiah prophesied Christ the Master, Who sustaineth the universe, as the all-
precious Cornerstone set in Sion.  
Troparia of the holy martyr  
Protected by the armor of the Cross, O martyr Christopher, thou didst endure 
wounds, delighting now, and rejoicing, in that which thou didst ever desire.  
Thy flesh was cut away by wounds, O Christopher, but thy God-loving soul was 
nourished with love, meditating on the delight of the kingdom.  
Theotokion: Truly the saying of Isaiah hath been fulfilled: for the Virgin hath 
given birth to the incarnate Bestower of life, the Savior of our souls.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy prophet, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Having cleansed thy soul of carnal passions, thou didst behold Him Who is God 
over all, O most noetically rich prophet, shining forth with the radiant beams of 
prophecy, and saying: “The Creator shall be born as a little Babe, Who will save us 
from corruption through the supplications of her who gave Him birth!”  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
Finishing the struggle of martyrdom, O glorious and blessed Christopher, thou 
didst receive a crown of victory from God, Whom do thou beseech that He deliver us 
from misfortunes.  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Proclaiming the advent of Thine appearance on earth, O Christ God, * 
the prophet cried aloud with gladness: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Troparia of the holy prophet  
Ascending to the summit of the virtues, and conversing in purity with Him Whom 
thou didst desire, thou dost sing with joy: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Isaiah was entrusted with the grace of prophecy, showing himself to be a dwelling-
place of God; wherefore he hath been counted worthy of the incorrupt glory of the 
heavenly hosts.  
As an initiate of ineffable mysteries, O glorious one, full of the divine Spirit thou 
didst say in a proverb that the children, the Churches of the nations, would be 
renewed.  
Troparia of the holy martyr  
Thou hast received a heavenly inheritance, O martyr, having struggled for Christ 
on earth, manfully extinguishing the idolatrous delusion of the cruel demon.  
As he had tempted our forefather Adam of old, the serpent exposed thee to a 
woman’s temptation, O martyr, but though he sought to choke thee, he was 
vanquished and put to shame.  
Theotokion: The Babe born from the Mother of God painlessly, hath been given 
to us by the prophetess; Whose governance the godly Isaiah proclaimed would be 
upon His shoulders.  
ODE V 
Irmos: Do Thou O Lord send down upon us * Thine enlightenment, and free 
us * from the gloom of transgression, O Good One, * granting us Thy peace. 
Troparia of the holy prophet  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Beholding the lofty hidden mystery, and the ancient counsel of the Most High, 
thou didst announce God’s dispensation concerning us, O divinely eloquent one.  
The ever-flowing well-spring of Thy sufferings, O Lord, washeth away our 
passions; for Thou hast come, O Savior, as the Prophet Isaiah hath taught.  
The pious Isaiah hath proclaimed to the ignorant the one Trinity in a single 
Essence: the Word and the Holy Spirit, Who came forth from God the Father.  
Troparia of the holy martyr  
With the enlightenment of grace thou didst fish for men, manifestly annulling the 
savagery of the ungodly tyrants, O wise one, who wast invested on earth with power 
from on high.  
Manifestly desiring the enjoyment of heaven more than anything earthly, O wise 
Christopher, thou didst mightily endure the pangs of martyrdom, strengthened by the 
Cross.  
Theotokion: Isaiah clearly foresaw Thee sitting upon the cloud of Thy most 
hymned Mother, O Lord, casting down the idols of Egypt.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
Troparia of the holy prophet  
Transported by the Spirit, Isaiah beheld on the throne of dominion the threefold 
shining glory, hymned with the thrice-holy hymn.  
To thy fearful lips, O Isaiah, the seraph bore the burning ember, carrying it with 
tongs; making thee a mystically consecrated prophet of God.  
Perceiving from afar the fulfillment of his prophecies, Isaiah rejoiced spiritually 
with the angels and, leaping up, glorified Him Who hath fulfilled his prophecies.  
Troparia of the holy martyr  
Waging war not against flesh or blood, the valiant one vanquished principalities 
and demons, strengthened by the invisible power of the Son of God.  
Piously loving the uttermost Desire, O spiritual athlete, thou didst not feel pain 
when lacerated, ever elevating thy mind to thy Master.  
Theotokion: Having beheld the Virgin who hath conceived in her womb and given 
birth to the Word, the Son of God incarnate, the glorious Prophet Isaiah doth now 
rejoice.  
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “The tomb and mortality ...”:  
Receiving the gift of prophecy, * O martyred Prophet Isaiah, thou herald of God, 
* thou didst explain to all the incarnation of the Lord, * exclaiming aloud to the ends 
of the earth: ** “Behold, a Virgin shall conceive in her womb!”  
Ikos: Let all of us faithful from all lands, come together to hymn as is meet, Isaiah 
wondrous among the prophets; for, receiving the gift of prophecy, he illumine the 
whole world, proclaiming unto all the mystery of the divine union, and crying out 
with them: “The invisible God is with us! Behold, a Virgin shall conceive in her 
womb!”  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Troparia of the holy prophet  
Beholding the deliverance of salvation which will come upon us, Isaiah cried 
aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
With the grace of prophecy and the crown of martyrdom hath Isaiah been 
crowned, who is my strength and my song. O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
With thy God-bearing tongue thou didst lay down the bounds of piety and the 
laws of life, O divinely inspired prophet. O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Troparia of the holy martyr  
Having run the path of martyrdom with endurance, Christopher dwelleth in the 
mansions of heaven, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
With the dew of piety Christopher caused the flame of ungodliness to die out, 
crying out in hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Beholding the supra-natural birthgiving and the splendor of purity of 
the Virgin, Isaiah cried out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In Babylon the godly Children, * burning with a fiery zeal for God * 
bravely trampled upon the threat of the tyrant and the fire; * and thrown into 
the midst of the flames * they were refreshed with dew and sang: * Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Troparia of the holy prophet  
Arrayed as with a bridegroom’s robe of gladness, the glorious Isaiah doth now 
rejoice in gladness, delighting in divine food, and exclaiming with the angels: O all ye 
works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
The accursed ones who were deceived by demonic words, of old cut themselves 
off from God, have fallen away from the pure earth, wherefore, in accordance with 
the prophet’s words, they are rightly unable to chant: O all ye works of the Lord, 
bless ye the Lord!  
Forsaking falsehood, multitudes of the gentiles have hastened to the divine 
radiance and betrothed themselves to the Church of Christ, as Isaiah foresaid of old; 
and with hymns they now chant: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
Troparia of the holy martyr  
The wave of the madness of idolatry, boldly issuing forth, hath been broken upon 
the steadfast and adverse opposition of the martyrs, who having accepted tribulations 
for Christ cry aloud: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
Beautifully arrayed now in a royal robe empurpled in thy blood, O invincible 
martyr Christopher, thou hast joined chorus with the angelic choirs, chanting to thy 
Creator: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
Theotokion: The Virgin Maiden, the Mother of God, holding as an infant the 
Word Who giveth life unto all and hath created all things, as Isaiah said of old, 
joyfully cried aloud: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Troparia of the holy prophet  
Thou dost stand in splendor before the throne of the Master of hosts, O all-
blessed and glorious God-pleaser, delighting in His glory and gathering together the 
fruits of thy piety; wherefore we all magnify thee.  
Come now, O ye who desire the gifts of the prophet’s light, earnestly receive ye 
the Book of Isaiah, which is full of divine knowledge. Let us attend unto it with 
steadfast desire, that we may be filled with divine radiance.  
Manifestly illumined by the Spirit of radiance, O God-bearing Isaiah, pray thou 
that those who with faith celebrate thine honored and radiant memorial may receive 
salvation, that we all may magnify thee.  
Troparia of the holy martyr  
Receiving a radiant crown as a victor, O all-glorious Christopher, thou reignest 
with the Master, Who strengthened thee amid thy tortures and gave Thee His life-
bearing hand, that thou mightest prevail over the author of evil.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Radiantly washed in the blood of martyrdom, thou wast illumined, O all-wondrous 
one; and, rejoicing now, thou hast entered with the Bridegroom into the virginal 
wedding-chamber. O glorious martyr, cease not to ask peace for the world.  
Theotokion: O pure divine Bride and Mother of God, in thine arms thou dost bear 
the noetic Ember, which Isaiah beheld, united to our form, and splendidly bestowing 
salvation upon the world. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy prophet, in Tone II:  
Celebrating the memory * of Thy Prophet Isaiah, O Lord, * through him we 
entreat Thee: ** Save Thou our souls!  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Arrayed in vesture dyed with thine own blood, * thou standest before the King of 
hosts, O ever-memorable Christopher; * therefore, with the incorporeal ones and the 
martyrs * thou dost sing thrice-holy and awesome melodies. ** Wherefore, by thy 
supplications save thou thy flock.  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone II: 
Receiving the gift of prophecy, * O martyred Prophet Isaiah, thou herald of God, 
* thou didst explain to all the incarnation of the Lord, * exclaiming aloud to the ends 
of the earth: ** “Behold, a Virgin shall conceive in her womb!”  
 
