--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 1st DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY PROPHET JEREMIAH 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy prophet, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O Lord, even though at the tribunal ...”: 
O Lord, * Thou didst know the glorious Jeremiah * even before he was created, * 
and didst sanctify the prophet * before his birth, and from infancy, * as one who 
beforehand knew the freedom of understanding: * By his supplications save our 
souls, ** in that Thou art merciful.  
O Lord, * even though the holy Jeremiah * was cast into a cesspool, * he noetically 
acquired a beautiful sweet fragrance, * for he dwelleth in the habitations of paradise. * 
By his supplications * preserve us all, ** in that Thou art our Benefactor.  
O Lord, * the prophet, shining with Thy most radiant beams, * was seen even by 
his opponents * to be blessed and honorable; * for the adversary was put to shame * 
by his virtues; * by which he foresaw the things of the future ** as though they were 
in the present.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion; 
 Or this Theotokion, in the same melody: 
Behold * the groaning of my contrite heart, * O Bride of God, * and accept, and 
reject not, * the lifting up of my hands, * O pure and all-immaculate Virgin Mary, * as 
thou art full of love for mankind; ** that I may hymn and magnify thee who hast 
exalted our race.  
Stavrotheotokion: Standing * at the foot of Thy Cross, the most immaculate one 
cried aloud: * “O my Son, beginningless Word of the Father, * Who art co-enthroned 
with the Spirit, * how is it that Thou hast stretched out * Thy most pure hands upon 
the Tree? * How hast Thou impoverished Thyself so greatly, ** O Supremely good 
One?”  
Troparion of the holy prophet, in Tone II: 
Celebrating the memory * of Thy Prophet Jeremiah, O Lord, * through him we 
entreat Thee: ** Save Thou our souls!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS 
Canon of the holy prophet, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Known before thou was created, thou wast sanctified from thy mother’s womb, 
and anointed a prophet to the nations, crying aloud: Let us chant to our Redeemer 
and God!  
He Who had understanding before all, foreseeing the movements of thy mind, O 
divinely manifest Jeremiah, ordained thee an instructor for the people,  
Having cleansed the sight of thy thought from carnal defilements, O wise one, 
thou didst show thyself to be a witness to the Truth beloved of thy Creator.  
Theotokion: Having, in a manner transcending nature, given birth to the Word of 
the Father, Who made His abode in thee on earth, O Virgin Theotokos, thou hast 
been shown to be the Sovereign Lady of all creation.  
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Having sanctified Thy prophet before his birth, O Master, Thou didst send him as 
a guide for those who are lost.  
The grace of the Spirit, which abode in thy lips, shone forth upon those in 
darkness like a most radiant beacon.  
Unable to bear the sweet fragrance of thy myrrh, the vile assembly of Israel 
imprisoned thee in a pit.  
Theotokion: Through thee, O most pure one, the beginningless Son of God was 
well pleased to dwell among mankind.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou didst rise from the tomb ...”: 
Thou didst incline thine ear unto God, to hear His words, O divinely eloquent 
prophet. Wherefore, in the present thou hast revealed to all, things which have not 
yet come to be; and with lamentations for thy people, who had withdrawn far away 
from the Lord, thou didst weep, and now in the heavens, dost pray that we be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion: 
Theotokion: I have fallen into the abyss of wicked despondency, and vexation on 
account of the multitude of my wicked and impure deeds, and am now stuck fast in 
despair. O Lady Theotokos, by thy compassion save me, in that thou art the help and 
salvific cleansing of sinners.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb and Shepherd suspended upon the 
Cross, the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud: “O my Child, what is this strange and 
unexpected sight? How can the Life of all be condemned to death like mortals? But 
rise Thou from the dead on the third day, O Word, as Thou didst say, that, rejoicing, 
I may glorify Thee!”  
ODE IV 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
The most radiant effulgence of the most holy and divine Spirit, which illumined 
thy heart, hath made thee the enlightenment of those in darkness.  
As thou of all the prophets art most sympathetic to us, O all-blessed God-pleaser, 
grant mercy unto me who am in despair of my manifold transgressions.  
As a mediator of manifest and divine splendor, by thy mediations still thou the 
tempest of my greatly tumultuous life.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, entreat the God to Whom thou hast given birth, 
that, by thy supplications, He may grant us the forgiveness of our sins.  
ODE V 
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
Thou didst send Thy prophet, the sanctified Jeremiah, like lightning, proclaiming 
Thee, the Light, to those in darkness, O Christ.  
In His foreknowledge, O Jeremiah, thy Master hath revealed thee to be a choice 
arrow stored in his quiver awaiting a fitting occasion.  
Thy spiritual ears purified, O glorious prophet, thou wast deemed worthy to hear 
the Spirit conversing with thee.  
Theotokion: Great and awesome is the mystery of the Virgin! For as a mother she 
hath nourished God who, in His tender compassion, hath appeared on earth to 
mankind.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: The abyss of my sins and the storm of my transgressions * disquieten 
me and thrust me down * into the depths of despondency; * but do Thou 
stretch forth Thy mighty arm, * unto me as Thou didst to Peter, * and save 
me, O my Guide.  
Thou didst draw down enlightenment and grace in abundance, O God-bearer, 
spiritually broadening the mouth of thy soul; and filled therewith, O prophet, thou 
hast bestowed them freely upon all who desire the radiance.  
Gazing upon the sea of this world raging with the threefold billows of temptations, 
thou didst seek out the outermost courts and a wellspring pouring forth a river of 
tears in lamentation for the apostasy of thy people.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
As a mystery thou didst recount beforehand the death of the Redeemer, O divinely 
eloquent one, for the iniquitous assembly of the Jews lifted Christ the Author of life, 
and the Benefactor of all creation, up upon the Tree like a lamb.  
Theotokion: The Word Who was begotten incorporeally of the Father before time 
began, O pure one, was born from thee in the flesh, within time; and we all live in His 
shadow, as Jeremiah prophesied of old.  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Having cleansed thy radiant heart with the Spirit, * O glorious Jeremiah, great 
prophet and martyr, * thou didst receive from on high the gift of prophecy * and 
didst cry aloud among the lands: * “Behold our God! * There is none other to 
compare with Him, ** Who hath appeared, incarnate, on the earth!”  
ODE VII 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Beholding the things foretold by thee no longer in expectation, but fulfilled in 
deed, O prophet, thou dost cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the 
ages!  
Thou wast shown to be a divine harp struck by the hand of the Comforter, 
producing heavenly sounds and chanting: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout 
the ages!  
Writing down the lamentations, O prophet, thy divine gladness, in which thou 
didst delight from infancy, was not darkened, wherefore thou didst cry aloud: Blessed 
art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: It was Thy good pleasure to enter the womb of the Virgin, desiring to 
save mankind, O Thou Who didst manifestly teach the prophets to perform miracles. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
In gladness thou hast ascended to the heavens, O divinely inspired Jeremiah, and 
with the incorporeal ones standing before the throne of the King of all, thou dost 
chant: Bless the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
As a sacred preacher of piety, O most praised Jeremiah, thou didst denounce the 
weakness of impiety, chanting: Bless the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Shining with the light of divine splendor, which thou hast received like a most 
lustrous mirror, emitting radiance upon those who love such things, crying: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: The Bestower of life received my nature from thee and having 
cleansed it of its former defilement, O Mother of God, we sing unto Him: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Having united thyself to the most pure light of the splendor of the Godhead, O 
blessed and glorious one, thou didst manifestly acquire the manifestations thereof on 
earth.  
Having attained unto the well-spring of incorruption and the effulgence thereof, O 
divinely inspired one, thou didst manifestly receive the end thou didst desire.  
Delighting now in radiant splendor, O blessed Jeremiah, grant that it may illumine 
all who hymn thy memory.  
Theotokion: O haven of salvation, we who believe in and acknowledge thy most 
pure birthgiving entreat thee, that we may be delivered from misfortunes.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy prophet, in Tone II: 
Celebrating the memory * of Thy Prophet Jeremiah, O Lord, * through him we 
entreat Thee: ** Save Thou our souls!  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone III:  
Having cleansed thy radiant heart with the Spirit, * O glorious Jeremiah, great 
prophet and martyr, * thou didst receive from on high the gift of prophecy * and 
didst cry aloud among the lands: * “Behold our God! * There is none other to 
compare with Him, ** Who hath appeared, incarnate, on the earth!”  
 
Prokeimenon in Tone IV: Thou art a priest for ever, * after the order of 
Melchizedek.  
Verse: The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make 
Thine enemies the footstool of thy feet.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §156 (I COR 14:20-25) 
Brethren: Be not children in understanding: howbeit in malice be ye children, but 
in understanding be men. In the law it is written: With men of other tongues and 
other lips will I speak unto this people; and yet for all that will they not hear me, saith 
the Lord. Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that 
believe not: but prophesying serveth not for them that believe not, but for them 
which believe. If therefore the whole church be come together into one place, and all 
speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or unbelievers, will 
they not say that ye are mad? But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth 
not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all: And thus are the 
secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face he will worship 
God, and report that God is in you of a truth.  
Alleluia, in Tone V: Moses and Aaron among His priests, and Samuel among 
them that call upon His name.  
Verse: A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the 
upright of heart.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §14 (4:22-30) 
At that time, the multitude wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out 
of His mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph’s son? And He said unto them: Ye 
will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself; whatsoever we have 

--- PAGE 7 ---
heard done in Capernaum, do also here in Thy country. And He said, Verily I say 
unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country. But I tell you of a truth, many 
widows were in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up three years 
and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land; But unto none of 
them was Elijah sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a 
widow. And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and none of 
them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian. And all they in the synagogue, when 
they heard these things, were filled with wrath, And rose up, and thrust Him out of 
the city, and led Him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they 
might cast Him down headlong. But He, passing through the midst of them, went His 
way.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
