--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 6th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY & RIGHTEOUS JOB  
THE MUCH-SUFFERING  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the righteous one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
O blessed Job, thou wast known to be * righteous and guileless, truthful, blameless 
and faithful, * abstaining from every evil thing, * truly adorned with the virtues * and 
resplendent in piety. * Wherefore, we call thee blessed * and, rejoicing, we celebrate 
today ** thy holy and honored festival.  
Arrayed in the riches of piety * as in a costly robe of purple, * and adorned with 
mercy and righteousness * as with a divine crown, thou didst exercise dominion * 
over the tyrannical passions, * O blameless Job; * wherefore, thou hast passed over to 
the noetic kingdom, ** to stand before the eternal King, O most glorious one.  
Let us praise Job, the blameless favorite of the Lord, * who, amid his trials, * was 
unconquered by the sores of his flesh, * the unshaken pillar, who was recognized by 
all as a bulwark of courage, * who with his wisdom-loving mind * broke the sting of 
the devil, * the godly and divinely wise one, ** the confirmation of the pious.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone I: 
Seeing the richness of the virtues of Job, * the enemy of the righteous plotted to 
steal them; * yet though he broke down the tower of his body, * he could not steal 
the treasure of his spirit: * for he who, having stripped me naked, took me captive * 
found the soul of the blameless one fully armed. * Wherefore, anticipating my need 
before the end, O Savior, ** deliver me from the deceiver and save me.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the righteous one, the acrostic whereof is: “It is meet to hymn Job who was 
afflicted with a myriad sufferings”, in Tone IV:  
ODE I 
Irmos: The people of Israel passed dry-shod across the watery deep of the Red 
Sea * and beholding the riders and captains of the enemy * swallowed by the 
waters, they cried out for joy: * ‘Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been 
glorified.’ 
Beholding with noetic eyes the mighty diamond adorned with the crown of 
suffering, the Church of Christ holdeth festival in joy, crying aloud: Let us chant unto 
our God, for He hath been glorified!  
Neither the tongue of the wise nor the human mind can attain unto thy praise; for 
the tongue of the Uncreated one hath called thee pious, truthful and blameless. 
Wherefore, we cry out together: Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been 
glorified!  
Supposing that the righteous man was protected by his wealth, the deceiver asked 
to overwhelm him with afflictions, and in overcoming him with violence he himself 
was shattered, for Job cried out with patience: Let us chant unto our God, for He 
hath been glorified!  
Theotokion: The choirs of the prophets’ hymn, and the multitudes of the 
incorporeal ones honor thee, O pure one; for, beholding the Creator of all ineffably 
issuing forth from thy womb, they chant to Him unceasingly: Let us chant unto our 
God, for He hath been glorified!  
ODE III  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
When deprived of thy beloved children and thy wealth thou didst remain unshaken 
in mind, crying aloud: Blessed is the name of my Lord!  
Thou didst make both riches and poverty a matter of virtue; for subjected to both, 
like gold seven times purified thou didst show thyself to be most pure.  
The serpent, the author of evil, exposed to thee the words of thy wife, as he had 
our forefather; but he who boasted exceedingly in his craftiness was foiled.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O Mother who knew not wedlock, who contained God the 
Word in thy womb and gave birth to Him in the flesh, as both God and man.  
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “As the first-fruits ...”: 
Shown to be truthful and righteous, pious, blameless and sanctified, * O all-
glorious one, thou true favorite of God, * thou hast enlightened the world with thy 
patience, O most patient and valiant one. ** Wherefore, O thou who art divinely 
wise, we all hymn thy memory.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sessional Hymn of the righteous one, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
Let us all bless and faithfully praise the blameless and most pure Job, the most 
exalted tower who in spirit was not conquered by the wiles of the enemy, the great 
favorite of Christ, and earnestly entreat Him to save our souls from misfortunes.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: I have heard of Thy glorious Dispensation, * O Christ our God: * how 
Thou wast born of the Virgin, * that Thou mightest deliver from error * those 
who cry aloud to Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord. 
The blameless Job hath been shown forth to us as a most exemplary model and 
animate pillar, having made us his emulators, who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
O most blessed Job, He Who healeth the crime which was committed in Eden 
healed the sufferings which thine innocent soul endured with forbearance and 
patience on the dung-hill.  
Considering with his holy mind, Job chanted: “Having received good things from 
the Lord, shall I not then steadfastly endure my pangs? Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!”  
Theotokion: We hymn thee, O exceedingly glorious Bride of God who knewest 
not wedlock, and hast given birth to the Savior in the flesh, and without ceasing we 
cry out to thee thus: Rejoice, thou intercessor on behalf of thy servants!  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Thou Who hast caused the light to shine, * who hast made bright the 
dawn and revealed the day; * glory be to Thee, glory be to Thee, * O Jesus 
Thou Son of God. 
The pangs accompanying thy sores have plaited for thee a multitudes of wreaths, 
O glorious Job, consoling thee for the evils thou didst endure.  
Like a youth thou wast revealed to be invincible amid evils, O righteous and 
blameless Job, and even in thy wealth thou wast without reproach.  
Keeping watch to preserve thy soul unharmed, O glorious one, thou didst valiantly 
endure the cruel storm of the enemy.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, creation crieth out, offering thee the words of the angel: 
Rejoice, O pure Mother of Jesus the Son of God!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
The ear is amazed, delighting in thy words, for thou wast shown to be a tongue 
filled to overflowing with the mysteries of the divine Spirit Who created and taught 
thee.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Having healed him who suffered pain of heart, thou didst pour forth from thine 
eyes tears of loving-kindness, interceding for orphans and widows, O glorious Job.  
Thy life was noble and full of the love of God; wherefore, thy death hath been 
shown to be a time of rest, O Job, having passed over to unceasing gladness.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate Theotokos, we beseech thee: On behalf of thy 
servants entreat Him Who became incarnate from thee, for we acknowledge thee 
alone as our intercessor.  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O God of our 
fathers, * supremely praised, and blessed art Thou O Lord.  
Without having tasted of things which are not lawful, but upholding the fullness of 
the prophets and the law, O Job, thou didst please God with thy love, chanting: O all-
hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Not laying up treasures on earth, but having thy hope in the heavens, thou didst 
consider gold as dust, and didst desire to chant unto God: O all-hymned Lord God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
The enemy of the righteous stripped thee of the children of thy love and thy 
possessions, yet the might of thy soul did not cease to cry: O all-hymned Lord God 
of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Triadicon: O ye divinely wise, piously theologizing concerning the Essence in three 
Hypostases - the Word and the Spirit Who have their origin in the Father - we cry out 
with faith: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Her who without knowing wedlock received in her womb in a 
manner past all telling the immutable God Who in His mercy entered into fellowship 
with mankind, do we piously hymn as the Mother of God throughout all ages.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Christ God, Who appeared in the form of an Angel * in the fiery furnace 
* to those who sang therein, * ye children, hymn; ye people, bless * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
The whole choir of those who keep festival doth celebrate in the highest with the 
wondrous Job who is hymned, chanting: O ye children, hymn; ye people, bless and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
The Judge of the contest hath awarded thee twofold crowns, on earth and in 
heaven, O divinely wise Job. Wherefore, thou dost cry aloud: O ye priests bless, O ye 
people supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
O most noetically rich righteous one, the sores of thy flesh pour forth healings 
upon the souls and bodies of those who chant: O ye priests bless, O ye people 
supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
Thou didst experience infirmity and health, riches and poverty in thy life, O 
blessed one, for, being manifest to many as radiant, thou dost cry aloud: O Ye people, 
supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Her who ineffably and seedlessly conceived and gave birth to Christ 
God, the Joy of the whole world, hymn ye children, O ye people bless and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Job was worthily crowned with splendor for his patience; but thou, O Satan, the 
only enemy of the righteous, wast put to shame, for thine expectation proved in vain, 
and thou weepest and art downcast, unable to bear the crowning of the righteous one.  
Gazing upon Thine immortal glory, insofar as it is possible for men to behold it, 
and seized with fear and greatly trembling, Job cried out with reverence: “I am dust 
and earth, but Thou art the Lord!” Wherefore, we all magnify thee.  
The books of life have received thee as is meet, and the store-houses of heaven 
have taken thee in like ripe grain, and thou art full of the days of the Spirit, O blessed 
Job, favorite of the Lord. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed.  
Triadicon: O honored Trinity our God, thou Unity in three Hypostases, most holy 
and one in glory, thou hast shown Thyself to the world as light, life and incorruption. 
Save Thy servants from deception, that we may worship Thee with faith.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be a receptacle of Wisdom far exceeding 
the mind, O most immaculate Maiden, and an animate throne and gate; wherefore, 
virgins, loving thee as their Queen, O Virgin, have brought themselves forth, 
following in the train of thee, the divine Maiden. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY  
 
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone I: 
Seeing the richness of the virtues of Job, * the enemy of the righteous plotted to 
steal them; * yet though he broke down the tower of his body, * he could not steal 
the treasure of his spirit: * for he who, having stripped me naked, took me captive * 
found the soul of the blameless one fully armed. * Wherefore, anticipating my need 
before the end, O Savior, ** deliver me from the deceiver and save me.  
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone VIII: 
Shown to be truthful and righteous, pious, blameless and sanctified, * O all-
glorious one, thou true favorite of God, * thou hast enlightened the world with thy 
patience, O most patient and valiant one. ** Wherefore, O thou who art divinely 
wise, we all hymn thy memory.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
 
THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. § 213 (5:22-6:2)  
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, §43 (MATT 11 :27-30)  
The Lord said to His disciples: All things are delivered. unto me of my Father: and 
no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save 
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Come unto me, all ye that 
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn 

--- PAGE 7 ---
of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls, for my 
yoke is easy, and my burden is light.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
