--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 4th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRED NUN PELAGIA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable martyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
When at the behest of God * thou wast instructed by divine words, O blessed one, 
* like glorious and fertile earth thou didst receive * the seed of the Word * in the 
furrows of thy heart * and thereby produce grain an hundredfold * for all who honor 
thee with faith, * O martyr Pelagia, ** truly delighting their hearts with grace.  
Seeking the beauty of Christ, * Who alone loveth us, * thou didst flee the beauties 
of this world * and hasten to the ever-living fount of holy baptism; * and, filled 
therewith, thou didst straightway * burn with thirst for martyrdom; * wherefore, 
zealously entering into the vessel greatly heated, * thou wast deemed worthy ** of a 
divine end.  
As a chosen and pure bride, * thou didst become a bride for Him * Who was born 
of her who knew not wedlock, * having first, in thine uprightness of mind, * spurned 
a transitory bridegroom * and earthly raiment richly dyed; * wherefore, O martyr 
Pelagia, * thou hast now received everlasting glory ** and the vesture of incorruption.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Pelagia, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the venerable martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I truly weave praise for 
Pelagia”, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Grant the dew of the Spirit unto me who now navigate the depths of thy wonders, 
O all-praised Pelagia, martyr of Christ, and pilot me to the right tranquil harbor of thy 
praises.  
Consciously inclining toward thy Creator from infancy, O honored one, thou didst 
reject the love of the corrupt, O all-glorious Pelagia; and thou didst manfully trample 
the passions underfoot by the power of God.  
Desiring to receive the laver of divine baptism, thou didst hasten to find a holy 
hierarch of Christ, O martyr Pelagia, and having received communion, thou wast 
filled with divine light.  
Theotokion: Thou art more holy than the Holy of holies, O pure Virgin, having 
borne on thine arm Christ, the Holy of holies, Who sustaineth all creation by His 
divine powers.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Receiving the seed of the word like good earth, O all-wise martyr of Christ, thou 
didst cause it to grow richly. (Twice) 
Strengthened with divine teachings as one of the elect, O glorious martyr of Christ, 
thou didst set forth, hastening to God the Master.  
Theotokion: O pure one, having manifestly given birth to the Source of the supra-
natural resurrection, thou hast restored my fallen image.  
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone III:  
Disdaining transitory things, and having become a partaker * of the good things of 
heaven * and having received a crown for thy suffering, * O most honored Pelagia, * 
thou didst bring the torrents of thy blood * as a gift to Christ the Master. ** Pray 
thou, that He deliver from misfortunes us who honor thy memory.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Setting thy soul aflame with the love of Christ, thou didst manfully enter into the 
greatly heated cauldron, O divinely wise Pelagia, becoming a sacrifice of sweet savor 
for thy Master. Wherefore, celebrating thine all-holy memory today, we hymn thee.  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
Having removed all the beautiful purple robes of this life, O most honored martyr 
Pelagia, thou wast arrayed in the purple robe of the Master through the laver of 
regeneration.  
Thou didst eclipse thy desires on earth with the desire for the beauties of heaven, 
O passion-bearer; wherefore, thou hast soared aloft to Christ, crying and saying: 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Having forsaken abominable religion, thou didst wisely hasten to Christ, O all-
glorious martyr Pelagia, trampling underfoot all the deceptions of idolatry, O thou 
who art pleasing to God.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth without knowing wedlock, O Virgin, and even 
after giving birth wast revealed to remain a virgin; wherefore, with unceasing cries and 
unwavering faith we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Sovereign Lady!  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Thou wast able to destroy the savagery of the enemy, O all-praised Pelagia, 
strengthened by the Cross and grace of the Master. (Twice) 
Now dost thou truly rejoice, having united thyself to thy Bridegroom through 
martyrdom, O most radiant one, holding the lamp of thy virginity.  
Theotokion: The Lord made His abode within thee, O Mother of God, restoring 
mankind who had fallen into corruption through the deception of the serpent.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Having lawfully wedded thyself to Christ, thou didst finish the course of 
martyrdom, and calling upon thy Bridegroom, thou didst establish thyself in His calm 
haven. (Twice) 
Plaiting an all-comely wreath of righteousness for thy head, O divinely wise 
Pelagia, thou wast crowned a martyr; for thou didst preserve the faith unsullied until 
the end.  
Theotokion: Of old the deceptively wicked serpent poured his venom into the ears 
of Eve; but thou alone, O Mother of God, hast shaken him off, having given birth to 
his Destroyer.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Kontakion & ikos from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Aflame with the divine love of Christ, O martyr; enduring the burning instrument 
as the holy children endured the furnace, thou didst cry aloud: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord! (Twice) 
O glorious martyr, He Who hath clothed the heavens in clouds illumined thee, 
who wast naked, devoid of divine vesture, wherefore thou didst sing: Blessed art 
Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O Theotokos, thou divine and sanctified habitation of the 
Most High, for through thee joy hath been granted to those who cry: Blessed art 
Thou among women, O all-immaculate Sovereign Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
As an exceeding and most laudable martyr of Christ, devoid of all deceitfulness, 
thou didst theologize concerning His power, teaching all with divine wisdom, drawing 
to piety the people who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! (Twice)  
Having manifestly wedded thyself to Christ, thou didst extinguish all the assaults 
of the tyrant, pouring forth an abyss of wisdom, O most honored martyr Pelagia; 
wherefore thou hast been adorned with a threefold crown, chanting: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: O ye faithful, we confess the Son and the Holy Spirit Who have Their 
origin in the Father, saying that the only-begotten Word Who is co-beginningless with 
the Father and the divine Spirit became incarnate of thee, O all-immaculate one; and 
we cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Words cannot express thy praise, O Pelagia; for thou hast poured forth an abyss of 
miracles through the power and grace of thy Bridegroom. Him do thou now entreat, 
that He save all who hymn thee.  
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Standing before the tribunal, O martyr Pelagia, thou crowned bride, thou wast 
deemed worthy to stand before thine uttermost Desire, and hast been granted the 
sustenance of everlasting delight.  
O divinely wise martyr Pelagia, entreat thy Bridegroom, that He grant peace to the 
world, and preserve the Church from perils, illumining those who hymn thee with 
grace.  
Theotokion: In a manner transcending nature thou hast been revealed to be both 
Virgin and Mother, O Birthgiver of God, having conceived the Word of the Father, 
and giving birth to Him in the flesh. And saved now thereby, O Theotokos, we mag-
nify thee. 
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Pelagia, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone III:  
Disdaining transitory things, and having become a partaker * of the good things of 
heaven * and having received a crown for thy suffering, * O most honored Pelagia, * 
thou didst bring the torrents of thy blood * as a gift to Christ the Master. ** Pray 
thou, that He deliver from misfortunes us who honor thy memory.  
 
