--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 15th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
 COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER PACHOMIUS THE GREAT  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”: 
Extending all thy desire unto God, * thou didst forsake * the beauty of the world 
as fleeting, * and didst offer thyself unto Christ, * O all-wise Pachomius, * purifying 
thyself in every way by abstinence, * showing forth patience opposition * to the 
burning of the passions; * and enduring the torment of thy conscience, * O divinely 
wise one, * thou didst receive an imperishable crown ** as one victorious.  
Through active vision * thou hast now drawn nigh to union with God, * casting 
from thee * the coarse covering of the body, * having rejected the passionate 
attachment of the flesh * and become illuminated by His effulgence and grace * and 
divine radiance, * and deified at His behest, * that thou mightest ascend to that which 
is higher. * And having now become blessed, O God-bearer, * entreat Christ with 
boldness ** on behalf of our souls.  
Having surpassed every sense, * thou didst converse with the Master in purity, * 
transcending the flesh, O most honored Pachomius, * restraining the passions with 
higher thought, * and destroying the arrogance of the demons, * thou didst trample 
them underfoot. * And dwelling now in the mansions of heaven, * be thou mindful 
of all who honor thy memory, * entreating Christ with boldness ** on behalf of our 
souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Having preserved unharmed that which was created according to the image of 
God, and through fasting made thy mind master over the pernicious passions, thou 
didst ascend, as far as thou wast able, to that which is in accordance with His likeness; 
for having manfully done violence to thy nature, thou didst strive to make that which 
is lower subject to that which is higher, and to enslave the flesh to the spirit. 
Wherefore, thou hast been revealed to be the summit of monastics, a desert-dweller, a 
trainer of those who run the good race, a most excellent model of virtue. And now in 
the heavens, the reflections having been abolished, O our father Pachomius, thou 
gazest in purity upon the Holy Trinity, praying directly for those who honor thee with 
faith and love.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; 
wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed 
hordes of the demons and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst 
blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask thou peace for our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, * and with sighs 
from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, * 
becoming a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. ** O Pachomius 
our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 Troparia, including its Irmos; and that of the 
venerable one, with 6 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is:  
“With love do I weave laudation for Pachomius”, in Tone II:  
ODE I  
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Trusting in the goodness of thy character, as a servant I zealously lift up my voice 
to thee in hymnody, O divinely eloquent one: With thy radiant effulgence and thine 
entreaties, O most excellent Pachomius, illumine my mind.  
Held fast by a fervent desire for dispassion, O most blessed father Pachomius, 
thou didst cause the material waves of the passions to wither away and, soaring aloft 
with love, thou didst attain unto the effulgence of the Godhead.  
O wise one, thou hast filled the ranks of heaven with joy, having come to know 
the Creator of all creation; for, faithfully instructed by His doctrines, O God-bearer, 
in thy stronghold thou didst learn of Him Who hath ineffable power.  
Theotokion: O pure Ever-virgin, thou art higher than all creation, visible and 
invisible, for thou hast given birth to the Creator, in that He was well pleased to 
assume flesh in thy womb. Him do thou beseech with boldness, that He save our 
souls.  
ODE III  
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a lily * 
at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established 
Thou didst hasten like a deer to water, O venerable one, and having been bathed 
in holy baptism, didst receive the dew by which thy heart was made sweet.  
Unable to bear the sight of thine ascetic feats, O venerable God-bearer, the hordes 
of demons plagued thee with divers temptations.  
As thou didst acquire a sanctified life, thou didst become a law-giver and first 
leader of fasters, O glorious Pachomius, leading them to Christ, in Whom thy heart 
was established.  
Theotokion: The ranks of angels were amazed, and the hearts of mankind were 
seized with fear, O most pure one, at thy birth giving. Wherefore, we honor thee with 
faith, O Theotokos.  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Pentecostarion.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having richly watered thy soul with showers of tears, O wise father, thou didst 
reap the abundant grain of thy virtues, and as a shepherd of venerable sheep, thou 

--- PAGE 4 ---
didst feed them in the meadow of abstinence. Wherefore, having departed gloriously 
from this life, O Pachomius, thou hast joined the choirs of the fathers. Therefore we 
cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who 
with love honor thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion; 
Or this Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Theotokion: O undefiled, blameless and all-immaculate Sovereign Lady, thou 
cloud of the noetic Sun and golden candle-stand of the light of God: with the 
radiance of dispassion illumine my soul, which hath grown dim through the blindness 
of the passions, I pray; with torrents of compunction enlighten my polluted heart, and 
with tears of repentance cleanse me of the mire of my evil deeds, that with love I may 
cry out to thee: O Ever-virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me 
forgiveness of my transgressions; for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
O Pachomius, thou wast an excellent guide for the assemblies of monastics; for 
through a divine vision thou wast told how to show care for virtue, O venerable 
father.  
Receiving the radiance of the Holy Spirit, thou didst become a most radiant star 
shining forth with grace upon all whom thou didst guide to the haven of salvation by 
thy teachings.  
Thy life became an excellent model for monastics, O most blessed father 
Pachomius, whereby they now live, following thy divine teachings.  
Wounded by love for the Master, by abstinence thou didst extinguish passionate 
attachment to the flesh, O Pachomius, rendering sacred thy whole life as a sacrifice of 
sweet savor.  
Theotokion: All of us, the faithful, know thee to be a haven of salvation and an 
unshakable rampart, O Lady Theotokos; for by thy supplications thou dost deliver 
our souls from misfortunes. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE V  
Irmos: O Christ God Thou art a mediator between God and man; * for by 
Thee, O Master, * we have been led from the night of ignorance, * to Thy 
Father, the Source of light.  
Thou didst communicate the love of God and the teaching of the Spirit, and, 
enlightened thereby, thou didst receive the perfection of the virtues, setting the state 
of thy soul free from the passions.  
O Master, we set before Thee Thine advocate, asking that, for his sake, we may be 
illumined with the enlightenment of grace and may ever be preserved by Thy whole 
armor.  
Having strengthened thy mind with the keeping of the commandments, O 
Pachomius, by thine asceticism thou didst cause the uprisings of the flesh to subside, 
and wast shown to be a shepherd of the assembly beloved of God.  
Theotokion: Entreat thy Son and Lord, O pure Virgin, that He grant to captives 
deliverance from adverse and evil circumstances and peace to those who place their 
hope in thee.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Clothed in the power of thy Master and armed with the precious Cross, thou didst 
trample underfoot the most pernicious wiles of the demons, O father.  
Having noetically preferred things eternal to that which passeth away, O venerable 
one, thou didst endure the pangs of abstinence, becoming an edifier of men’s souls.  
Having voluntarily become poor in spirit, O father, thou hast received immortal 
and immutable delight and ineffable riches in the heavens.  
Theotokion: Without knowing a man, O Virgin, thou hast given birth, yet 
remainest ever a virgin, revealing the image of the true divinity of thy Son and God.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Thou wast shown to be a radiant luminary unto the ends of the earth, * populating 
the desert with multitudes of monastics, as with cities. * And crucifying thyself, taking 
thy cross upon thy shoulders, * thou didst lay waste to thy body with asceticism, ** 
praying unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
Ikos: The resplendent memorial of the blessed one hath been revealed to us as 
another day of salvation, dispelling the deep night of the passions with the radiance of 
abstinence and shedding brilliant light through his most virtuous activity: and thereon 
hath a bright and radiant star appeared. With gladness let us faithfully offer hymns to 
the godly Pachomius, for, looking down from on high, he doth enlighten us and 
granting abundant peace, prayeth unceasingly on behalf of us all.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
Arrayed in the strength of the Master, vanquished by love for the life of 
incorruption, like dust thou didst trample underfoot the passionate pleasures of life; 
and dwelling with the choirs of angels, O father, thou dost now also partake thereof.  
Having acquired a pure heart, thou wast deemed worthy to behold Him Whom 
none can see; wherefore, thou didst become His blessed minister, O father, hymning 
the supremely glorious Benefactor.  
Having acquired Orthodox wisdom, O most blessed one, thou didst preach the 
threefold Unity, the consubstantial Trinity, and the awesome incarnation of the Word; 
teaching all to hymn the Benefactor as supremely glorious throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: O undefiled Virgin, Mother unwedded, we understand thee to be 
holier than the saints, in that thou alone hast given birth to the immutable God; for 
by thy divine birthgiving thou hast poured forth incorruption upon all the faithful. 
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
At the divine command, O wise one, thou didst manifestly learn from the angel the 
habit of fasters, wherein the children of piety are now nurtured, who cry out in 
hymns: Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thy life of asceticism, resplendent with great radiance like that of lightning, O all-
wise one, hath shone forth upon all who cry out to the Creator with piety: Bless ye 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Glorifying Thee Who wast ineffably begotten before time of the unbegotten 
Father, O Christ, the glorious Pachomius preached Thee and the all-holy Spirit, 
knowing the one nature and Godhead of the Trinity.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother of God, in piety we call thee the portal of the Light, 
for in a manner transcending nature thou hast given birth to the Effulgence of the 
Father, Who united Himself to the coarseness of the flesh, O most pure one. Him do 
all of us, the works of the Lord, hymn as Lord.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Illumined with rays of grace, O Pachomius, thou dost stand before God as a 
faithful minister, deemed worthy to delight in inescapable glory. Wherefore, we 
magnify thine honored festival.  
A wreath was woven forth as for a victor by the life-bearing right hand of the 
Almighty, O Pachomius; and now, O blessed one, do thou entreat that those who 
hymn thy glorious memory may receive forgiveness of sins, O ever all-memorable 
one.  
Embracing now the fruits of thy pangs, O Pachomius, thou delightest in the joy 
which passeth all understanding. By thy mediation entreat Christ to deliver thy 
disciples, who now glorify and honor thee, O right glorious one.  
Theotokion: Receiving the Rain of heaven in thy womb like the fleece which was 
bedewed, O most immaculate one, thou hast given birth to Him Who doth grant 
food unto us who piously hymn Him and confess thee to be the all-hymned 
Theotokos.  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”:  
Desiring the angelic life, thou didst withdraw into the deserts and subdue the 
carnal passions, showing thyself to be angelic, O God-bearing Pachomius. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion from the Pentecostarion.  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
O Pachomius our father, we honor thee as the guide of the multitudes of monks; 
for following thy steps we have truly come to know how to walk aright. Blessed art 
thou who, laboring for Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O converser 
with the angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them entreat the 
Lord, that our souls find mercy.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the appointed ODE of the canon from 
the Pentecostarion, and 4 from ODE III of the canon of the venerable one:  
Thou didst hasten like a deer to water, O venerable one, and having been bathed 
in holy baptism, didst receive the dew by which thy heart was made sweet.  
Unable to bear the sight of thine ascetic feats, O venerable God-bearer, the hordes 
of demons plagued thee with divers temptations.  
As thou didst acquire a sanctified life, thou didst become a law-giver and first 
leader of fasters, O glorious Pachomius, leading them to Christ, in Whom thy heart 
was established.  
Theotokion: The ranks of angels were amazed, and the hearts of men were seized 
with fear, O most pure one, at thy birth giving. Wherefore, we honor thee with faith, 
O Theotokos.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, * and with sighs 
from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, * 
becoming a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. ** O Pachomius 
our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Thou wast shown to be a radiant luminary unto the ends of the earth, * populating 
the desert with multitudes of monastics, as with cities. * And crucifying thyself, taking 
thy cross upon thy shoulders, * thou didst lay waste to thy body with asceticism, ** 
praying unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
 
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §176 (II COR. 4: 6-15)  
Brethren: God, Who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in 
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus 
Christ. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power 
may be of God, and not of us. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we 
are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not 
destroyed; always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life 
also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. For we which live are always 
delivered unto death for Jesus’ sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest 

--- PAGE 9 ---
in our mortal flesh. So then death worketh in us, but life in you. We, having the same 
spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we 
also believe, and therefore speak; knowing that He which raised up the Lord Jesus 
shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us with you. For all things are for 
your sakes, that the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound 
to the glory of God.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 77 (LK. 14: 25-35)  
At that time, great multitudes went with Jesus: and He turned, and said unto them, 
If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, 
and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be My disciple. And 
whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after Me, cannot be my disciple. For 
which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the 
cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? Lest haply, after he hath laid the 
foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, Saying, 
This man began to build, and was not able to finish. Or what king, going to make war 
against another king, sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with 
ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand? Or else, 
while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an embassy, and desireth conditions 
of peace. So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he 
cannot be My disciple. Salt is good: but if the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall 
it be seasoned? It is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dunghill; but men cast it 
out. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
