--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 14th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR ISIDORE OF THE ISLAND OF CHIOS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Lacerated with wounds, * thou didst strip away the skin-garments of mortality, * 
and arrayed in the vesture * and splendid purple robe of incorruption, * thou didst 
quickly approach the Tree of life, * truly receiving life indestructible and endless, * O 
glorious one. * And, as thou now delightest therein, ** preserve those who hymn 
thee.  
Burning with the zeal of piety, * O martyr Isidore, * thou didst enter into the 
tribunal, * ardently accepting suffering, * and didst receive the crown of victory; * 
and, adorned with divine teachings * against falsehood, and fortified by the armor of 
the Cross, * thou didst cast down the lying tyrant, ** showing thyself to be a crown-
bearer.  
Truly the sufferings of the martyrs * have transcended all manner of praise, * dis-
course and thought; * for, steadfast pillars of piety, * though clad like us * in mortal 
and passion-plagued bodies, * the glorious ones braved the fire * and triumphed over 
wounds, ** as though suffering in someone else’s bodies.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Isidore O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
By thy supplications, O blessed Isidore, martyr of Christ, grant me enlightenment 
and grace from heaven, that I may praise thine honored festival.  
Possessed of a perfect heart and soul, and having acquired a blameless life, O 
martyr Isidore, thou didst struggle well with the martyrs for God.  
Having ordered thy life according to the law, O martyr Isidore, thou didst keep the 
Faith of salvation unadulterated, like a treasure which cannot be stolen away, O most 
blessed one.  
Theotokion: Having truly given birth to Him Who is God by nature, thou, the 
pure Theotokos, dost truly hearken to the angel’s call, bearing Him in both natures in 
thy divine birthgiving.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Guided by the Word, O glorious martyr and spiritual athlete of Christ, thou didst 
cause the uprisings of the passions to wither away through the virtues of fasting.  
Possessed of an unashamed yearning of soul, O glorious one, thou didst most 
piously preserve thy confession uncompromised.  
By thy supplications, O spiritual athlete, render thou the Judge of all merciful unto 
those who piously praise thy festival.  
Theotokion: Mortify the wisdom of our flesh, O Virgin Sovereign Lady, and 
enliven the souls of those who hymn thee with faith.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
In thy supplications unto God * thou wast revealed to be an all-great helmsman * 
on behalf of the whole world, O holy one; * wherefore, we hymn thee today, ** O 
divinely wise and most glorious martyr Isidore.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
Struggling against the serpent, thou didst win the victory, O martyr Isidore; and as 
a beacon from Egypt, illumining the whole world, thou hast shone forth, showing the 
way to Him Who shone forth from the divine Virgin Maiden: For His sake wast thou 
slain, O spiritual athlete, becoming a sacrifice of sweet savor.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Having the Word dwelling wholly within thee, as an invincible warrior thou didst 
put to shame the pride of the tyrant, and having won victory for His sake, O blessed 
one, thou hast received from God an imperishable crown, O all-glorious martyr 
Isidore.  
Like a youth thou didst put thine enemies to flight, breaking them asunder, O 
Isidore, and protected by the awesome weapon of the Cross, girded about with might; 
thou didst destroy those who hated thee, crying: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of 
mankind!  
Following the death of the Master, thou didst endure sufferings for His sake; 
wherefore, the Lord of glory deemed thee worthy of life incorruptible, O martyr. And 
into His hands didst thou commit thy soul, O most blessed Isidore.  
Theotokion: He Who became incarnate reneweth all of mankind, O most pure 
one, having united Himself to him without leaving the bosom of the Father; and it 
was His will to make His abode within thy womb. And, having voluntarily lowered 
Himself, He hath enriched the world with a wealth of tender compassion and divinity.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Thou didst offer thyself to Christ thy Master as a perfect and unblemished 
sacrifice, and, slain in thy zeal, thou didst shed thy blood, O Isidore, sharing in His 
suffering and becoming a worthy heir of His kingdom.  
Strengthened by Thine omnipotent might, O Savior, the right victorious martyr 
Isidore did away with the gloom of deception; for, beheaded, he right laudably 
committed his soul to Thee, the Bestower of light, O Master.  
The Church of Christ is adorned with thy precious blood and made luminous by 
thy sufferings through thine opposition to sin, O glorious one; for thou, O Isidore, 
didst mightily contend against it even to the shedding of thy blood.  
Theotokion: Thou hast restored human nature, which in the beginning had 
become defiled and grievously corrupted by disobedience, becoming mortal, O most 
immaculate Lady Theotokos, who in a manner beyond understanding hast given birth 
to the Well-spring of immortality.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Having acquired perfect love for God, O most blessed passion-bearer, thou didst 
truly forsake the love of earthly things for the sake of incorrupt good things, and 
didst hasten, crying aloud: “I have hastened to follow after Thee, O Master!”  
Like a magnificent bridegroom adorned with the beauties of martyrdom, O 
Isidore, thou didst ascend, rejoicing, to the heavens, to stand before the Radiance 
which is the source of good, praying ever on behalf of those who keep thy memory.  
Thou didst endure slaying, O spiritual athlete, truly looking forward to the eternal 
delight and the ever-living sustenance which awaited thee; and as an invincible martyr, 
with the martyrs thou didst truly receive a crown, O most blessed Isidore.  
Theotokion: O Mary, thou dwelling-place of the Master, radiantly resplendent like 
a lily in the luminous rays of thy virginity amid a field of thorns, I beseech thee, O 
good one: Grant me forgiveness of sins.  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Shining now with spiritual radiance, O thrice-blessed one, be thou well-pleased to 
shine upon those who chant with thee, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages! (Twice)  
O Thy supremely good struggles! For thou didst thereby destroy the delusion of 
idolatry and put to shame the cruelties of the tyrant, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: O all-holy Virgin Sovereign Lady, with the oil of thy loving-kindness 
heal the wounds of mine offenses, for I cry: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O most 
pure one!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
For selfish purposes the tyrant strove to break the might and power of thine 
endurance with tortures, O most blessed Isidore; but thou, O divinely wise one, didst 
cry out: “I fear Christ and serve Him! O ye Youths bless, O ye priests praise, O ye 
people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Most radiant like the sun, thy countenance was shown to be serene through thy joy 
in martyrdom; for, slain like an unblemished lamb, thou didst offer thyself to God, to 
Whom as Creator thou didst cry out in hymns: O ye Youths bless, O ye priests praise, 
O ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thy body appeared radiant to the ranks of angels who love thee and bore it aloft, 
O Isidore, shining with the effulgence of miracles and the divers graces of 
wonderworking; granting an abundance of healing unto those who cry: O ye Youths 
bless, O ye priests praise, O ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Even the tongues of orators are unable to praise thee, O Mary, 
Birthgiver of God, O pure Maiden, Bride of God; for from thy virginal womb which 
knew not wedlock thou hast given birth to Him Who is God over all, Whom Youths 
bless, priests praise, and people, supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Thou didst descend from the heavens in the richness of Thy loving-kindness, and 
willingly endured death for our sake, in that Thou art good, wherefore, looking to 
Thee, Isidore cried aloud: “I die with Thee, that I might live with Thee! I am crucified 
with Thee, that I might reign with Thee!”  
O Isidore, the drops of thy blood which were lawfully shed upon the ground have 
magnificently dyed a robe for thee in the heavens, woven by grace; and now arrayed 
therein, thou dost stand before Christ in the bridal-chambers of heaven, wearing a 
crown, O most blessed and glorious martyr.  
As thou hast boldness before Christ, O Isidore, cease not to pray that He deliver 
from tempest, tribulations and sufferings those who keep thy sacred memory as is 
meet, O thrice-blessed one, asking salvation of soul; and grant unto us thy portion.  
Theotokion: In that thou hast given birth to the Savior and Redeemer, O most 
pure Maiden, grant that I might receive salvation, loosing the bonds of my 
transgressions by thy supplications; for thou canst accomplish all things whatsoever 
thou dost desire, in that thou from the abundance of thine incomparable goodness 
didst bear the King of all in thy bosom.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Isidore O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In thy supplications unto God * thou wast revealed to be an all-great helmsman * 
on behalf of the whole world, O holy one; * wherefore, we hymn thee today, ** O 
divinely wise and most glorious martyr Isidore.  
 
