--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 18th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR THEODOTUS OF ANCYRA & THE 
SEVEN HOLY VIRGINS  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS PETER, DIONYSIUS & THOSE WITH 
THEM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy martyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks  of heaven ...”: 
Adorned with a peaceful disposition, * thou wast chosen in holiness to minister 
unto all, O most blessed Theodotus, * and illumined with the crown of suffering, * 
thou hast joined chorus in the heavens * with those who suffered with thee. ** With 
them pray thou, that we be saved.  
Having offered thyself to the Lord * as a sacred vessel, submitting to His words, O 
divinely blessed one, * thou didst generously give to the poor, O wise martyr, * 
noetically laying up for thyself * the riches of martyrdom, ** which cannot be taken 
away.  
Behold the river of salvation! Behold the living well-spring, * which the company 
of holy virgins hath been shown to be! * Wherefore, come ye fervently: * Let us who 
are sick now draw forth healing, * and let those in sorrow draw forth joy, ** through 
the supplications of the holy brides of Christ!  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
Illumined with the radiance * of the three-Sunned Godhead, * ye passed through 
the darkness of tortures * and have been revealed to be brilliant stars, * the divine 
confirmation of the Church, * ever shedding light, O holy martyrs. * Wherefore, 
bowing down before your relics * and the dust of your bodies, ** we celebrate your 
resplendent festival.  
O ye faithful, with joy let us all now bless * Peter and Dionysius, * Paul, Andrew 
and Benedimus, * who were valiant and firm, * Christina, Heraclius and Paulinus, * 
who suffered steadfastly, * the three together, * trampled underfoot all the wiles of 
the serpent ** and dispelled the darkness of idolatry with grace.  
With your blood, O blessed ones, * ye purchased the unshakable kingdom of God, 
* and ye attained unto the calm havens, * having endured all the threefold waves of 
evils * with manly mind, O ye divinely sanctified ones. * Wherefore, ye are called 
blessed * and are glorified by all, * pray ye always, that we find mercy ** on the day of 
judgment.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS 
 ODE I 
Canon of the holy martyr & the holy women, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Let us chant a hymn of victory * unto the Lord, * Who most gloriously 
drowned Pharaoh in the sea, * for He hath been glorified.  
Let us sing unto the Lord, Who hath strengthened human weakness against the in-
visible foe and crowned it with victories!  
Receiving a victory bestowed by God, O glorious spiritual athlete Theodotus, thou 
wast revealed to be unvanquished by the adversaries, having conquered them.  
Adorned with the beauty of divine purity, O virgins, ye entered into the tribunal as 
it were a bridal-chamber, hymning Christ the Bridegroom.  
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving, O Theotokos, all of us who with love glorify thee 
as the Mother of the God of all mankind, have partaken of divine glory.  
Canon of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I will sing unto Thee, O Lord my God, * for Thou hast led Thy people 
out of the bondage of Egypt, * and hast drowned in the waters * the chariots 
and the might of Pharaoh. 
O champions of the Faith, from sufferings and every evil circumstance, deliver 
those who with faith ever celebrate your sacred memory.  
Most gloriously propelled by the mast and sail of the Cross, O God-bearers, ye 
navigated the depths of tortures without sinking, drowning the enemy.  
Ye have joined the ranks of heaven, enduring wounds in your bodies, O holy ones; 
wherefore, we honor your divine memory today.  
Made steadfast by the law of God, O wise ones, suffering lawfully ye set at naught 
the counsels of the iniquitous and have received divine glory.  
Theotokion: As the throne of the King, upon which He sat O Virgin, thou hast 
prepared a heavenly seat for the faithful. And with love we honor and glorify thee.  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy martyr & virgins  
Irmos: My heart hath been firmly established * in the Lord my God: * for by 
Him the weak * have been girded with strength. 
Strengthened in the Lord thy God, O martyr Theodotus, with truth thou didst cast 
down the adverse foe.  
Having set aside the coarseness of the flesh through abstinence, O passion-
bearers, ye soared aloft to the heights of martyrdom.  
Not inclining your ears to the allurements of the enemy, ye suffered lawfully, obe-
dient to the laws of God.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Theotokion: Established upon a rock by hope in thee, O Virgin, we remain 
unshaken by the threefold waves of temptations.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
Having set the feet of thy soul upon the rock of the Faith, O blessed Peter, thou 
wast not vanquished by the opposition of the ungodly, O all-blessed one.  
Thy city, O Peter, setteth thee before the world as a radiant star dispelling the 
night of ungodliness with divine grace.  
Crushed by wheels of torture and heavy bonds, and unceasingly beaten, O Peter, 
thou wast shown to be a crown-bearer, strengthened by looking toward God.  
Offering hymnody to God, O passion-bearers, ye endured every application of 
torture; wherefore, ye have been deemed worthy of crowns.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother and Theotokos, who alone remainest virgin after 
birthgiving, and hast truly been shown to be a servant of the great mystery, having 
giving birth to God.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Having been anointed by the divine Spirit, O glorious one, thou didst become the 
servant of all, having suffered steadfastly, and thou hast thereby been greatly glorified. 
Wherefore, assembling, O Theodotus, we honor thee, celebrating thy holy memory 
with faith, whereon do thou save all by thy supplications.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in the same melody:  
Adorned with the blood of martyrdom, ye stand before the King and Lord of all, 
O right victorious martyrs. Wherefore, with gladness we celebrate your honored 
memory today, asking that through you we may receive forgiveness of our debts and 
great mercy.  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion, in Tone 
IV: 
O all-immaculate Virgin * who hast given birth to the transcendent God: * do 
thou unceasingly entreat Him with the incorporeal ones, * that He grant forgiveness 
of transgressions * and correction of life before the end, * to us who, as is meet, 
hymn thee with faith and love, ** O thou who alone art most hymned.  
Stavrotheotokion: When Thy most pure Mother beheld Thee uplifted upon the 
Cross, O Word of God she exclaimed, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and 
strange wonder, O my Son? How is it that Thou, the Life of all, dost taste of death 
desiring to bring life to the dead, in that Thou art compassionate?”  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy martyr & virgins  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, * how Thou wast born of the 
Virgin, * who having given birth, remained undefiled. * and I glorify Thy 
dispensation O Savior. 
Having drowned the tyrant in the blood of thy martyrdom as in the sea, O martyr, 
thou dwellest in delight incorruptible, hymning Christ, the Bestower of crowns.  
The right laudable choir of passion- bearers, the seven wise virgins, hath shone 
forth in the divine bridal-chamber of Christ, having lit their most radiant lamps.  
Theotokion: Having thee as their noetic crown, O Virgin, the virgin passion-
bearers boast in thee, hymning thy Son and God, the Bridegroom and Master.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: For the sake of love for Thine image, * O compassionate One, * Thou 
didst ascend the cross * and the nations melted away. * For Thou, O Lover of 
mankind, * art my strength and my praise. 
Having by divine vigilance, shaken off slumber from the eyelids, and slothfulness 
from your souls, ye lulled to sleep all the evil intentions of the ungodly.  
Slain by stoning, Andrew, Paul and Dionysius have been deemed worthy of life 
everlasting, as most precious and divine stones of the Word.  
With faith let us praise the martyrs today: the most comely flowers of piety, the 
divine fragrance of Christ.  
Having disdained things below by desire for that which is divine, and valiantly 
endured pain in their flesh, rejoicing, they passed over to the life which is devoid of 
pain.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned Virgin Birthgiver of God, from every evil circumstance, 
from misfortunes and tribulations save those who hymn and set their hope in thee.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy martyr & virgins  
Irmos: O Thou Who hast caused the light to shine, * who hast made bright the 
dawn and revealed the day; * glory be to Thee, glory be to Thee, * O Jesus 
Thou Son of God. 
Pouring forth the wisdom of doctrine from the cup of thy soul, O wise and 
glorious Theodotus, thou hast gladdened the hearts of the pious.  
Drinking in the dew of abstinence, the honored ones noetically blossomed forth 
with purity, having shown themselves to be the sweet fragrance of Christ.  
Treating the pangs of the flesh as delight for the sake of the Lord’s love, the 
virgins suffered valiantly for His sake.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: Delivered from the deception of demonic idolatry by thy divine 
birthgiving, O pure one, we hymn thee, the cause and mediatress of good things.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Do Thou O Lord send down upon us * Thine enlightenment, and free 
us * from the gloom of transgression, O Good One, * granting us Thy peace. 
Sealed with noetic light, O martyrs, without stumbling ye traversed the darkness 
and the evil night of polytheism of martyrdom, by divine power.  
Resplendent with the beauties of virginity, O Christina, thou wast splendidly 
adorned with radiant wounds, and rejoicing, made thine abode in the noetic bridal-
chamber of Christ.  
They who cruelly desired thy body, O martyr Christina, suffered mightily, bound 
to God’s will by thy sweet discourse.  
Theotokion: O unwedded Bride of God, by whom we have been released from 
our ancient debt, and by whom we have been shown to be children of the heavenly 
father by grace. Preserve us who hymn thee!  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy martyr & virgins  
Irmos: As Thou didst deliver Jonah the prophet from the Whale, * do Thou 
deliver me O Christ God, * and bring me out from the depths of mine offences 
* and save me, for Thou alone lovest mankind. 
Finding thee to be a divine haven, O Theodotus, the faithful fend off the threefold 
waves of the ungodly, hymning Christ the Helmsman.  
With love for the Creator the passion-bearers strengthened their natural weakness 
and for Him bore well supra-natural struggles.  
Having lighted the divers lamps of your seven-branched lampstand, O virgins, ye 
entered the arena of martyrdom as it were a bridal-chamber.  
Theotokion: The earth and those who dwell thereon have been delivered from the 
ancient curse by thy birthgiving, O Virgin. Thee do we ever glorify as the cause of 
blessing.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
Having manfully contended, the glorious Heraclius received great glory, becoming 
a citizen of paradise, and having joined with the honored choirs of spiritual athletes, 
he now rejoiceth.  
Let us hymn the manly Benedimus and Andrew with Paulinus, Heraclius and 
Dionysius, Peter, Paul and Christina, the martyrs of the Lord.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Cut asunder, unjustly stoned, slain in the fire, O glorious martyrs, ye have been 
deemed worthy to live in the Church of the firstborn.  
Shining forth like stars in the firmament of the Church, the most wise passion-
bearers chanted piously to Him Who had revealed them: “Let us worship the Son of 
God!”  
Theotokion: Like a meadow, O Virgin, thou didst produce the fertile Grain of life 
Who nourisheth the faithful with life and doth truly banish famine from the earth.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Having struggled well as a spiritual athlete, O Theodotus, * with the spiritual 
athletes and the passion-bearing virgins * thou hast received crowns of honor. ** 
Wherefore, unceasingly entreat Christ God on behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy martyr & virgins  
Irmos: Thou didst speak with Moses on the mountain * and prefigure the 
Virgin in the bush: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Denouncing the wiles of the enemy with spiritual wisdom, O passion-bearer, thou 
didst save the martyrs who suffered with thee from their deceit.  
Giving wings to your thoughts with the love of incorrupt good things, O virgins, 
through struggles ye entered in unto them, hymning Christ.  
In nowise inclining toward the lies of the author of evils, O glorious passion-
bearers, ye kept the commandment of the Creator inviolate.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, cease not to entreat Him Who was born of thee, 
that those who hymn thee may behold His glory and delight therein with the martyrs.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Emulating in faith the young children in Babylon, O blessed ones, ye eagerly 
entered the fire, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Rejecting graven images, ye did not worship them O glorious spiritual athletes, and 
endured an ever-memorable death, manifestly receiving immortal delights.  
With manliness of soul and strength of character the martyrs cast down the 
arrogance of the iniquitous, crying out with faith: O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
Strengthened by the words of the godly martyrs, O most glorious Paulinus, thou 
didst elect to die, crying out to Him Who created all things: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: O ye faithful, let us all glorify the Theotokos in hymnody, for she is 
the ark of God, the jar of the divine Manna, the golden lampstand, the table, and the 
holy mountain.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy martyr & virgins  
Irmos: Those who confessed Christ the King, * the Children prisoners, in the 
furnace * cried with a loud voice, saying: * O all ye works of the Lord, praise 
ye the Lord. 
Having Christ our Benefactor ever preserving and strengthening thee in all amid 
the pangs of suffering, O Theodotus, thou didst undertake supra-natural struggles, 
hymning God the King.  
The goodly virgins, sweetening their souls with the goodness of Christ, hastened 
after Him suffering valiantly, and in joy cried aloud: “Thee do we supremely exalt, O 
Christ, throughout the ages!”  
O Word, Thou Creator of all things, as God Thou hast strengthened the weakness 
of women’s nature in sufferings; wherefore, having struggled well, the holy ones 
hymned Thee, God the King.  
Theotokion: As God, the Creator and the Lover of mankind, renewed human 
nature and took on humanity from thee, restoring the nature of us who confess thee 
to be the true Theotokos.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
With the shedding of their bodies of clay, the spiritual spiritual athletes were 
clothed in a vesture woven of heavenly grace, crying out with love: All ye works, bless 
and hymn the Lord!  
Purified by the sprinkling of divine Blood, O martyrs, ye poured forth your blood 
for Christ, chanting unceasingly: All ye works, bless and hymn the Lord!  
O blessed ones, ye were shown to be comely grapes of the noetic Vine, exuding 
the wine of piety for us who with love cry aloud: All ye works, bless and hymn the 
Lord!  
Theotokion: O most pure one, thou hast been revealed to be a noetic mercy-seat, 
receiving the supplications of all and bearing them to thy Son, unto the deliverance of 
those who chant: All ye works, bless and hymn the Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy martyr & virgins  
Irmos: O undefiled Theotokos, * with never-silent hymns * we magnify thine 
Offspring born without seed, * Christ our God. 
O glorious Theodotus, by the power of the Spirit thou didst vanquish the hordes 
of falsehood, and receive a crown of victory.  
Breathing forth miracles like ointment, O Theodotus, thou dost perfume all who 
glorify thee with faith and love.  
Lighting your seven-lamped beacon, O honored ones, guide us to Christ God, the 
never-waning Light.  
Theotokion: The desire of thee, which surpasseth all love, O most pure one, doth 
lead me to unceasingly cry aloud to thee: Rejoice, O Sovereign Lady!  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Sacrificing themselves with desire, the valiant martyrs eagerly gave up their blood, 
rejoicing, and having received riches which cannot be taken away, the all-praised ones 
joined the choirs of the martyrs.  
Ye were shown to be noetic flowers spreading the perfume of piety, passion-
bearers and citizens of the city of God, havens of salvation for the storm-tossed, 
beacons and champions of the Truth; wherefore as is meet, ye are called blessed.  
Let us honor the wise Heraclius with Peter and Paul, Paulinus and Benedimus, 
together with Andrew, Christina and Dionysius, who suffered mightily for Christ 
destroying pagan delusion.  
The ground received your blood, which was shed for the Benefactor of all, O ye of 
great renown, and the habitations of the just have received your souls. Joining chorus 
with them, be ye mindful of those who ever commemorate you.  
Theotokion: With joy we the faithful offer thee the cry of the angel, O Bride of 
God: Rejoice, O helper of all mankind, confirmation of the martyrs and apostles, 
announcement of all the prophets, O all-immaculate Birthgiver of God.  
 
AT LITURGY 
Kontakion of the holy martyr and holy virgins, in Tone II:  
Having struggled well as a spiritual athlete, O Theodotus, * with the spiritual 
athletes and the passion-bearing virgins * thou hast received crowns of honor. ** 
Wherefore, unceasingly entreat Christ God on behalf of us all.  
