--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 10th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE SIMON THE ZEALOT  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion 
And 5 of the holy apostle, in tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
The wondrous Simon, * the glory of the apostles, * like a brilliant ray, hath passed 
over the ends of the earth, * driving away the darkness of polytheism * with his 
saving, brilliant and divine teachings, * enlightening all * to worship the one Godhead 
* in three Hypostases, ** indivisible and undivided. (Twice)  
The apostle Simon, * going about the ends of the earth, * whirling about like a 
wheel, * hath burned away the madness of idolatry from all the land; * and, shedding 
the light of piety, * he hath kindled luminous rays of grace for the faithful, * that they 
may worship the one Godhead * in three Hypostases, ** indivisible and Undivided. 
(Twice) 
The apostle Simon, * most radiant and all-wondrous, * the teacher of the nations, 
* the net of God * drawing us up from the depths of perdition * with exalted 
theology, the true preacher, * hath now wisely led all * to the knowledge of Christ ** 
and set forth his corrections as a beautiful banquet.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Thou wast called the namesake of zeal, O rightly wondrous Simon, zealously 
emulating Almighty God, He showed thee to be filled to overflowing with divine 
miracles; for, possessing strange zeal, O blessed one, thou wast called the namesake 
of zeal, acquiring a title in accordance with thy character. Wherefore, dwelling with 
the heavenly choirs in the highest, entreat the Word, Christ our God, O God-seer, 
that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JOHN (I JN. 3: 21-4: 6)  
Beloved: if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. And 
whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do 
those things that are pleasing in his sight. And this is his commandment, that we 
should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave 
us commandment. And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he 
in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given 
us. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: 
because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit 

--- PAGE 2 ---
of God: Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: 
And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of 
God: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; 
and even now already is it in the world. Ye are of God, little children, and have over-
come them: because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. They are 
of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them. We are 
of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us.  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JOHN (I JN. 4: 11-16)  
Beloved: if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. No man hath seen 
God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected 
in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us 
of his Spirit. And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the 
Savior of the world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God 
dwelleth in him, and he in God. And we have known and believed the love that God 
hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in 
him.  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JOHN (I JN. 4: 20-5: 5)  
Beloved: If a man saith: “I love God,” and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he 
that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God Whom he hath 
not seen? And this commandment have we from Him, That he who loveth God love 
his brother also. Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and 
everyone that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him. By this 
we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep His 
commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep His commandments: and 
His commandments are not grievous. For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the 
world: and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. Who is he 
that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
O ever all-memorable Simon, * thou didst partake of the torrent of sweetness, * 
drinking with divine wisdom * the understanding of God * which thou didst fervently 
desire. * To Him hast thou now joyously passed over, * deified by the most radiant 
glory of the Trinity ** and immeasurable peace.  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  
O all-wondrous Simon, * contemplating the beauty of God, * and looking upon it 
as far as thou wast able, * and by a higher union delighting therein, * thou wast 
deified by His gifts, and rejoicing, didst reach * the only Divine One Whom thou 
didst desire, * O ever all-memorable preacher of Christ, ** who dost now co-dwell 
with the angels.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
O all-blessed Simon, * thou hast shown thyself to be * a faithful mediator between 
God and man; * and now, by thy right bold supplications, * render Christ merciful to 
us, * and never cease to entreat the Lord, * that He grant unto our souls ** peace and 
great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Like a high-flying eagle thou didst soar over creation, O most sacred Simon, 
disciple and apostle of Christ, and, burning up the falsehood of idolatry with the fiery 
words of thy dogmas, thou didst lead the nations out of the depths of ignorance unto 
the knowledge of God. And now, pray thou to Christ, that He be merciful to us on 
the day of judgment.  
Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Simon * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins ** unto our souls 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion from the Pentecostarion (Twice);  
Glory ..., that of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Simon * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins ** unto our souls 
Both now ..., that from the Pentecostarion.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
Fishing for the nations, the glorious apostle taught the ends of the earth to 
worship Thee with the Father and the Spirit, O Christ God. Wherefore, establish Thy 
Church, and send down Thy blessing upon the faithful, O only Merciful One, and 
Lover of mankind. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Like the sun, Christ emitted thee like a ray to enlighten all the earth, O glorious 
apostle Simon; and with thy divine supplications thou dost illumine and enlighten 
with divine and never-waning light all who celebrate thy holy memory with faith. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O apostle of Christ Simon, 
and we honor the pangs and labors wherewith thou didst struggle in the 
proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the 
work of His hands. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
With the net of thy divine words thou didst fish for the reason-endowed fish, 
bringing the first-fruits thereof to our God, and desiring to clothe thyself in the 
wounds of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be an emulator of His suffering. 
Wherefore, assembling as is meet, we honor thy most festive memory, O glorious 
apostle, and together cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness 
of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and 
their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 67 (21: 15-25)  
At that time: Jesus shewed himself to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and on 
this wise shewed he himself. There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called 
Didymus, and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other 
of his disciples. Simon Peter saith unto them, I go a fishing. They say unto him, We 
also go with thee. They went forth, and entered into a ship immediately; and that 
night they caught nothing. But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the 
shore: but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus. Then Jesus saith unto them, 
Children, have ye any meat? They answered him, No. And he said unto them, Cast 
the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find. They cast therefore, and now 
they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes. Therefore that disciple 
whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter, It is the Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard that 
it was the Lord, he girt his fisher’s coat unto him, (for he was naked,) and did cast 
himself into the sea. And the other disciples came in a little ship; (for they were not 
far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits,) dragging the net with fishes. As 
soon then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid 
thereon, and bread. Jesus saith unto them, Bring of the fish which ye have now 
caught. 11 Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land full of great fishes, an 
hundred and fifty and three: and for all there were so many, yet was not the net 
broken. Jesus saith unto them, Come and dine. And none of the disciples durst ask 
him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord. Jesus then cometh, and taketh 
bread, and giveth them, and fish likewise. This is now the third time that Jesus 
shewed himself to his disciples, after that he was risen from the dead. 
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
Manifestly receiving grace from the divine Spirit, thou wast a member of the choir 
of the apostles, breathing forth with a fiery tongue the fiery breath which once was 
borne down upon them from heaven, O Simon, utterly consuming the thorns of 
pagan ungodliness. O preacher of Christ God, entreat Him, that our souls be saved.  
Canon from the Pentecostarion, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the 
holy apostle, with 8 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the glory of the apostle 
Simon”, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
Standing in the highest before the Master Who glorified thee and splendidly 
showed thee forth as His disciple, O wondrous apostle, illumine my soul, that I may 
hymn thy divine memory.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Bestowing upon thee an abundance of divine things, O apostle, Christ, the Summit 
of divine gifts, Who alone is righteous, revealed thee by His righteous judgment, O 
divinely revealed one.  
Thou didst become fiery of spirit, O apostle, receiving the whole radiance of the 
Spirit Who descended upon thee from heaven, burning up all the delusion of idolatry.  
Theotokion: Having revealed my mortality and corruption to be immortality and 
incorruption, O Savior, thou didst make Thine abode in the womb of the most pure 
and holy Virgin who knew not wedlock, taking the form of human nature.  
Katavasia from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as our God, 
* Whom the whole of creation hymns: * There is none more righteous than 
Thee, O Lord. 
Thou didst truly recognize the divine mystery of the incarnation, O God-pleasing 
apostle Simon, receiving transcendent radiance from the Savior Himself. 
The beginningless and ever-existent Word richly illumined thee, His servant, O 
wondrous Simon, with the splendid effulgence of divine grace.  
Theotokion: The prophet described thee beforehand, O Theotokos, as an all 
golden candlestick, bearing Christ our God, the never-waning Light Who illumineth 
the world with the beams of divinity.  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Pentecostarion.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
With the radiant light of the divine Spirit thou hast destroyed the darkness of 
polytheism, and illumined the hearts of the faithful, and singing forth the Savior’s 
commandments, thou didst abolish the fables of the pagans. O glorious Simon, 
entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Being wholly a treasury of evangelical gifts, full of grace, O all-blessed Simon, thou 
wast a light for the world and the salt of the universe.  
Thou didst turn away from shameful things, O rightly wondrous one, and wast 
deemed worthy to behold the immaterial light of God Who took upon Himself 
matter in the guise of humanity.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
O Simon, disciple of Life incorruptible, slay thou our living sin with the life-
bearing power of the Bestower of life, the activity whereof thou didst receive.  
Theotokion: Being the peer of Thy Father in essence, Thou wast the peer of 
humanity in nature, having received our flesh from the most pure virgin, O Master.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
Thou didst zealously receive the fiery tongue of the Spirit O God-seer, which 
appeared to thee while seated in the upper chamber.  
As one exalted, living in the mansions on high, thou hast brought lofty and great 
doctrines unto us.  
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving, O Virgin, the former law hath been annulled, 
grace hath blossomed forth, and righteousness hath shone forth.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
O right wondrous Simon, called the namesake of zeal, for with zeal thou didst 
emulate the Lord God Almighty.  
Giving thee authority, through the activity of His grace the Savior showed thee to 
be a worker of divine miracles.  
Theotokion: Let the mouths of the heretics who do not acknowledge thee to be 
the Theotokos be stopped, O all-immaculate one, and let their faces be covered with 
shame.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”:  
In praises let us all bless the divinely eloquent Simon, * who hath diligently set the 
doctrines of wisdom in the hearts of the pious; * for standing now before the throne 
of glory * and dwelling with the incorporeal ones, ** he doth unceasingly pray on 
behalf of us all.  
Ikos: Let us all now praise and piously bless the commemoration of the apostle as 
though it were a day of salvation; for shineth forth like the sun upon the whole world, 
it dispelleth all darkness with the rays of its light, and with love illumineth those who 
celebrate his memory and who lovingly honor it. Wherefore, let us hasten with zeal, 
chanting to him, for he standeth before Christ, praying unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Possessed of strange zeal, O blessed Simon, thou wast called the namesake of zeal, 
and having acquired a title in accordance with thy character, thou didst cry aloud: 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, throughout the ages!  
Joining chorus before the Word as one who conversed with Him, thou hast found 
a share of His kingdom, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the 
ages!  
Theotokion: Of old, through deceit the serpent drove our ancestors from their 
good inheritance; but thou hast restored it to them, O Mother of God. Blessed is the 
Fruit of thy womb, O most pure one!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The instruments of music sounded out in harmony, * and countless 
multitudes worshipped the image in Dura; * but the three Children, refusing 
to bow in obeisance, * hymn and glorify the Lord throughout all ages. 
As thy feet are beautiful, O Simon, so is thy tongue fair, which speaketh glory to 
the Lord and hath taught all to say: Hymn ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages.  
Adorned with radiant beauties, and emitting the splendors of miracles, O Simon, 
thou wast recognized by the people as a blessed seed. Hymn the Lord, ye works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: The human mind is incapable of describing thy birthgiving, O 
Birthgiver of God, and faileth when trying to speak of it; for, having conceived, O 
Virgin, thou hast given birth to God, Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: O ye people, with glory let us honor the pure Theotokos, * who 
received the fire of the Divinity in her womb * yet remained unconsumed, * let 
us magnify her with hymns.  
Thou wast revealed to the ends of the world, shining with light; and, having 
received the fire of the Spirit, wast shown to be radiant. Wherefore, we magnify thee.  
Having offered thyself wholly to God, thou wast united to Him. Entreat Him 
now, O divinely manifest one, on behalf of us who praise thee with faith and love.  
Theotokion: In hymns we magnify the mediatress of the salvation of all, who hath 
appeared to mankind and illumined the world with the splendors of her divine purity.  
Exapostilarion of the holy apostle:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”:  
Directing the course of thy beautiful feet to the path of heaven, O apostle Simon, 
thou didst ascend, rejoicing; and, standing before the Trinity, thou dost behold the 
Son and the divine Spirit in the Father. Wherefore, we celebrate with faith thy most 
sacred and divine memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you ...”: 
What shall we call thee, O apostle? * Heaven, for thou hast declared the glory of 
God. * A river, for thou dost mystically water creation. * A star illumining the 
Church. * A cup pouring forth holy nectar. * A most dear friend of Christ, * a dweller 
with the incorporeal ones. ** Pray thou for the salvation of our souls. (Twice)  
O Simon, boast of the apostles, * having adorned thy feet * which trod well the 
path of preaching * thou didst make narrow all the paths of the enemy * by the 
breadth of thy divine understanding * of the Word Who hath appeared in the 
coarseness of the flesh * and Who chose thee to be His most glorious disciple, O 
blessed one. ** Him do thou beseech, that our souls be saved.  
O divinely eloquent apostle Simon, * thou wast sent by Christ like a radiant arrow 
* wounding the enemy * and manifestly imparting healing * to wounded souls. * 
Wherefore, as is meet, we call thee blessed * and celebrate today thy holy solemnity. 
** Pray thou, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Forsaking earthly things, thou didst follow after Christ, having been signed with 
the inspiration of the Holy Spirit and sent by Him to the nations which were 
perishing, that mankind might turn to the light of the knowledge of God; and having 
completed the struggles of thy divine suffering and diverse torments, O apostle 
Simon, thou didst surrender thy soul into the hands of Christ. Him do thou entreat, 
O all-blessed one, that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.  
Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the appointed ODE of the canon from 
the Pentecostarion; and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the holy apostle.  
O right wondrous Simon, called the namesake of zeal, for with zeal thou didst 
emulate the Lord God Almighty. (Twice) 
Giving thee authority, through the activity of His grace the Savior showed thee to 
be a worker of divine miracles.  
Theotokion: Let the mouths of the heretics who do not acknowledge thee to be 
the Theotokos be stopped, O all-immaculate one, and let their faces be covered with 
shame.  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Simon * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls 
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone II:  
In praises let us all bless the divinely eloquent Simon, * who hath diligently set the 
doctrines of wisdom in the hearts of the pious; * for standing now before the throne 
of glory * and dwelling with the incorporeal ones, ** he doth unceasingly pray on 
behalf of us all.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, § 131 (I COR. 4: 9-16)  
Brethren: God hath set forth us, the apostles, last, as it were appointed to death: 
for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools 
for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are 
honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and 
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-place; And labor, 
working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: 
Being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the off 
scouring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as my 
beloved sons I warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet 
have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel. 
Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §56 (13: 54-58)  
At that time, Jesus came into His own country, and taught the people in their 
synagogue, insomuch that they were astounded, and said, Whence hath this man this 
wisdom, and these mighty works? Is not this the carpenter’s son? is not his mother 
called Mary? And his brethren James, and Joses and Simon, and Judas? And his 
sisters, are they not all with us? Whence hath this man all these things? And they were 
offended in him, But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honor, save in 
his own country, and in his own house. And he did not many mighty works there 
because of their unbelief.  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
 
 
 
 
