--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 17th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE ANDRONICUS & THOSE WITH HIM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...”: 3 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
As a servant of the Word, * a glorious minister, * and most radiant luminary of the 
whole world, * O divinely blessed one, * thou didst bring an end * to the irrational 
corruption of ungodliness by thy word; * wherefore, with divine words we joyfully 
glorify and celebrate * thy holy memory, ** offering praise to the Almighty.  
The divine Apostle Paul, * splendidly praising you all with divine laudations, * 
setting forth your valor before the faithful, * speaking first of all to show that ye * are 
divinely wise disciples of the Word of God * and His true kinsmen, * O glorious 
Junia * and blessed Andronicus, ** ye favorites of God.  
Illumining the whole earth * with sacred preaching, * ye dispelled the gloom of 
vainglory * and have directed to the light of divine knowledge * those who from of 
old were sunk in the darkness of ungodliness, * O divine apostles, * ye guides to 
salvation * and intercessors for all ** who ever honor you with faith.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
O holy apostles, * entreat the merciful God, * that He grant forgiveness of sins ** 
unto our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion from the Pentecostarion.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the apostle, the acrostic whereof is: “I offer praise to the wise Andronicus”, 
the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
The honored Church offereth praise to God on the day of thy most holy 
memorial, O blessed one, glorifying thy struggles with faith.  
Thou didst direct all the movements of thy mind to the desire of God, O sacred 
Andronicus, rejoicing in the fulfillment thereof.  
O divinely wise Andronicus, thou hast received from God the divine grace to 
cleanse away ailments and expel evil spirits.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, by thy mediation and grace rain down upon me deliverance 
from all sins and the correction of my life.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as our God, 
* Whom the whole of creation hymns: * There is none more righteous than 
Thee, O Lord. 
Having mortified thy members with ascetic feats, thou wast deemed worthy to 
behold those who live the life of Christ our God, Who bear flesh upon the earth, O 
Apostle Andronicus.  
Filled with the fiery inspiration of the divine Spirit, O all-praised Apostle 
Andronicus, thou didst embrace His fervor with thy pure thought and didst burn up 
the thorns of delusion.  
The sound of thy words and the power of thy miracles have gone throughout the 
ends of the world, O disciple of the Lord, teaching the faithful the divine grace of the 
Spirit.  
Theotokion: There is none most pure other than thee, O Sovereign Lady, and 
none more immaculate than thee, O all-immaculate one; for thou alone wast the 
spacious dwelling-place of the God of all.  
Kontakion of the apostles, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Let us praise Andronicus, the apostle of Christ, * the most radiant star who hath 
illumined the nations * with the light of divine knowledge, * and with him the most 
wise Junia, * who shone forth in piety; * and let us cry aloud: ** Entreat Christ God 
without ceasing on behalf Of our souls!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sessional Hymn of the apostle, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
As one radiant, the divine Andronicus illumined men’s hearts with the light of 
divine knowledge, and passed over to the Lord; wherefore, even after his end he 
poureth forth healings upon those who approach his honored temple with faith, for 
he asketh great mercy for all the faithful.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the  
Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Theotokion: By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal 
nature of those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * 
raising up all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless 
thee, ** O exceedingly glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee suspended upon the Cross, * O Word of 
God, * Thy most pure Mother exclaimed, lamenting maternally: * “What is this new 
and strange wonder, O my Son? * How is it that Thou, the Life of all, hast tasted 
death, * desiring to bring life to mortals, ** in so far as Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Paul greeted thee as a kinsman, proclaiming thy divine praises before the faithful, 
O divinely eloquent Andronicus, who dost lead to the Light those who praise thee.  
As a dwelling-place of the most holy Trinity, thou didst demolish the offensive 
temples, O most praised one, raising up churches for the salvation of our souls.  
Strengthened by the might of God, O blessed Andronicus, thou wast able to 
remove the vessels of the mighty one and make a dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, all of us, the faithful together, ever hymn thee as 
the steadfast and constant intercession and salvation of our souls.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
Assembling with faith, O Andronicus, we honor thee with Paul, for thou wast his 
kinsman, and even more his disciple.  
Let us honor the sacred apostles, the divine Junia and the God-bearing 
Andronicus, the radiant stars.  
In the midst of the Church the blessed Paul declared you to be excellent among 
the apostles, O blessed ones.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: O most holy Maiden, in sacred images the choir of the prophets 
portrayed thee to be the Mother of the Lord.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Thy house poureth forth springs of healings upon those who have recourse to it, 
O apostle, washing away the infirmities of their souls.  
With thy new teachings thou didst renew a multitude of the heathen who had been 
corrupted by ungodliness, O true friend of Jesus the incorrupt One.  
Like the sun thou didst pass over all the earth, O most wise Andronicus, 
proclaiming to the faithful the light of the three-Sunned Godhead.  
Theotokion: In thee were perceived the divine ways of the Master, Who 
impoverished Himself by assuming flesh, enriching the faithful, O thou who knewest 
not wedlock.  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Pentecostarion.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: O Thou who in the beginning founded the earth * and by Thy word 
made the heavens firm, * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * O Lord God 
of our Fathers. 
O wise disciple of Christ, thou drivest grievous ailments and every pang from the 
souls and bodies of those who have recourse to thy house.  
Thou turnest away the visitations of demons, cleansing mortals of cruel passions 
by thy compassion, O eye-witness of Christ; wherefore, we bless thee with faith. 
Having cast down the prating of the orators by the simplicity of thy teachings, O 
wise one, thou didst proclaim that God hath appeared in the flesh and dwelt with 
mortals in His goodness.  
Theotokion: O Lord God of our fathers, Who didst make Thine abode within the 
Virgin’s womb, and therein restored Adam: Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the mystery of the 
Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning bush: * praise ye and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Having seasoned with divine salt the hearts of mortals made foolish by evil 
decadence, O Andronicus, by thy teachings thou didst present them as saved to the 
Word Who poured Himself forth, O thrice-blessed one.  
To Him Who in His loving-kindness was sacrificed wast thou known as priest, 
sacrificer and sacrifice, O Andronicus, and hastening to Him, thou didst receive from 
Him a crown of incorruption and righteousness.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thou wast revealed to be a divine preacher, a godly witness of the apostles, the 
destroyer of pernicious graven images, the enricher of the poor and a great inhabitant 
of Sion on high, O glorious and divinely wise Andronicus.  
Theotokion: In thine arms, as with tongs, O Virgin, thou hast borne Him Who 
poureth forth divine dew upon those who languish in the flame of delusion, and Who 
burneth up the passions of those who hymn His kingdom.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire of 
the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the salvation 
of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we magnify thee. 
O right blessed Andronicus, by thy life-bearing discourse thou hast given life to 
those slain before by the assaults of the demons, that thou mightest be shown to be a 
heir to the life of heaven.  
As a right fruitful branch of the true Vine, O most blessed and praised 
Andronicus, thou didst exude the wine of immortality and hast made glad the hearts 
of men.  
Having utterly consumed the tinder of polytheism like lightning, thou didst openly 
shed the light of divine knowledge upon those whose life lay in darkness; wherefore, 
we all glorify thee, O Andronicus.  
Thy sacred memory, extending today unto the ends of the earth, doth illumine the 
hearts of those who in sanctity praise thee thereon, O right blessed Andronicus.  
Theotokion: O pure and all-immaculate Virgin who hast given birth to the Light, 
ask for the enlightenment, forgiveness of sins and salvation of the souls who 
acknowledge thee to be the true Theotokos.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
O holy apostles, * entreat the merciful God, * that He grant forgiveness of sins ** 
unto our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone II:  
Let us praise Andronicus, the apostle of Christ, * the most radiant star who hath 
illumined the nations * with the light of divine knowledge, * and with him the most 
wise Junia, * who shone forth in piety; * and let us cry aloud: ** Entreat Christ God 
without ceasing on behalf Of our souls!  
 
