--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 25th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE THIRD FINDING  
OF THE PRECIOUS HEAD OF THE HOLY & GLORIOUS PROPHET, FORERUNNER 
AND BAPTIST JOHN  
AT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...”: If this day falleth within the period of the Pentecostarion, we appoint 
8 Stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion, and 5 for the forerunner. But if it falleth within the 
Apostles’ Fast, we appoint 6 Stichera of the forerunner, repeating as necessary, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O blessed forerunner John, * shedding rays brighter than those of the sun * thy 
head hath shone forth from the ground * and illumined the faithful. * Possessing it as 
a divine treasure, * we draw forth rich grace therefrom, * hallowing our souls, * 
bodies and thoughts; ** and celebrating, we call thee blessed.  
Pouring forth abundant grace, * O blessed forerunner, * thy sacred head * was 
shown to the divinely wise priest * all unaware; * and he, hastening with faith and 
grace, * manifestly accomplished its arrival, * sanctified with the emperor and the 
divinely wise people, ** who fervently maintain the Orthodox Faith.  
We celebrate the third revelation * of thy precious head, * which, when it was 
severed, O glorious one, * was crowned by the Trinity * because of thy godly zeal. * 
The ranks of the angels, * the company of martyrs, the divine apostles and all the 
prophets * rejoice in its discovery. ** With them be thou ever mindful of us, O thou 
forerunner of the Lord!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
The divinely preserved head, a treasury of divine gifts, O forerunner, hath shone 
forth from the bosom of the earth; and we, faithfully receiving and bowing down 
before it, O glorious one, are enriched by thee with most glorious miracles and the 
forgiveness of our sins, O Baptist of Christ.  
Both now ..., If this day fall within the period of Pentecost, we chant the Doxasticon 
from the Pentecostarion; but if it fall within the Apostles’ Fast, we chant the 
Dogmaticon in Tone VI:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: Comfort ye, comfort ye My people, saith the Lord. Speak, ye 
priests, to the heart of Jerusalem; comfort her, for her humiliation is accomplished, 
her sin is put away: for she hath received of the Lord’s hand double the amount of 
her sins. The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, 
make straight the paths of our God. O thou who bringest glad tidings to Sion, go up 
on the high mountain; lift up thy voice with strength, thou that bringest glad tidings 
to Jerusalem; lift it up, fear not. I, the Lord God, I will hear the poor of Israel and will 
not forsake them: but I will open rivers on the mountains, and fountains in the midst 
of plains: I will make the desert pools of water, and a thirsty land, courses of water. 
Let the heaven rejoice from above, and let the clouds rain righteousness: let the earth 
bring forth, and blossom with mercy, and bring forth righteousness likewise. Utter 
aloud a voice of gladness, and let this be made known, proclaim it to the ends of the 
earth. Say ye: The Lord hath delivered His servant Jacob. And if they shall thirst, He 
shall lead them through the desert; He shall bring forth water to them out of the rock. 
Rejoice, thou barren woman who bearest not; break forth and cry, thou who dost not 
travail: for more are the children of the desolate than of her who hath a husband.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF MALACHI  
Thus saith the Lord Almighty: Behold, I send forth My messenger, and he shall 
survey the way before Me: and the Lord, Whom ye seek, shall suddenly come into His 
temple, even the angel of the covenant, whom ye take pleasure in. Who will abide the 
day of his coming, or who will withstand at his appearing? For he is coming in as the 
fire of a furnace and as the herb of those who wash. He shall sit to melt and purify as 
it were silver, and as it were gold. And he will come to you as a Judge, and will be a 
swift witness against the wicked, and against the adulteresses, and against those who 
swear falsely by My name, and against those who keep back the hirelings’ wages, and 
those who oppress the widow, and orphans, and wrest the judgment of the stranger, 
and fear not Me, saith the Lord Almighty. For I am the Lord your God, and I am not 
changed. But ye, the sons of Jacob, have perverted My statutes, and have not kept 
them. Wherefore, return to Me, and I will return to you, saith the Lord Almighty. 
And all nations shall call you blessed. Understand ye that I am the Lord Who 
discerneth between the righteous man and the iniquitous on the day whereon I shall 
preserve those who love Me. Be ye therefore aware and remember the law of Moses 
My servant, accordingly as I charged him with it in Horeb for all Israel, even the 
commandments and ordinances. And, behold, I will sent to you Elijah the Tishbite, 
before the great and glorious day of the Lord cometh, who shall turn again the heart 
of the father to the son, and the heart of a man to his neighbor, lest I come and smite 
the earth grievously, saith the Lord Almighty, the holy God of Israel.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
 Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. Thus the 
righteous who is dead shall condemn the ungodly who are living. For they shall see 
the end of the wise, and shall not understand what God in His counsel hath decreed 

--- PAGE 3 ---
of him. For the Lord shall cast the ungodly down headlong, that they shall be 
speechless, and He shall shake them from the foundation; and they shall be utterly 
laid waste, and be in sorrow; and their memorial shall perish. And when they cast up 
the account of their sins, they shall come with fear: and their own iniquities shall 
convict them to their face. Then shall the righteous man stand in great boldness 
before the face of such as have afflicted him, and made no account of his labors. 
When they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the 
strangeness of his salvation. And they, repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit, 
shall say within themselves: “This was he whom we held betimes in derision, and as a 
proverb of reproach. We fools accounted his life madness, and his end to be without 
honor. How is he numbered among the children of God, and his lot among the 
saints? Therefore have we erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness 
hath not shined unto us, and the sun of righteousness rose not upon us. We have 
been full of the ways of the iniquitous and destruction, and have trodden trackless 
paths, but the ways of the Lord have we not known.”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the finding, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Come ye, and with splendor let us celebrate the divine feast; * for the baptizer of 
the Lord, * the lampstand of the Light, * the voice of the Word, the friend of the 
Bridegroom, * the great beacon of the Truth, hath appeared, ** showing us his holy 
head.  
Verse: There will I make to spring forth a horn for David, * I have prepared a 
lamp for My Christ.  
Because of Herod’s commission of the abomination of incest * and his adulterous 
impurity, * thou didst denounce the iniquitous one, in that thou art a preacher of 
purity, O forerunner, * and thy head was cut off, * which, through the grace of thy 
miraculous deeds ** hath now been revealed to the faithful.  
Verse: Remember, O Lord, * David and all his meekness.  
O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us joyfully utter praise, * receiving the 
head of the forerunner * which hath been revealed by God, * as a treasury of gifts 
pouring forth miracles * like a divinely-flowing well-spring of grace ** arising from 
the bosom of the earth.  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Like a most precious abode of divine thoughts, thy head, O all-praised John, hath 
shone forth today from the secret places of the earth, as from thy mother’s womb, 
for it clearly foresaw the mystery of the ineffable Being; and it hath rendered the 
whole earth fragrant, emitting the myrrh of sanctification, noetically proclaiming the 
way of repentance and entreating the Savior of all on behalf of our souls.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., If this day fall within the period of Pentecost, the Doxasticon from the 
Pentecostarion; but if it fall within the Apostles’ Fast;  
The Theotokion, in Tone II: 
O new wonder greater than all the wonders of old! * For who hath ever known a 
mother to give birth without having known a man, * and to bear on her arm Him 
Who sustaineth all creation? * Yet it was the will of God to be born. * O most pure 
one, who carried Him as an infant in Thine embrace * and before Whom thou hast a 
mother’s boldness: * cease not to pray on behalf of those who honor thee, ** that He 
have compassion and save our souls. 
Troparion of the finding, in Tone IV:  
Like a divine treasure hidden in the earth * Christ hath revealed thy head to us, O 
prophet and forerunner; * wherefore, assembling for the feast of its discovery, * let us 
all chant divinely sounding hymns to the Savior ** Who saveth us from corruption by 
his supplications.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., If this day falleth within the period of Pentecost, we chant the 
Troparion from the Pentecostarion; but if it falleth within the Apostles’ Fast, we 
chant the Theotokion, in the same tone:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...”: If this day falleth within the period of Pentecost, we chant 
the Troparion from the Pentecostarion, (Twice); 
 Glory ..., that of the finding, in Tone IV:  
Like a divine treasure hidden in the earth * Christ hath revealed thy head to us, O 
prophet and forerunner; * wherefore, assembling for the feast of its discovery, * let us 
all chant divinely sounding hymns to the Savior ** Who saveth us from corruption by 
his supplications.  
Both now ..., that from the Pentecostarion. 
 But if it fall within the Apostles’ Fast, we chant the Troparion of the finding, (Twice);  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
The head of the forerunner, shining forth from the earth, doth shed rays of 
incorruption and healing upon the faithful. On high it assembleth a multitude of 
angels, and below it calleth upon the human race with one voice to send up glory to 
Christ God. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion; or this Theotokion, 
in the same melody:  
O all-immaculate Virgin * who hast given birth to the transcendent God: * do 
thou unceasingly entreat Him with the forerunner, * that He grant forgiveness of 
transgressions * and correction of life before the end, * to us who, as is meet, hymn 
thee with faith and love, ** O thou who alone art all-hymned.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”:  
Most strangely yielded up like gold from veins of ore taken from the impenetrable 
bosom of the earth, thy sacred head hath now enriched the thoughts of all the faithful 
with divine understanding, crying aloud “Repent!”, as was thy wont. Venerating it, O 
forerunner, with faith we glorify Christ aloud. (Twice)  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion; or this Theotokion, in Tone 
IV: 
He that sitteth upon the throne of the cherubim * and abideth in the bosom of the 
Father * doth sit in thy womb as upon a throne, O Lady; * for, being truly God 
incarnate, * He reigneth over all nations, * and with understanding we now chant to 
Him. * Him do thou also entreat, ** that thy servants be saved.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O John, thou baptizer of 
Christ, and we all honor the discovery of thy precious head.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord. In His commandments shall he 
greatly delight. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Committing iniquity, the accursed Herod vilely had thy precious head cut off with 
the sword, but we, the faithful, kiss it with love.  
Glory ..., another Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded ...”:  
Like a pearl was the head of the Baptist concealed in the damp earth, and, adorned 
like a divinely radiant lamp, it illumineth the whole world, working wonders. For like 
the dawn, the forerunner hath shone forth most splendidly like the sun, preaching to 
us again the unwaning light, crying out: Behold, the Lamb of God!  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
O thou who hast given birth to the immutable God, * by thy maternal 
supplications * make steadfast my heart which is ever changing due to sin, * 
slothfulness and the attacks of the deceiver; * that in thanksgiving I also may glorify 
thee O good one. * O all-immaculate Mary, Birthgiver of God, * have mercy on the 
flock ** which thou hast acquired.  
Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: There will I make to spring forth a horn for David, * 
I have prepared a lamp for My Christ.  
Verse: Remember, O Lord, David and all his meekness.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §31 (LK. 7: 17-30)  
At that time, the rumor of Jesus went forth throughout all Judaea, and throughout 
all the region round about. And the disciples of John showed him of all these things. 
And John calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to Jesus, saying, Art thou he 
that should come? or look we for another? When the men were come unto him, they 
said, John Baptist hath sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he that should come? or 
look we for another? And in that same hour he cured many of their infirmities and 
plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto many that were blind he gave sight. Then Jesus 
answering said unto them, Go your way, and tell John what things ye have seen and 
heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the 
dead are raised, to the poor the gospel is preached. And blessed is he, whosoever shall 
not be offended in me. And when the messengers of John were departed, he began to 
speak unto the people concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness for to 

--- PAGE 7 ---
see? A reed shaken with the wind? But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in 
soft raiment? Behold, they which are gorgeously appareled, and live delicately, are in 
kings’ courts. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and 
much more than a prophet. This is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my 
messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. For I say unto 
you, Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John 
the Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he. And all the 
people that heard him, and the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the 
baptism of John. But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against 
themselves, being not baptized of him.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron of the finding, in Tone VI: 
The precious head of the baptizer of Christ, which of old preached repentance to 
all the faithful, denounced the impurity of the iniquitous Herod, and lay upon a 
charger, hath appeared out of the hidden places of the earth and lieth before those 
who have recourse unto it with faith, who touch it with fear and bow down before it 
with spiritual love. Granting forgiveness of transgressions and forgiveness, it be-
stoweth that which is needful and great mercy.  
If this day falleth within the period of Pentecost, we chant first the canon from the 
Pentecostarion, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos, and that of the forerunner, with 
8 Troparia. But if this day falleth within the Apostles’ Fast, we chant first the canon 
of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraklisis) with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos, 
followed by that of the forerunner, with 8 Troparia.  
Canon of the forerunner, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
As the voice of the Word, O blessed forerunner, thou heavenly man, thou hast 
loosed my muteness, as of old thou didst loose that of thy father, that with a voice of 
joy I may praise thee on the present feast of the discovery of thy head.  
O forerunner who placed thy hand upon the head of Christ, thou showest forth 
this third revelation to the Church of God: thy precious head which recognized the 
Trinity and doth most manifestly sanctify the assemblies of the Orthodox.  
Unable to endure burial any longer, O forerunner of the Lord, thou hast arranged 
to reveal thyself today, not enclosed in a jar, but resting in a silver vessel in a sacred 
place known to a priest.  
The Imperial City hath now manifestly received a sacred gift, O forerunner who of 
old was deprived of thy head; and, adorned now in the entry thereof, it rejoiceth and 
calleth thee blessed, as is meet.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: Thou didst spring forth from the womb of a barren woman, O all-
praised one, preparing with thy discourse the ways of thy Master, Who shone forth 
ineffably from the most holy Virgin, wherefore, acknowledging her to be the 
Theotokos, all of us, the generations of men, call her blessed.  
Katavasia: If this day falls within the period of Pentecost, we chant the Katavasia 
from the Pentecostarion, but if it falls within the Apostles’ Fast, we chant the Irmoi: 
“I will open my mouth ...”  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Given to the wanton woman because of her voluptuous dancing, thy sacred head 
was carried in her hands; but now it is borne chastely and with reverence into the holy 
church in the hands of a priest.  
The concourse of the faithful, the emperor and the priest, greet thee reverently, O 
glorious forerunner, chanting with joy, they go before thee with love, sanctified by 
thine arrival.  
Thy most sacred head, shining forth like the radiant sun out of the sacred 
precincts, hath illumined the whole world with divine splendors, O prophet and 
forerunner of Christ.  
Theotokion: From the womb of a barren woman didst thou radiantly shine forth 
as the star of the Sun of glory, O Baptist, going forth before Him Who shone forth 
from the cloud of the Virgin, dispelling the night of polytheism.  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Pentecostarion.  
Sessional Hymn of the finding, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Most strangely yielded forth like gold from veins of ore out of the impenetrable 
bosom of the earth, O baptizer of Christ, thy sacred head hath enriched all who have 
recourse thereon on the feast of its discovery, magnifying with hymns the Savior and 
Creator Who granteth us great mercy for thy sake. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion;  
or this Theotokion in Tone IV: 
As one who loveth sin, I beseech thee who hast given birth to the sinless God 
Who taketh away the sins of the world: O most pure one, have compassion on my 
greatly sinful soul and cleanse me of my many sins; for thou art the cleansing, 
salvation and aid of the faithful.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
As one more exalted than the prophets, thou wast deemed worthy to behold Him 
Whom they prophesied, going before Him with the power of Elijah, O blessed 
Forerunner.  
For the third time thou hast revealed thy most glorious head, which poureth forth 
the myrrh of healings, and dispelleth the fetid passions.  
Not interred in a jar of clay as before, but in a vessel of silver, thy head hath been 
revealed in a holy place, O right wondrous one.  
Assembling, draw forth ye all inexhaustible healings from the precious head of the 
forerunner of Christ, the well-spring which hath been given to us.  
Theotokion: O most pure one who hast given birth to Him Who hath raised up 
our lowly nature, save me who, having lived in arrogance of mind, have been 
exceedingly humbled.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
As the sacred mediator between the Old and the New Covenants, O blessed 
forerunner, by thy mediations and the newly revealed finding of thy head, renew us 
who are grown old and who celebrate its restoration.  
Bringing the grace of healings from Comana to the Imperial City, O forerunner, 
thy head calleth all cities to its arrival today, and the multitudes of the faithful gather, 
filled with light incorruptible.  
The emperor rejoiceth at the entry of thy head more than in his robe of royal 
purple, O forerunner, and the godly priest, the namesake of the God-bearer, blesseth 
all, holding it in his hands, sending forth a benediction upon the fullness of the 
faithful.  
Theotokion: Having given birth to the Master, thou wast shown to surpass the 
heavenly hosts, O all-immaculate Maiden, and thou hast deified the nature of mortals. 
Wherefore, with soul and tongue, O Virgin, we glorify thee as the true Theotokos.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
In truth, the head of him who baptized Thee, O Christ, shining forth from the 
earth, hath dispelled the bitter winter of heresy and illumined the world. Draw ye 
forth enlightenment, divine grace and mercy, and sanctify your heads and souls, 
touching the head of the forerunner of grace, who touched the head of God in the 
waters of the Jordan.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Pray thou, O forerunner, that the heads of our enemies be crushed beneath the 
feet of all Orthodox Christians who lovingly honor thy precious head which 
denounced Herod.  
Theotokion: Thou didst proclaim to those in Hades the light of Him Who came 
forth from the Virgin’s womb and clothed Himself in flesh, becoming a man for the 
benefit of mankind, O blessed forerunner.  
Kontakion of the finding, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having fulfilled the dispensation concerning us ...”:  
A splendid and divine pillar in the world, * the luminary of the Sun, the 
forerunner, * showing forth his radiant and divine head unto the ends of the earth, * 
doth thereby sanctify those who bow down before it with faith crying aloud: ** O 
most wise baptizer of Christ, save us all!  
Ikos: The God-loving head of the forerunner, like a well-spring of paradise 
springing forth from the earth, sendeth forth streams of grace, granting torrents of 
miracles to all in need. Wherefore, let us all approach it and earnestly draw forth from 
it divine streams of healings, for with endless gifts it giveth drink to men’s souls, 
drowning the pains of the body, and in good time taking away every ailment. Let us 
therefore hymn it with love and venerate it with faith, kissing it with honor. With 
hymns, as with wreaths, let us, the faithful, crown it; let us cleanse ourselves 
beforehand of spiritual defilement, let us adorn our souls with divine virtues, and let 
us cry out unceasingly: O most wise baptizer of Christ, save us all!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Thou wast the most radiant luminary of the Sun of glory, O forerunner, dispelling 
the darkness of deception and illumining those who cry out with faith: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The honorable Church doth splendidly celebrate this feast of supplication, O 
forerunner, honoring thy head and crying out repeatedly: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst announce beforehand the awesome advent of the Word by thy divine 
leaps, O prophet, and with a true voice didst proclaim the discovery of thy head to 
the priestly pastor who fervently desired thee.  
Theotokion: Virginity and birthgiving flowed together within thee in a manner 
beyond nature and understanding, O Theotokos, for thou didst ineffably give birth to 
God incarnate, to Whom we chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
The baptist and forerunner, the earthly angel, the renowned one who upbraided 
iniquity, who before beheld the manifestation of the Trinity, revealeth his head for a 
third time to all who chant with love: Ye priests, bless; ye people, supremely exalt 
Christ throughout all ages!  
The most meek emperor and the Christ-loving people greet thee earnestly, O all--
praised one; and the archpastor stretcheth forth his hand to thee and, clasping it to 
his breast, danceth with gladness and crieth out in thanksgiving: Ye people, supremely 
exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
Thy head, deposited in silver vessels, shining forth with greater luster than that of 
gold as a precious treasure, O forerunner, is given to the Imperial City, and it, 
enriched with its divine gifts, doth chant earnestly: Ye priests, bless; ye people, 
supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: While borne in thy mother’s womb, O blessed John, rejoicing, thou 
didst worship Him Who beareth all things, O most praised one who art concealed in 
a womb not made of flesh. And, preaching the Lamb of God Who was born of the 
holy Virgin, thou didst piously cry: Ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
With sacred hymns let us praise the venerable fruit of the barren woman, the 
greatest among those born of women, the warrior of Christ the King, the great 
forerunner who proclaimed the Lamb Who taketh away the transgressions of the 
world.  
Having filled a cup to overflowing, with exalted preaching thou dost call together 
the Church of Christ for the discovery of thy head, O forerunner, crying out: “Come 
ye, and take your fill of the beautiful things which I have prepared, and magnify Him 
Who is given to men!”  
Rejoicing, the emperor, the namesake of the archangel, doth piously receive thee 
in His kingdom, O angel of God, and with him the goodly archpastor and the God-
bearing and divinely wise priest, manifestly adorned with grace and his calling.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Thou didst cause divine enlightenment to shine forth with the entry of thy head, O 
glorious one, illumining the hearts of the faithful who cry out to thee: O never-
waning luminary of the Sun, all-holy forerunner, deliver us, thy people, and all our 
city from the darkness of the passions!  
Theotokion: O Savior Who wast born and preserved her who gave Thee birth 
incorrupt even after birthgiving, have pity on me when Thou wilt sit to judge me 
according to my works, and overlook mine iniquities and sins, in that Thou art a 
sinless and merciful God and the Lover of mankind.  
Exapostilarion of the finding:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast illumined us ...”:  
As the voice of one crying aloud, thou couldst not bear that thy head be covered 
by the earth any longer, O forerunner John, and announced its discovery in a certain 
manner, which we honor today.  
Glory ..., another Exapostilarion:  
Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples ...”:  
Thy precious and luminous head hath shone forth from the impassable bosom of 
the earth, O forerunner John, beacon of immaterial light; and, lovingly celebrating its 
discovery, we entreat thee to obtain the forgiveness of our grievous deeds, that we 
may complete the period of abstinence well, through thy supplications, O all-praised 
baptizer of the Savior.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
We who are crucified with Christ place our trust in thee and God Who issued 
forth from thee, O most pure one. By thine entreaties to Him keep us unharmed until 
the end.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the finding, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Rejoice, O sacred and light-bearing head, * venerated by the angels, * which of old 
was severed by a sword, * and which cut down the shame of impurity with sharp 
reproofs, * thou wellspring of miracles which giveth drink unto the faithful, * and 
which hath proclaimed the saving advent of the Savior, * and which of old perceived 
the coming of the Spirit * and which made His abode in thee, * who didst bridge the 
grace of the Old and New Covenants. ** Entreat Christ God that our souls be 
granted great mercy! (Twice)  
The head of the Forerunner, * which once was concealed in an earthen vessel, * 
hath appeared, manifestly given up from the bosom of the earth * and pouring forth 
streams of healing; * for in the waters did he wash the head of Him that even now * 
covereth the chambers of the firmament with waters * and raineth down divine 
remission upon mankind. * Wherefore, let us bless it as truly most glorious, * and in 
its discovery let us joyously keep festival, ** entreating Christ to grant our souls great 
mercy.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
The head which proclaimed the Lamb of God * Who hath appeared in the flesh, * 
which with divine commands hath declared unto all * the ways of saving repentance, 
* which of old denounced the transgression of Herod * and was therefore severed 
from its body * and endured concealment for a time, * and which hath shone forth 
upon us * like a radiant sun, crying aloud: * Repent ye, and in compunction of soul * 
now submit unto Christ ** Who granteth the world great mercy!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Faithfully receiving with a voice of praise the most precious head of Thy Baptist, 
O Lord, which today was revealed from the earth, we, Thy sinful servants, led to 
prayer, pray that on the day of Judgment we may, for his sake, obtain cleansing and 
great mercy from Thee.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion in Tone VI:  
O right loving God and Savior, from all evil circumstances save Thou Thy 
servants, by the prayers of Thy Forerunner, and of all the saints, and through the 
entreaties of Thy Mother.  
Great Doxology. After the Trisagion, the Troparion of the finding, in Tone IV:  
Like a divine treasure hidden in the earth hath Christ revealed thy head to us, O 
prophet and forerunner; wherefore, assembling for the feast of its discovery, let us all 
chant divinely sounding hymns to the Savior Who saveth us from corruption by his 
supplications.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion from the Pentecostarion, or the Theotokion:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
Litanies. Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: from Odes III & VI of the canon of the 
forerunner.  
Given to the wanton woman because of her voluptuous dancing, thy sacred head 
was carried in her hands; but now it is borne chastely and with reverence into the holy 
church in the hands of a priest. (Twice)  
The concourse of the faithful, the emperor and the priest, greet thee piously, O 
glorious forerunner, chanting with joy, and they go before thee with love, sanctified 
by thy coming.  
Thy most sacred head, shining forth like the radiant sun out of the sacred 
precincts, hath illumined the whole world with divine splendors, O prophet and 
forerunner of Christ.  
Truth, the head of him who baptized Thee, O Christ, shining forth from the earth, 
hath dispelled the bitter winter of heresy and illumined the world. Draw ye forth 
enlightenment, divine grace and mercy.  
And sanctify your heads and souls, touching the head of the forerunner of grace, 
who touched the head of God in the waters of the Jordan.  
Pray thou, O forerunner, that the heads of our enemies be crushed beneath the 
feet of all Orthodox Christians who lovingly honor thy precious head which 
denounced Herod.  
Theotokion: Thou didst proclaim to those in hell the light of Him Who came 
forth from the Virgin’s womb and clothed Himself in flesh, becoming a man for the 
benefit of men, O blessed forerunner.  
Troparion of the finding, in Tone IV:  
Like a divine treasure hidden in the earth * Christ hath revealed thy head to us, O 
prophet and forerunner; * wherefore, assembling for the feast of its discovery, * let us 
all chant divinely sounding hymns to the Savior ** Who saveth us from corruption by 
his supplications.  
Kontakion of the finding, in Tone VI:  
A splendid and divine pillar in the world, * the luminary of the Sun, the 
forerunner, * showing forth his radiant and divine head unto the ends of the earth, * 
doth thereby sanctify those who bow down before it with faith crying aloud: ** O 
most wise baptizer of Christ, save us all!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §176 (II COR. 4: 6-15)  
Brethren: God, Who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in 
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus 
Christ. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power 
may be of God, and not of us. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we 
are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not 
destroyed; always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life 
also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. For we which live are always 
delivered unto death for Jesus’ sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest 
in our mortal flesh. So then death worketh in us, but life in you. We having the same 
spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we 
also believe, and therefore speak; Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus 
shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us with you. For all things are for 
your sakes, that the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound 
to the glory of God. 
Alleluia, in Tone V: A light hath dawned for the righteous man, and gladness 
for the upright of heart.  
Verse: Truth is sprung up out of the earth, and righteousness hath looked down 
from heaven.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, §40 (11: 2-15)  
At that time, when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two 
of his disciples, And said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for 
another? Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and shew John again those things 
which ye do hear and see: The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers 
are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel 
preached to them. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me. And as 
they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What went ye 
out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind? But what went ye out 
for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? behold, they that wear soft clothing are in 
kings’ houses. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and 
more than a prophet. For this is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my 
messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. Verily I say unto 
you, Among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John 
the Baptist: notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than 
he. And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth 
violence, and the violent take it by force. For all the prophets and the law prophesied 
until John. And if ye will receive it, this is Elias, which was for to come. He that hath 
ears to hear, let him hear.  
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
