--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 28th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
 COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, NICETAS, BISHOP OF 
CHALCEDON  
AT VESPERS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Emulating the hospitality of Abraham, * Isaac’s love for God * and the 
guilelessness of Jacob, * thou didst emulate also the suffering of Job of Uz, * the 
meekness of David * and the innocence of Moses, * and having been anointed with 
holy chrism * as Aaron was of old, O God-bearing hierarch, ** thou wast manifest as 
a sacred wonder-worker.  
Thy great innocence * dispelled the malice of the demons * with the grace of the 
divine Spirit, * gladdening with thy suffering * God, Whom thou didst desire, * and 
thy spirit was illumined by the indwelling of prayer. * Wherefore, thou hast received 
the grace of miracles, * to heal the infirmities, O Nicetas, ** of those who piously 
have recourse unto thee.  
Bound by kinship, * ye kept the laws of the Holy Spirit, * O ye priests, * and, 
following the steps * of the divinely wise Shepherd * Who emitted rays of most 
glorious healings, * ye were adorned similarly with the power of healing, * O most 
glorious Nicetas ** and divinely wise Ignatius.  
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
Deliver my lowly soul * from condemnation and grievous transgressions, * O most 
holy Bride of God, * and free me from death by thine intercessions; * grant that on 
the day of trial * I may receive that justification * which the assemblies of the saints 
have received, * and before the end show me forth as purified ** by repentance and 
the outpouring of tears.  
With the showers of the most holy Spirit * bedew thou my mind, O most pure one 
* who beyond comprehension hast given birth to Christ, * the Dewdrop Who by His 
compassions * hath washed away the countless iniquities of all mankind. * Dry up the 
well-spring of my passions, * and by thy supplications * do thou ever grant unto me 
** a torrent of living sustenance.  
O Virgin who hast given birth to God my Savior, * by thy supplications grant unto 
me * the excellent and saving remedy of repentance, * torrents of tears, * and the 
thought of the dread * and awesome hour of judgment * and the impartial trial, * that 
I may escape fearsome torment ** and may receive divine grace.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Tens of thousands of times have I promised * to repent of mine offenses, O most 
pure one, * yet the cherished habits of mine evil ways * will not depart from me; * 
wherefore, I cry unto thee * and fall down, praying: * O Sovereign Lady, rescue me 
from such tyranny, * guiding me to things that are higher, ** which are nigh unto 
salvation.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee * nailed to the Cross, O Lord, * the ewe-lamb 
Thy Mother marveled * and cried out: “What is this that I see, * O my Son most 
desired? * How hast Thou been rewarded * by the unfaithful and iniquitous assembly 
* which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? ** Yet glory to Thine ineffable condescen-
sion, O Master!”  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Nicetas our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Illumined by divine effulgence, O venerable one, thou didst become radiant. 
Enlighten those who with faith celebrate thy splendid repose, driving away the gloom 
of the passions.  
Thou wast shown to be full of light through thy radiant deeds, illumining those 
who are in the night of evils, and guiding them to the light of heaven by the Spirit, O 
sacred father Nicetas.  
Thou shinest forth gifts of miracles upon those who ever approach thy sacred 
shrine, O most blessed one, receiving them from God as a reward for thy labors and 
pangs.  
Theotokion: Thou didst seedlessly conceive the Son of God, through the divine 
Spirit, by the will of the Father, giving birth in the flesh to Him Who was begotten of 
the Father without mother, and was born of thee without father for our sake.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Thou wast uplifted, O venerable one, having humbled thyself for Christ’s sake, 
humbling the pride of the noetic serpent by the Spirit.  
Having been deemed worthy of great gifts by God, O God-pleasing hierarch and 
father, thou didst become a worthily-great priest.  
Perfecting thy life in innocence like a babe, O venerable one, thou didst destroy all 
the malice of the enemy by grace.  
Theotokion: With joy let us all glorify the Theotokos, who, alone among women, 
is blessed, in that she is the most magnificent habitation of God.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before ...”: 
Having taken up thy cross from childhood, thou didst piously follow after Christ, 
causing the wisdom of the flesh to wither away through abstinence; wherefore, on thy 
hierarchal cathedra, O divinely blessed Nicetas, thou didst exalt the Master Who hath 
adorned thy shrine with divers signs.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O pure, all-immaculate one who knewest not a man, who alone hast given birth 
within time to the timeless Son and Word of God, with the holy and honored 
patriarchs, the martyrs, prophets and the venerable, entreat Him, that He grant us 
purification and great mercy.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Stavrotheotokion: When Thy most pure Mother beheld Thee uplifted upon the 
Cross, O Word of God she exclaimed, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and 
strange wonder, O my Son? How is it that Thou, the Life of all, dost taste of death 
desiring to bring life to the dead, in that Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
By all-night vigils and standing for whole days, O divinely wise father, thou didst 
cause all the movements of the flesh to subside, and, rejoicing, thou didst cry aloud: 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
With the powers of thy soul thou didst make subject the perversity of thy flesh, O 
divinely wise one; and thou didst receive the grace to drive away evil spirits and to 
wash away infirmities, O all-blessed one.  
Strengthened by divine power, O holy hierarch, thou didst vanquish all the hordes 
of the demons in that thou art the namesake of victory, and didst inherit a wreath of 
miracles from the Bestower of crowns.  
Theotokion: Thou wast adorned with spiritual beauties, haying conceived the 
Word Who is co-beginningless with the Father and given birth to Him in the flesh, O 
all-immaculate Virgin. Him do thou entreat on behalf of the world.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Manifestly adorned with meekness of soul, O holy hierarch, thou hast made thine 
abode in the land of the meek, in that thou art blessed.  
Watered by the streams of the gifts of the Spirit, O divinely wise and sacred 
Nicetas, thou dost pour forth healings upon those who desire them.  
Making thy life resplendent with the light of the virtues, as with priceless 
ornaments, O all-blessed one, thou wast adorned with the grace of miracles.  
Theotokion: O Bride of God, we wield thee as an invincible weapon against the 
enemy, for we have acquired thee as the confirmation and hope of our salvation.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
With Ignatius, O Nicetas, thou didst shine forth as a lamp of three lights, a sacred 
brotherhood, shining forth radiantly and imparting healings to the faithful.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Akin one to another in the flesh, O wise ones, ye have now been deemed worthy 
of true kinship in the Spirit, having in a manner all-pleasing unto God shared a single 
character.  
Eluding the destructive mire of heresies by rendering honorable veneration to the 
icons of Christ, O God-pleasing and holy hierarch Nicetas, saving that which had 
been created in His image.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, thou portal through which the Most High 
alone passed, open unto me the gates of repentance and the doors of salvation, 
preserving me from all harm.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”: 
Thou didst shine forth in the splendor of thy deeds, * and didst become an heir to 
the throne of the apostles, O venerable Nicetas; * and, wholly filled with divine 
doctrines, O father, * thou didst shine forth like the sun upon the flock. ** Where-
fore, we cry to thee: Rejoice, O adornment of Chalcedon!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Thou dost truly dwell with the holy hierarchs, O wise father, full of noetic 
radiance. Illumine us who cry: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
As a chief shepherd, as a blameless advocate of God, thou didst offer pure 
sacrifices unto Him, chanting in splendor: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, O Lord!  
Thou wast shown to be a shepherd, summoning the reason-endowed flock to the 
pasture of true doctrines with thy noetic pipes, O Nicetas, crying out: Blessed art 
Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Having adorned thy life with confession, O father, thou didst receive from the 
Spirit the true grace of healings, crying out: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, O Lord my God!  
Theotokion: That He might deify mankind, O Sovereign Lady, the Redeemer 
appeared as a man, receiving flesh from thy womb according to His desire. Blessed 
art thou among women, O most immaculate Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Manifestly receiving as the reward for thy great labors ineffable light, immortal life 
and a bridal-chamber which cannot be taken away, O venerable one, thou dost cry 
aloud, rejoicing, to Christ, the Bestower of crowns: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord!  
Seeking mercy through almsgiving, which thou didst provide for the poor, feeding 
the indigent, and clothing the naked, thereby winning for thyself a vesture of glory, O 
Nicetas, thou wast a true model for monastics, who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
Having become an all-comely temple of the divine Spirit through purity of mind, 
thou drivest away the spirits of wickedness, and washest away the infirmities of those 
who approach thee and cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Christ, the Lord of all, having made His abode within thy womb as 
was His good pleasure, showed thee forth as holier than the angels, O Virgin Mother; 
granting sanctification and enlightenment unto us who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Following the divine significance of thy name in a sacred manner, thou wast 
deemed worthy to show it forth in deed, O divinely blessed father Nicetas; and wast 
enriched with the gracious radiance of the Spirit, O divinely inspired one.  
Ye were shown to be enriched by the grace of the Trinity, O God-bearers, equally 
receiving therefrom the divine activity of healing, having lived pure and God-pleasing 
lives, O right wondrous ones.  
Today thy memory shineth forth with the radiance of the virtues more brightly 
than the sun, O father, illumining the whole world with miracles and enlightening the 
faithful, O most honored initiate of the sacred mysteries.  
Like bright day-stars were thou and the sacred Ignatius revealed to be, O father 
Nicetas. Wherefore, O pious and blessed ones, ever illumine those who praise you.  
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be an abode of the light of the Word Who 
shone forth from the Father before the morning-star, illumining the faithful and 
crowning the venerable, O only divinely joyous Virgin Maiden.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Nicetas our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
 
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Thou didst shine forth in the splendor of thy deeds, * and didst become an heir to 
the throne of the apostles, O venerable Nicetas; * and, wholly filled with divine 
doctrines, O father, * thou didst shine forth like the sun upon the flock. ** Where-
fore, we cry to thee: Rejoice, O adornment of Chalcedon!  
 
