--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 23rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER MICHAEL THE CONFESSOR, 
BISHOP OF SYNADA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion. 
And 3 for the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O blessed and divinely inspired father Michael, * as is meet, thou hast been 
deemed worthy to behold * the Well-spring of blessings, * the Fulfillment of the 
desire for the uttermost desires, * the true Blessedness * which all nature truly 
desireth. * O thy beauteous comeliness, O glorious one! * Rejoicing therein, thou 
standest now before Christ ** as a radiant hierarch.  
Arrayed in priestly vesture, * O God-pleasing father Michael, * thou didst hasten 
to the tribunal of the tyrant * and offer thyself to Christ; * and, adorned with twofold 
crowns, O blessed one, * thou didst look upon the ranks of the hierarchy. * O thine 
ineffable gladness, O most wise one, * in which thou wast truly deemed worthy ** to 
share, O divinely blessed one.  
Bedewed from on high, * O divinely wise father Michael, * thou didst divinely 
quench the fire of temptations * and pass through it unharmed; * and, rejoicing, O 
blessed hieromartyr, * thou wast splendidly added to the holy hierarchs who went 
before thee. * O thine ineffable and radiant habitation * wherein Christ hath now 
caused thee to dwell ** as an honored hierarch!  
But if this day fall during the fast, and Alleluia is sung instead of “God is the Lord ...,” 
we chant the following Stichera to the Theotokos first, in the same melody:  
Rejoice, thou enlightenment of men’s souls, * the forgiveness of the sinful, * the 
correction of the neglectful! * Rejoice, O consolation and joy, * helper of the 
sorrowful! * Rejoice, O good one, * thou healing of ailing souls! * Rejoice, mediatress 
and reconciliation before God, ** O pure one who art holier than all the seraphim!  
Having received flesh through thy blood, O pure one, * the pre-eternal God * 
hath shown thee to be an intercessor for all mankind. * Wherefore, deliver thy 
servants * from every misfortune and evil circumstance * and from the snares of the 
wicked enemy, * and grant that all the elect * who glorify and do thee homage ** may 
partake of radiant light.  
Save me, O most pure Lady, * who hast ineffably given birth to Christ the Savior; 
* for thee have I acquired as my sole intercessor, * an undefeatable rampart, * my 
protection and joy, * the divine consolation of my soul. * Wherefore, deliver me from 
the worm which sleepeth not * and from everlasting fire, ** O Mother of Christ God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Doxasticon from the Pentecostarion.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Or this Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
That I may magnify thee * with joyful voice, O pure one, * and glorify the depth 
of thy love for mankind, * save me from misfortunes * and rescue me from the soul-
destroying darts * of the invisible and most wicked foe; * for I set thee against him * 
as a firm and invincible weapon, ** O divine Bride, Mother of Christ God.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician * and healer of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hierarch and confessor, in Tone II: 
ODE I  
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Thou wast a holy hierarch of God, O wondrous father Michael, shining with the 
ineffable light of abstinence, thou wast a bearer of royal sanctity, shepherding the 
Church of Christ, O most blessed one.  
Discoursing with thy radiant mouth, thou didst piously transmit the doctrines of 
theology to all, O most noetically rich Michael; and, denouncing the blasphemies of 
heresies, thou wast a champion of piety, O most blessed one.  
As a vessel of divine gifts, O blessed and most praised Michael, thou didst mani-
festly give of them to all the faithful, having acquired a godly life and been vested 
with righteousness as with a robe.  
Thou didst continue to venerate with honor the sacred image of Christ and the 
Mother of God, O most sacred Michael, casting down the blasphemous speech of the 
heretics, and vanquishing them with thy words and sufferings.  
Theotokion: The supremely glorious Lord, the Sun which shone forth upon us 
from thy womb, O pure and most holy one, illumined all with His divine splendors, 
driving away all the gloomy darkness of the demons; for gloriously hath He been 
glorified.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
Through transitory things thou didst earn things which are lasting and abide 
forever, O divinely eloquent one; for living a different life, thou didst cry aloud: There 
is none as holy as our God, and none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!  
Divine grace was poured forth from thy lips, enlarging thy mouth, and having 
received the gifts of wisdom, thou didst cry aloud: There is none as holy as our God, 
and none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!  
Thou didst subdue the passions through abstinence, and illumining thy mind with 
divine vision, thou wast spiritually active, crying aloud: There is none as holy as our 
God, and none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!  
Theotokion: We hymn the most pure Theotokos Mary as the mediatress who hath 
made manifest our salvation. O ye divinely wise chant ye: There is none as 
immaculate as thee, O all-immaculate one, and none more pure than thee, O 
Sovereign Lady!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Having sanctified thyself with a perfect life, thou wast revealed to be a priest of 
God Most High, and, strengthened by Him, thou didst shut the mouths of the 
heretics which were opened against the icon of Christ; and persecuted thou didst 
finish thy course O father.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion,  
or this Theotokion in Tone I:  
O pure Virgin Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, thou sole intercessor and 
protection of the faithful: from tribulations, sorrows and cruel circumstances deliver 
all who place their trust in thee, O Maiden, and save our souls by thy divine 
supplications.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O Christ, 
Thine all-immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the 
Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, wherewith Thou hast 
saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Desiring crowns of glory, thou didst leave off pleasing the flesh, O most excellent 
initiate of the sacred mysteries; and didst offer thy whole life to God as a sacrifice of 
sweet savor.  
Limping away from the main path, the iconoclasts fell into the pit of heresy, and 
are now shown to be aliens; but thou, O most blessed one, by venerating the image of 
Christ, didst denounce them.  
Thou hast richly received the reward for thy sufferings, O most honored and 
blessed Michael, dwelling now with the heavenly hosts and dancing with the angels.  
Thy tongue was shown to be a pen of the Spirit, O most glorious Michael, being 
instructed to record the dispensation in the flesh of the Almighty Word, O thou who 
art most praised.  
Resplendent in the sacred and honorable vesture of thy priesthood, and adorned 
with confession, thou wast a sight for angels and men, O most honored one.  
Theotokion: Set my life aright, O Theotokos, directing it by the precepts of the 
Word Who assumed flesh from thee; and guide it toward the light, O Virgin Mother, 
Mary Bride of God.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
From thy youth thou didst offer thyself to the Word, revealed as sacred, thou dist 
offer the divine offering adorned with active vision, and, having reaped the fruit of 
wisdom, thou didst become a shepherd, O right pleasing Michael.  
The Word of God dwelt abundantly within thee, O divinely wise and blessed one, 
pouring forth rivers of doctrines, drinking whereof we are gladdened, manifestly 
having thee as a merciful mediator between us and Christ Who hath fashioned us.  
Perceiving thy radiance, O thou who art revealed by God, He Who hath adorned 
all things with divine power adorned thee with the myrrh of spiritual sanctity; for 
thou wast revealed to be a most wise priest of God.  
Theotokion: He Who shone forth pre-eternally from the Father, yet deigned to 
become like unto us in all things, made His abode within thee, O all-immaculate 
Mother of God, and was born of thee, being both man and omnipotent God.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Arrayed in the salvific garment of divine gladness, O most praised one, as is meet, 
thou didst receive from God a crown of confession.  
Having endured bitter imprisonment, O wise one, thou didst attain unto the broad 
expanse of paradise, where thou dost join chorus with the martyrs, O divinely wise 
and most noetically rich hierarch.  
As a disciple of Christ God, O blessed and divinely inspired one, thou didst 
emulate His sufferings, valiantly accepting tribulations for the sake of His Church.  
Theotokion: All the prophets, having noetically learned of thine ineffable 
birthgiving, O most pure one, disposed themselves spiritually, foretelling unto all the 
things of the future.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “‘As first-fruits ...”: 
As a most honorable hierarch and sacred sufferer for piety, * undaunted by the 
threats of the vile one, thou didst vanquish his heretical opposition, * crying aloud 
with a free voice: “I venerate the icon of Christ and His most pure Mother!” ** 
Wherefore, we honor thee, O Michael.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
The abominable beast could not bear the divine sound of thy tongue, O sacred 
Michael and condemned thee to banishment in a remote country; yet he was put to 
shame, beholding thy firmness, O sacred preacher.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
The most sacred assembly of Christ is guided by thy teachings, O most wise one; 
for thou wast an instrument sounded by the Spirit, O Michael, performer of the 
sacred mysteries, announcing the mighty works of the Almighty.  
Wisely didst thou denounce the infamous adherents of the blasphemous impiety of 
Manes, openly preaching the veneration of the most pure icon of Christ, the Mother 
of God and the saints, O venerable father Michael.  
Theotokion: Thou wast the beautiful vessel of the incarnation of the Word of 
God, O all-immaculate Virgin; for, as One blessed and exceedingly glorious, in His 
great loving-kindness He took me wholly upon Himself.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Standing before the judgment-seat, O Michael preacher of God, thou wast not 
daunted by the threats of the iniquitous, but cried out with an unrestrained voice: “I 
honor the most pure icon of Christ the Savior and all the saints!”  
With mighty steadfast character, O wise one, thou didst contend with those who 
fight against God, and wast shown to be the victor, manifest as such in deed and 
word, for it was fitting to honor the most pure icon of Christ the Savior and all the 
saints.  
Knowing that the veneration shown to icons passeth to their Prototype, O father, 
following the divinely inspired Scriptures and revealed as sacred thou didst teach all to 
honor the icon of Christ and all the saints.  
Theotokion: O pure one, thou dost unceasingly pour forth a stream of healings 
upon us, the faithful; and, drawing forth the abundant grace therefrom, we hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving and supremely exalt it throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Shining now with boundless enlightenment, O most noetically rich confessor, as 
thou standest before the great Light, thou hast been deemed worthy to receive the 
end which thou didst desire, and hastening toward which thou didst run, living in 
piety, O right wondrous one.  
Thou hast been counted worthy to behold the radiance which passeth 
understanding, O father, and which thou didst manifestly acquire on earth. Entreat 
Christ in mediation, that He deliver thy disciples who now praise and honor thee, O 
right wondrous one.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Strengthened by divine grace, with the effulgence of thy wisdom and the rays 
emitted thereby thou didst burn up the audacity of those who fought against God, O 
wise and wondrous Michael, sacred preacher of Christ, having acquired a well-spring 
of light within thyself.  
Theotokion: Thy womb O most immaculate one, like a fleece, having received the 
sweet dew of heaven, hath given birth for us to Him Who bestoweth immortality 
upon those who piously hymn Him and proclaim thee to be the most praised 
Theotokos. 
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
As a most honorable hierarch and sacred sufferer for piety, * undaunted by the 
threats of the vile one, thou didst vanquish his heretical opposition, * crying aloud 
with a free voice: “I venerate the icon of Christ and His most pure Mother!” ** 
Wherefore, we honor thee, O Michael.  
 
 
