--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 27th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR THERAPONT  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs, O Lord ...”: 
The all-glorious Therapont, illumined by divine acts, was deemed worthy to 
behold the beauty of Christ with the eyes of his heart, having pleased Him by his 
suffering. Wherefore, by grace he ever healeth sufferings of soul and body for those 
who have recourse unto him with faith.  
As a well-spring of living water the most noetically rich Therapont poureth forth 
streams of healings and utterly washeth away the defilement of grievous ailments 
from all who have recourse to him with faith. By his entreaties, O Lord, grant unto all 
great mercy.  
The wondrous Therapont, soaked in the dye of his blood, fashioned a truly most 
splendid garment of sanctity; and arraying himself magnificently therein, he hath 
entered the Holy of holies. Through his supplications, O Lord, grant great mercy 
unto all.  
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
O Sovereign Lady, rescue me from the hands of the serpent, the slayer of men, 
who warreth against me with deception, to slaughter me utterly. Crush his jaws, I 
pray, and annul his machinations, that delivered from his talons, I may magnify thy 
power.  
O all-immaculate one, I am the barren tree which produceth not the fruit of 
salvation; wherefore, I tremble at the thought of being felled, that, wretch that I am, I 
shall be cast into the unquenchable fire. Wherefore, I fall down before thee: Deliver 
me therefrom, and by thy mediation before thy Son show me to be fruitful.  
The deadly dart of desire hath wounded my heart: I have been wounded by 
ignorance and am incurably ill. O Mother of God, disdain me not, wretched as I am, 
but grant me healing, in that thou hast given birth to the only merciful Lord and 
Savior.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
My thoughts are impure, * and my lips are false, * all my works are defiled. * What, 
then, shall I do? * How shall I meet the Judge? * O Virgin Sovereign Lady, * entreat 
the Lord, thy Son and Creator, * that He accept my soul in repentance, ** in that He 
alone is compassionate.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Stavrotheotokion: “I cannot bear O my child, to behold Thee, * Who dost grant 
life and health unto all, * hung upon the Tree; * for of old those who were lulled into 
the sleep of death * by the fruit of the transgression * have been awakened * and 
granted divine and salvific life and health by Thee”, * thus said the Virgin weeping, ** 
whom we magnify. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VI: 
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Joining chorus with the sacred choirs in the heavens, O Therapont, do thou ever 
deliver from sufferings and cruel misfortunes those who on earth honor thy holy 
memory.  
Thy sacred and honored suffering which took place in the world moveth the 
faithful to glorify thee splendidly who wast made bold by grace, O wise Therapont.  
The noetic Sun, showing thee forth as a star divinely radiant in the light of thy 
struggles, illumineth with the radiance of miracles the faithful who praise thee in 
sacred manner.  
Theotokion: The sacred choir of the prophets foretold from afar that thou 
wouldst become the Theotokos, O pure one, who art higher than the cherubim and 
all creation.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Thou wast a favorite of Christ, truly bearing thine appropriate name, O martyr, 
and thou ever healest infirmities of soul and body.  
Thy blood, mingled with chrism, rendereth thy priesthood yet more splendid, O 
holy hierarch and pastor, thou martyr and physician of the sick; wherefore, we praise 
thee.  
Thou dost heal the grievous sufferings of those who approach with faith, causing 
sicknesses to cease, and washing away the harm caused by evil spirits, by the divine 
invocation of Christ, O all-blessed one.  
Theotokion: The mind of man is unable to understand the ineffable depths of thy 
birthgiving, O pure one; for, pouring Himself forth into thy womb in His loving-
kindness, God hath wholly restored me.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
O favorite of Christ, having suffered lawfully, thou wast shown to be a true 
hierarch and martyr. Wherefore, we beseech thee: Cure now the persistent sufferings 
of our souls, O holy one, and entreat Christ, Who willeth mercy and is the Lover of 
mankind.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone I:  
Do thou guide to the path of repentance, we who have ever wandered away into 
the trackless wastes of evil and have angered the supremely good Lord, O blessed 
Mary who knewest not wedlock, thou refuge of despairing men and dwelling-place of 
God.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O Christ, 
Thine all-immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the 
Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, wherewith Thou hast 
saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Having first rid thy soul of the tumult of the passions, O sacred minister, thou 
didst receive the holy and divine anointing, and at thine end wast adorned with the 
wreath of a spiritual spiritual athlete.  
Thou art seen ever shining with divine signs and wonders, illumining the whole 
world, and receiving grace from God, O right wondrous holy hierarch.  
Thou didst first tend the people with grace and un-bloody sacrifices, sacredly 
hallowed as a holy hierarch; and being slaughtered like a lamb, thou wast brought to 
the Lord.  
Theotokion: We bless the Virgin as a gateway leading to the divine entry, as the 
divine garden of paradise, as the noetic place of sanctity, as the beauty of Jacob.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Illumined with divine radiance, thou wast shown to be a most radiant star, 
enlightening the world with divine signs through the Spirit of God, O holy hierarch 
Therapont, blessed of God.  
As a sacred wholeburnt offering, as a pleasing oblation, as a perfect sacrifice, thou 
didst offer thyself to the Word Who suffered in the flesh, O holy hierarch father 
Therapont, becoming a martyr.  
Having truly filled the cup of confession most beautifully, O venerable Therapont, 
thou dost give all to drink of thy mighty suffering, calling them with exalted 
proclamation.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: After thine awesome birthgiving thou didst remain a Virgin as thou 
wast before; for God was born, accomplishing all by His will, O Mary who knewest 
not wedlock, who art full of the grace of God.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Thy manner of living was divine, thy life godly, and thy death glorious, resplendent 
with the beauties of martyrdom, illumining with the splendors of miracles the hearts 
of those who hymn thee.  
We recognize thee as a fruitful branch of the true noetic Vine, O divinely wise one, 
bearing the true grapes of confession which exude the most excellent wine of 
patience.  
Thy temple hath been shown to be a place of sacred healing, easing all the pangs 
of the infirm by grace and releasing them from ailments, O divinely wise and right 
wondrous hierarch. 
Theotokion: The Word seedlessly assumed flesh in thy womb, and revealed 
Himself as perfect man, restoring nature in a godly manner as He alone knew how, O 
all-immaculate one, thou portal which held God.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Having subdued the threefold billows of the passions, O venerable one, suffering, 
thou didst extinguish the conflagration of falsehood with the flood of thy blood, O 
venerable Therapont, hieromartyr of Christ.  
Thou wast consecrated by the anointing of chrism, O venerable initiate of the 
mysteries, and, having perfected priests and the people, as a pastor thou didst finish 
the good race, being slain for Christ, O wise martyr Therapont.  
With the torrents of thy blood thou didst drown the hordes of the enemy, and 
with the radiance of miracles thou dost destroy the gloom of the passions, O 
Therapont, revealing thyself to be a truly wondrous physician of the sick.  
Theotokion: He Who sitteth un-circumscribed in the bosom of the Father, O pure 
one, now sitteth, circumscribed, in thy womb, encompassed by thy body, that He 
might save Adam, by becoming the new Adam.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thou didst offer un-bloody sacrifices unto God and wast slaughtered like a pure 
and innocent lamb; and thou didst abolish demonic sacrifices, O holy hierarch 
Therapont, thou adornment of spiritual athletes.  
Having become a resident of paradise, thou wast shown to be a companion of the 
holy angels, O martyred passion-bearer and a minister of Christ, resplendent with the 
radiance of martyrdom.  
Thou didst bring low the prideful serpent with humility of heart, having opposed 
him manfully, O holy hierarch, dying thy priestly vesture in the blood of martyrdom.  
Theotokion: Delivered from the primal curse by thy birthgiving, O all-blessed and 
divinely joyous Maiden, we send up to thee the cry of Gabriel: Rejoice, O cause of the 
salvation of all!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Desiring to behold the glory of the Almighty, thou didst endure an unjust death 
ascending on thy blood as upon a chariot, O glorious hierarch, and soaring aloft to 
the heavens, where, rejoicing, thou hast found rest.  
Like light, like the dawn hast thou shone forth upon us, illumining the ends of the 
earth with radiant beams, O holy hierarch and divinely inspired pastor, freeing us 
from the gloom of the passions. Wherefore, we honor and piously bless thee.  
As thou art with the choirs of the patriarchs and martyrs, the apostles, the 
righteous and the venerable, O divinely blessed one, pray with them, that Christ grant 
forgiveness of sins unto all who piously observe thy divine memorial.  
The magnificence of thy temple, ever illumined with the effulgence of miracles, 
doth free from the gloom of the passions, those who with faith approach in the Spirit, 
causing sicknesses to cease, O martyred hierarch, and right wondrous pastor.  
Theotokion: With thy light illumine me, I pray O Virgin, divinely blessed among 
women, and deliver me from everlasting fire, that, as is meet, I may magnify and 
glorify thee, and hymn thy mighty acts.  
 
