--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 20th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR THALALEUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
When the great turbulence of the lands under heaven * laid hold of thee, * and a 
storm smote thy soul, O all-glorious one, * steered by thine exalted name as with a 
rudder * thou didst traverse unharmed * the abyss of greatly painful tortures; * and 
having attained unto the harbors of the Most High, * thou wast filled with everlasting 
calm, ** O martyr Thalaleus.  
Lifted up upon a tree, * thy side lacerated * by the savagery of the torturers, * thou 
didst emulate the suffering * of the Master of creation, O glorious one; * and 
denounce their erroneous thought, * reviling the delusion of idolatry * and manifestly 
strengthening piety, ** O great-martyr Thalaleus.  
At the command of the tyrant * thou wast committed to the depths of the sea, * 
yet through divine grace * remained un-drowned, O most wise one; * and with the 
torrents of thy blood * drowned the noetic Pharaoh * and his army, O divinely wise 
one, * wherefore, strengthened greatly by Christ, ** thou didst commit him to utter 
destruction.  
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
O most holy Bride of God, * deliver my lowly soul * from condemnation and 
grievous transgressions, * and by thy supplications rescue me from death * and grant 
that on the day of trial * I may receive the justification * which the assemblies of the 
saints have received; * and show me to be cleansed before the end ** by repentance 
and the outpourings of tears.  
With the showers of the most holy Spirit, O most pure one, * bedew thou my 
mind, * O thou who hast given birth to Christ, * the Drop Who by His compassions 
* hath utterly washed away the countless iniquities of men; * and dry up the well-
spring of my passions, * and ever grant unto me * a torrent of living sustenance ** by 
thy supplications.  
O Virgin who hast given birth to God my Savior, * by thy supplications grant unto 
me * the excellent and saving cure of repentance, * torrents of tears, * the thought of 
the dread and awesome hour * and the inexorable judgment, * that I may escape * 
terrifying torment ** and receive divine grace.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Tens of thousands of times have I promised * to repent of mine offenses, O most 
pure one, * yet the cherished habits of mine evil ways * will not depart from me; * 
wherefore, I cry unto thee * and fall down, praying: * O Sovereign Lady, rescue me 
from such tyranny, * guiding me to things that are higher, ** which are nigh unto 
salvation.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
The Church of Christ, right beautifully arrayed with a robe empurpled in the blood 
of the martyrs, doth boast in, and is beautified, by the passion-bearers.  
Receiving invincible power from God, O passion-bearer Thalaleus, thou didst 
battle alone against myriads of enemies in the struggles of martyrdom.  
Having cast aside the matter of the flesh and lived the life of the immaterial ones 
on earth, O Thalaleus, thou hast been numbered among the angelic choirs.  
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving, O pure Theotokos, we earthborn mortals have 
truly been borne up from earth to the heights of heaven and numbered among the 
angelic choirs.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
The unction of Christ anointed thy head, O glorious Thalaleus; wherefore, thou 
couldst not bear the unction of falsehood, but poured forth thy blood as a healing 
laver upon all, washing away the blood of ungodliness from the earth.  
Thou didst make thy flesh subject to Him Who accepted the Cross for thy sake, O 
blessed martyr of Christ, and hast therefore been deemed worthy of the life of 
incorruption.  
The tyrant fell beneath thy feet, O glorious Thalaleus, felled by thy patient opposi-
tion.  
Theotokion: Thy birthgiving hath loosed the debts of our offenses, and bound all 
the faithful to righteousness.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Shown to be radiant, O passion-bearer, thou didst dispel the darkness of 
ungodliness, and didst set thyself apart for torments and death. Wherefore, having 
finished thy great struggles, thou hast received a great inheritance and glory which is 
nowise passeth away, O valiant spiritual athlete, glorious Thalaleus.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
After God, it is to thy divine protection that I, the lowly one, flee, O Theotokos, 
and falling down, I pray: Have mercy, O most pure one, for my sins have engulfed 
me, and I fear torments and tremble. O pure Lady, entreat thy Son, that He deliver 
me them.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
In the tribunal of suffering, as in a bridal-chamber, Christ received thee, O 
glorious one, illumined with the radiance of the virtues; and He hath glorified thee.  
The Master hath given thee to all the faithful as a source of healing, O Thalaleus, 
and by thy divine supplications thou dost heal the sufferings of our souls.  
The torrents of thy blood pour forth the myrrh of healing upon all, driving away 
the stench of infirmities and sorrows, O Thalaleus.  
Theotokion: Possessing thee as an inexhaustible treasury, O Lady, we all receive 
abundant gifts of miracles through thee.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
The cloud of pain and torments did not cover the radiance of thine endurance; for 
thou didst shine forth more brightly than the sun, O passion-bearer.  
O most glorious Thalaleus, having grown noetically in the Lebanon of the Faith, 
thou didst breathe forth all the sweet fragrance of martyrdom.  
Arrayed in the armor of suffering, O wise Thalaleus, thou didst ascend to the 
divine heights of grace, mounting aloft on the air.  
Theotokion: Having cleansed my defiled soul of passionate thoughts by thy 
supplications, O Bride of God, set me before God, purified.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Worshiping the living God, the Fashioner of all creation, thou didst reject the 
worship of the earthly, O Thalaleus; wherefore, the Judge of the contest hath glorified 
thee in sufferings and miracles.  
Thou didst put forth offshoots like a fruitful olive-tree, O wise one, stretching 
forth thy mind to the heights of patience; wherefore, thou hast poured forth the oil of 
miracles upon the faithful, O martyr Thalaleus.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Noetically providing the lamp of thy soul with the oil of the virtues, O glorious 
martyr Thalaleus, thou didst light it with the fire of suffering. Wherefore, thou hast 
attained unto the divine bridal-chamber.  
Theotokion: We mortals have been rendered immortal through the divine grace of 
thy birthgiving; and delivered from the primal corruption, O most pure Theotokos, 
we have been adorned with the vesture of incorruption.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Shown forth to be a fellow sufferer and warrior with the martyrs, * thou wast an 
excellent warrior of the King of glory, * and by trials and torture didst trample 
underfoot the arrogance of the idolaters. * Wherefore, we hymn thine honored 
memory, ** O wise Thalaleus.  
Ikos: With songs and laudations let us all now hymn and piously praise the brave 
servant of the truth of Christ as a steadfast spiritual athlete and preacher of the Faith, 
who cast down the wiles of the enemy and denounced all the soul-destroying 
madness of the idols; for having stood before the most iniquitous ones, like a lamb in 
the midst of wolves, he piously proclaimed the law of the Lord; and having piously 
kept it in oneness of mind, let us hymn the honored memory of the most wise 
Thalaleus.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Having ascended to the heights of Christ’s piety, O martyr Thalaleus, thou didst 
revile the falsehoods of idolatry which drag men down, ceaselessly crying aloud: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Founded firmly upon the rock of the Creator’s love and His divine Faith, O martyr 
Thalaleus, thou didst remain unshaken by the threefold billows of tortures, hymning 
Him in thanksgiving as thy Benefactor.  
Drawing forth abundant waters of the miracles of the grace of the Spirit, thou dost 
distribute them in abundance unto all who ask, O Thalaleus, crying: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: That He might draw all to the glory of heaven, O Theotokos, the 
Creator of all things was well-pleased to be born from thee, and to mingle with us in 
the flesh, as our beneficent God, Who is the Lover of mankind.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having put aside the temporal wisdom of the Greeks who boast in their subtleties, 
O glorious martyr, thou didst draw down from thyself an understanding which faileth 
not, the unshakable discourse of the Master and God of all, crying out to Him 
unceasingly: O ye Youths bless, O ye priests praise, O ye people, supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Carried above earthly things by the Spirit, O Thalaleus, beholding the Creator and 
Redeemer in purity of mind, thou didst endure pangs, suffering with valiant soul, and 
crying aloud: O ye Youths bless, O ye priests praise, O ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Having dyed thy vesture with the blood of martyrdom, thou didst noetically clothe 
thyself therein, adorned as with a royal garment, and joining chorus with all the 
spiritual athletes and martyrs in the mansions of heaven, thou dost unceasingly cry 
aloud: O ye Youths bless, O ye priests praise, O ye people, supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Let the only Immortal One, Who by His word brought all things into 
being from nothingness, and Who, in His loving-kindness as God and Benefactor, 
assumed human flesh from thee, O pure one, renewing all who chant: O ye Youths 
bless, O ye priests praise, O ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
With the flowers of the virtues thou didst adorn the noetic and woven wreath of 
suffering as with precious stones, O passion-bearer Thalaleus, beautifying it with thy 
comely wounds. And arrayed therewith, thou hast entered into the heavenly bridal-
chamber.  
Thou wast wounded with the noetic arrow of patience, yet by wounding thy body 
the enemy, the author of evil, grew weak and fell to the ground. But thou, 
strengthened in spirit, O Thalaleus, wast taken up to the heights of heaven, hymning 
the Lord Who strengthened thee.  
The drops of thy blood have been shown to be healing for the faithful, O 
Thalaleus, washing away infirmities, pouring forth miracles of healing, extinguishing 
the burning of evils by the grace of Christ, the Bestower of crowns, and bedewing 
those who glorify thee in hymns.  
The rewards thou hast received for thy sufferings have become known to all 
mankind, O Thalaleus; for they pour forth gifts far surpassing our hopes, and 
therewith do thou visit us who piously and faithfully honor thy struggles, petitioning 
thee with all our heart.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: O pure Lady, to the most radiant and divine desire of thy Son and 
God do thou elevate the understanding of my soul, which tendeth to look downward, 
that ever enkindled and captivated by His love, I may draw nigh unto Him through 
virtue.  
  
AT LITURGY 
 
Kontakion of the holy Martyr, in Tone III:  
Shown forth to be a fellow sufferer and warrior with the martyrs, * thou wast an 
excellent warrior of the King of glory, * and by trials and torture didst trample 
underfoot the arrogance of the idolaters. * Wherefore, we hymn thine honored 
memory, ** O wise Thalaleus.  
 
