--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE CARPUS, ONE OF THE SEVENTY 
APOSTLES  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised apostles ...”: 
Making thy mind divine * with pleasing effulgence, * thou wast enlightened, O 
most noetically rich apostle, * and didst go forth to preach Christ * teaching the 
people to worship Him * as the Lover of mankind. * And now, do thou make 
supplication, * that He grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
Revealed as a most radiant star, * with divine splendors and doctrines * thou dost 
ever illumine the ends of the whole world, * O blessed one, * and by grace dost dispel 
* the gloom of affliction from everyone. * And now, do thou make supplication, * 
that He grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
Making the perfect and un-bloody sacrifice unto God, * thou wast slain for Him, 
O martyr, * and didst offer thyself * upon the noetic altar * as a sacrifice of sweet 
savor, * O most noetically rich Apostle Carpus * And now, do thou make 
supplication, * that He grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion. 
Or this Theotokion, in the same melody:  
O all-hymned Sovereign Lady, * thou hope and confirmation of the faithful, * 
refuge and help, * we beseech thee: * from all misfortune preserve thy servants * who 
worship thine Offspring with faith. * Him do thou entreat, * that He grant unto our 
souls ** peace and great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb and Sovereign Lady * beheld 
her Lamb upon the Cross, * having neither form nor beauty, * she said, lamenting: 
“Woe is me! * Wither hath Thy beauty gone, * O Thou Who art most sweet? * Where 
is thy majesty? * Where the shining grace of Thine image, * O my most beloved 
Son?”  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III:  
O holy Apostle Carpus, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy apostle, the acrostic whereof is: “With divine love I praise the 
glorious Carpus”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: I will sing unto Thee, O Lord my God, * for Thou hast led Thy people 
out of the bondage of Egypt, * and hast drowned in the waters * the chariots 
and the might of Pharaoh. 
By thy supplications, O apostle, fill with divine light those who celebrate thy 
luminous and sacred, glorious and most honored memory with love.  
Relying wholly upon the Master, thou didst keep His precious laws intact, teaching 
good laws to the iniquitous peoples, O apostle.  
Having loved the transcendent Mind in mystic vision and been illumined in mind, 
O all-blessed and sacred one, thou wast revealed to be a secondary luminary.  
Theotokion: O Virgin thou didst ineffably give birth, and restore the laws of 
nature; wherefore, we call thee blessed, O Mary Bride of God.  
ODE III  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
Thou wast a harp struck by the Spirit, O all-blessed one, and thy tongue was 
divinely moved, proclaiming the mighty acts of our Savior and God.  
Having the beginningless Word guiding thee and manifestly strengthening thee, O 
Carpus, thou didst show the ungodly the ways of salvation.  
O glorious Carpus, proclaiming the preaching of salvation to creation as a God-
pleasing holy hierarch, thou didst endure much persecution and tribulation.  
Theotokion: O Birthgiver of God, thou didst ineffably give birth to Him Who 
shone forth from the Father before all time, as a little Babe. Wherefore, we glorify 
thee.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Receiving the divine effulgence of the Comforter, O most wise Carpus, thou didst 
illumine those darkened by ignorance; and having passed over to the kingdom on 
high, thou standest before the King of all, ever entreating Christ God, that He grant 
us great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion:  
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence when He took flesh in thy 
womb, the one Lord remained God though He had become a man; and even after thy 
birthgiving He preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: For the sake of love for Thine image, * O compassionate One, * Thou 
didst ascend the cross * and the nations melted away. * For Thou, O Lover of 
mankind, * art my strength and my praise. 
Setting the multitude of the faithful like stones, thou didst make them temples of 
the Holy Spirit on the rock of piety, O divinely wise apostle.  
Making them new through baptism, thou didst save those who had grown old 
through corrupt morals, O divinely blessed one, and they now glorify Christ our God.  
Revealing the mystery of Him Who hath covered the heavens with virtue, O 
divinely wise one, thou didst draw the nations to the proper understanding of Him, 
driving away the darkness.  
Theotokion: O Birthgiver of God and Maiden, the God-bearer noetically beheld 
thee as the great and overshadowed mountain from whence our God hath come in 
the flesh.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Do Thou O Lord send down upon us * Thine enlightenment, and free 
us * from the gloom of transgression, O Good One, * granting us Thy peace. 
As an excellent orchard-keeper, thou hast shown mankind the Tree of life, eating 
of which he shall live forever, O apostle, preacher of Christ.  
As an apostle and preacher to the nations, an honored teacher and initiate of the 
mysteries, sacred in discourse, O Carpus, thou standest before the Master in gladness.  
Like a never-waning star thou hast come from the East, shedding light upon the 
whole world with the rays of thy words and illumining it with sacred images, O 
hierarch and apostle.  
Theotokion: Wash away now the defilement of my soul and body, O blessed one, 
with thy merciful gaze, that I may hymn and magnify thee as is meet, O all-hymned 
one.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
Through divine grace the shrine of thy relics doth pour forth torrents of healings 
upon those in need, O holy hierarch; taking away sufferings and drowning the 
unclean spirits.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thy discourse and the great revelation of thy miracles, delivering men from 
irrationality, O glorious Carpus, have guided the lost to piety.  
Enlivened by divine power, O apostle, and destroying the serpent who uttered 
blasphemy against the Highest, thou hast saved those devoured by him.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, without pain thou hast given birth to the 
Creator Who taketh away our pain and toil, granting mankind the food which 
requireth no travail.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
Illumined by the great outpouring of thy miracles, * the Church hath ever acquired 
thee * O Apostle Carpus, * as a most radiant star. ** Save those who with faith honor 
thy memory.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Dispelling sickness by thy proclamation, healing sufferings by the sign of the Cross 
alone, thou didst announce the preaching of salvation, O Carpus, initiate of the 
mysteries, illumining those in darkness.  
In nowise afraid of the princes of wrath, thou didst courageously dedicate thyself 
to the suffering of painful labors, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Berea hath set thee forth as a divine enlightener illumined by the Lord, O Carpus, 
excellently illumining it with divine visitations.  
Theotokion: As one more spacious than the heavens, O Virgin, thou didst receive 
in thy womb the infinite Word Who delivereth the human race from all confinement.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: He Who was nailed to the Cross in the flesh, * hath shown it to be a 
weapon for our salvation, * O ye children, supremely exalt Christ our God 
throughout the ages.  
Ministering unto the wise Paul, thy guide in divine journeys, O holy hierarch, thou 
didst impart the doctrines of salvation unto all the saved.  
Thou wast shown to be a radiant dawn illumining the whole world with light, O 
right wondrous one, and as a herald thou hast driven away the profound darkness of 
ignorance.  
Working miracles through the invocation of the Father, the Spirit and the incarnate 
Word, O wise one, thou didst convince the wise Greeks to worship the One Essence 
in three Hypostases.  
Theotokion: O Birthgiver of God, thou hast been revealed to be a heaven which 
hath shone forth upon us the Sun of righteousness, illumining us all to the 
comprehension of divine knowledge.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: Thy birthgiving was revealed to be incorrupt, * God came forth from 
thy womb, * and He appeared upon earth in mortal flesh * and dwelt among 
mankind; * Wherefore we all magnify thee, O Theotokos. 
Seeing God ascending into the highest in the flesh with glory, O Carpus, thou wast 
numbered among the seven disciples and didst depart with them, showing thyself to 
be a divine preacher.  
Thou wast sent like a lamb among wolves, O Carpus, turning them to an 
understanding of salvation by the word of truth, and transforming their character to 
piety, O divinely eloquent one.  
Thou wast shown to be a converser with the angels, the apostles and the martyrs, 
who reposed wondrously in piety, O divinely eloquent Apostle Carpus. And joining 
with them in gladsome chorus, be thou mindful of us.  
Treading the earth, O Carpus, thou didst sanctify it, proclaiming the Holy Gospel 
with faith, and leading souls to the life-bestowing Word. Wherefore, He giveth thee a 
heavenly inheritance.  
Theotokion: We offer unto thee the cry of Gabriel, O Virgin, crying out: Rejoice, 
O light cloud! Rejoice, O un-ploughed earth which hath produced the comely Grain, 
the Nurturer of all creation!  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III:  
O holy Apostle Carpus, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls 
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
Illumined by the great outpouring of thy miracles, * the Church hath ever acquired 
thee * O Apostle Carpus. * as a most radiant star, ** Save those who with faith honor 
thy memory.  
 
