--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR BASILISCUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Reigning like a king, thou didst receive * the kingdom which abideth forever, * O 
glorious Basiliscus, * and standing before the King of hosts, * thou dost rejoice with 
all the ranks of angels. * And with them, O blessed one, * thou dost unceasingly 
chant divine hymnody, * radiantly illumined ** by splendors and divine communion.  
When, rejoicing, thou didst walk * the path of martyrdom, O most praised one, * 
they pierced thy feet with nails, * binding them fast; * and therewith thou didst 
trample upon the head of the enemy * and utterly crushing it, O glorious one, * thou 
didst tread mightily * the paths of heaven, ** revealing thyself to the Master as 
victorious.  
Thy supplication first caused * a barren tree to put forth fruit, * and a spring put 
forth living water; * by the fountain of thy blood the earth was sanctified, * and the 
air was hallowed by the passage of thy soul, * O most noetically rich martyr. * 
Wherefore, with faith, O Basiliscus, * we celebrate thy holy and most festive feast-
day, ** whereon thou didst struggle lawfully.  
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
O most holy Bride of God, * deliver my lowly soul * from condemnation and 
grievous transgressions, * and by thy supplications rescue me from death * and grant 
that on the day of trial * I may receive the justification * which the assemblies of the 
saints have received; * and show me forth as cleansed before the end ** by 
repentance and outpourings of tears.  
With the showers of the most holy Spirit, O most pure one, * bedew thou my 
mind, * O thou who hast given birth to Christ, * the Drop Who by His compassions 
* hath utterly washed away the countless iniquities of men; * and dry up the well-
spring of my passions, * and ever grant unto me * a torrent of living sustenance ** by 
thy supplications.  
O Virgin who hast given birth to God my Savior, * by thy supplications grant unto 
me * the excellent and saving cure * of repentance, * torrents of tears, * the thought 
of the dread and awesome hour * and the inexorable judgment, * that I may escape 
terrifying torment ** and receive divine grace.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Tens of thousands of times have I promised * to repent of mine offenses, O most 
pure one, * yet the cherished habits of mine evil ways * will not depart from me; * 
wherefore, I cry unto thee * and fall down, praying: * O Sovereign Lady, rescue me 
from such tyranny, * guiding me to things that are higher, ** which are nigh unto 
salvation.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof is: 
 “I Joseph, praise Basiliscus the all-great one”, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
In the kingdom of heaven, O much suffering martyr, entreat Christ the King, that 
He save those who reverently praise this thy radiant festival, that they may come to 
share in it with thee.  
Justly didst thou hold the flesh in contempt, as that which would become corrupt, 
and wholly strengthened by the love of Christ, O most noetically rich martyr, 
enduring tortures, and manfully denouncing the delusion of idolatry.  
O Basiliscus, Illumined by the enlightenment of the most holy Spirit, thou didst 
pass through the night of ignorance, and through the radiance of sufferings wast 
revealed to be like the sun, splendidly illumining all creation.  
Theotokion: Seeing thee with his mind O Maiden, Gideon foretold that thy most 
pure womb would be like a fleece, receiving Him who is the Dew of heaven and 
Who, drying up the sea of ungodliness, givest drink to those yearning for 
understanding.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Extinguishing the conflagration of idolatry with the blood of martyrdom O martyr, 
thou dost now rejoice and delight in the torrent of true sustenance.  
Parting from thee, the martyr of the Trinity, the two chosen spiritual athletes, 
departed unto Christ.  
Having departed from thy body, thou didst await those who suffered with thee, 
confessing Christ the Lord, the King of all, O much suffering Basiliscus.  
Theotokion: Purest of all O maiden, let me ever have thee guiding me toward the 
virtues and leading me to the ways of repentance.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Rejoicing, thou standest now before the one King, sacredly arrayed in a splendid 
diadem and in vesture empurpled by thy blood, and deified by pure communion. 
Wherefore, celebrating thine all-holy memory today, we hymn thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion:  
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Rising to work the soil of thy soul as with a plough, O martyr, thou didst produce 
the grain of suffering an hundredfold, storing it up in the granaries of God.  
Thou didst hear a sacred voice from on high, O most blessed one, announcing to 
thee the end of thy suffering and enrolling thee in the choirs of the martyrs.  
In showing steadfast opposition, O glorious one thou didst endure to be fettered 
with chains, loosing every bond of falsehood.  
Strangling Satan with the cords of thy divine pangs, O passion-bearer, thou hast 
been adorned with a crown of victory, O martyr Basiliscus.  
Theotokion: He Who is one in essence with the Father deigned to assume flesh 
from thy blood, as He was well pleased, O all-immaculate one, showing Himself to be 
like unto men in all things.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Bound by the power of the Spirit to suffer lawfully, O divinely wise martyr, thou 
didst put the iniquitous ones to shame.  
As one who boldly trod the path of martyrdom, O glorious one, thou didst shatter 
the darts of the enemy.  
Speared by nails, driven through thy feet O divinely wise one, thou didst utterly 
crush the head of the adverse foe.  
Theotokion: In truth O Theotokos, thou didst give birth to the incomprehensible 
and unapproachable God, in the guise of the flesh.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Lifted up and bound to a dry tree, thou didst preach Him Who had been likewise 
lifted up upon the Tree; and by the sweet sprinkling of thy supplications thou didst 
show it forth as well watered, and richly adorned with leaves, unto the confirmation 
of the pious and the glory of thy pangs, O Basiliscus.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Iniquitous and lawless ones unjustly bound thee who had been freed from the 
carnal passions, and pierced thee with nails of iron, forcing thee to make a long 
march, thereby sanctifying the ground upon which thou traversed with thy blood, O 
much suffering martyr.  
Standing with thy hands bound, thou didst lift up the eyes of thy heart to God, and 
entreated Him O blessed one, to cause a spring of living water to pour forth for thine 
all-glorious memory and the healing of men’s souls.  
Theotokion: Come thou and heal my broken and wretched soul of its habitual 
passions, O Virgin, for thou hast ineffably given birth to the Physician of souls and 
bodies. Save me who set my hope on thee, O all-immaculate one.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”: 
Thou wast shown to be mighty and manly in suffering and all-wondrous in 
miracles, * and manifestly bearing forth the name of Christ, thou didst put the tyrant 
to shame. * Wherefore, we honor thee, O most honored Basiliscus, ever crying aloud: 
** Rejoice, O splendid adornment of martyrs!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Thou O most blessed one, wast shown to all to be an adornment of the martyrs, 
and now dwelling in the most splendid habitations, by thy supplications drive the 
stormy winds of the world, far from us who honor thee with love.  
Shown to be the habitation of the Trinity, O wise one, thou didst cast down the 
temples of the idols and chant unto the Master: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages!  
The Master bestowed honor upon thee when thou didst suffer mightily, setting at 
naught the machinations of the enemy and singing melodiously: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
He who wast shown to be a second firmament, Basiliscus, acquired martyrdom, 
and like the sun shone in sacred radiance, and in the fullness of his miracles, radiated 
like the stars, adorning the heavens throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: Ever beholding the Virgin of whom the great Isaiah, through the 
divine Spirit, said would conceive God in her womb and give birth to Him, we chant 
unto Him: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
As thou wast shown to be a victor over tyrants and the spirits of evil, O glorious 
one, thou dost now unceasingly chant unto Him Who strengthened thee: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Lo! Thou didst die unto the world, steadfastly following the Master Who hath 
breathed life into the dead, O glorious martyr Basiliscus, and thou chantest: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Lo! Enduring the torturing of thy body with steadfastness of soul, O divinely wise 
one, thou joinest chorus with the divine and incorporeal angels, offering praise to 
God and crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: God hath revealed thee to be more spacious than the heavens, O 
most holy Maiden, having contained within thy womb Him Who delivereth from the 
constraint of the evil one all who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
Raising the sail of the Cross, thou didst traverse the stormy seas of martyrdom, 
and thereby reach the calm haven of the kingdom, and like a goodly merchant, thou 
didst deliver the freight of thy piety unto Christ our God, the King of all.  
Even as of old Elijah the Tishbite called down fire from heaven, so didst thou O 
blessed one, call down flame by thy supplications, and thereby utterly consume the 
false fame of idols, burning down the temples of demons, whereby God the Creator 
hath been magnified.  
As thou didst depart thy body through beheading by the sword, the wise hosts 
received thy godly spirit which had vanquished the cruel evil spirit by grace, O most 
noetically rich martyr; and now thou dost dwell as a victor of the kingdom in the 
highest, O Basiliscus.  
The earth was sanctified by thy burial and heaven by thy soul, O divinely inspired 
one; for, arrayed in a splendid robe dyed purple in thy blood, thou dost reign forever 
with Christ our God, being ever mindful of those who commemorate thee.  
Theotokion: Being by nature one God, Thou didst endure to be clothed in the 
nature of man, willingly making Thine abode in the womb of the immaculate one, O 
Lover of mankind. Wherefore, knowing that Thou hast two wills corresponding to 
Thy two natures, we magnify thee, blessing Thy Mother with faith.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Thou wast shown to be mighty and manly in suffering and all-wondrous in 
miracles, * and manifestly bearing forth the name of Christ, thou didst put the tyrant 
to shame. * Wherefore, we honor thee, O most honored Basiliscus, ever crying aloud: 
** Rejoice, O splendid adornment of martyrs!  
 
