--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 23rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE MOTHER EUPHROSYNIA OF 
POLOTSK  
AT GREAT VESPERS 
After the Introductory Psalm. “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
Loving the honorable and all-loving purity of the angels, O venerable mother 
Euphrosynia, thou didst wed thyself to Christ from thy youth. Standing now before 
Him with the angels, pray thou for those who piously honor thy memory. (Thrice) 
Emulating the life of the angels, in fasting and prayer thou didst serve Christ like 
an incorporeal being. And now, dwelling with the angelic ranks in the chamber of 
thine immortal Bridegroom, entreat Him Whom thou didst love, on behalf of those 
who joyfully honor thy most honored memory. (Thrice) 
Embracing the angelic life, thou didst leave behind fleeting glory and wealth, the 
house of thy father, and an earthly bridegroom, and hast received thereby an eternal 
reward in the heavens, where, rejoicing now with the angels, pray thou on behalf of 
those who with love honor thy memory. (Twice) 
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Praising Christ, our God and King, with joy let us hymn today the adornment of 
the monastic ranks and boast of nuns; for as the Sanctifier of the saints and Boast of 
the venerable He hath glorified the relics of the venerable Euphrosynia with 
incorruption. And the faithful, standing reverently before them and kissing them with 
love, receive healings of their ailments and comfort in their sorrows; and with 
compunction they joyfully say: Rejoice, O Euphrosynia, most honored bride of 
Christ! 
Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (3:1-9)  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 

--- PAGE 2 ---
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (5:15-6:3) 
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with His right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of an 
helmet. He shall take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall he 
sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then 
shall the right aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-
drawn bow, shall they fly to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out 
of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall 
cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm 
shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill-dealing· 
shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear therefore, O ye kings, and 
understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the 
people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord, and 
sovereignty from the Highest, Who shall try your works, and search out your 
counsels. 
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (4:7-15) 
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was loved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in their minds, 
That His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His 
chosen.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone VII: 
O venerable mother Euphrosynia, having pleased God thou didst reach the end of 
Thine earthly life, righteous and blameless in all the precepts of the Lord. Come ye, 
therefore, ye assemblies of monastics, and with hymns and spiritual songs let us 
radiantly join chorus today, crying aloud: Rejoice, thou who wast zealous for the 
traditions of the apostles and the fathers! Rejoice, boast of the city of Polotsk! 
Rejoice, O most honored Euphrosynia, for through humility and purity thou hast 
inherited the kingdom of heaven in the angelic ranks! And now, standing before the 
Lord, beseech Him to grant us great and rich mercy.  
As is meet, O Euphrosynia, we bless thee as our boast and an angel in the flesh; 
for thy life was honorable and thy repose is with the saints. For shining forth in good 
works, thou didst lead many to Christ, and bequeath a precious cross to thy convent, 
as a gift of the grace of God which abideth in thee, prophetically foreseeing that after 
thy convent’s destruction it would be restored again through the cross, which now 
hath come to pass. Wherefore, blessing thee with joy, we fall down before thee, 
praying with compunction: Pray to Christ for us, O venerable mother, that He grant 
our souls great and rich mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone VII: 
Today the ancient city of Polotsk is splendidly adorned with the divine treasure of 
the Cross of the Lord, which in thy zeal thou didst have fashioned, O venerable 
Euphrosynia; and thy convent rejoiceth in the return to it of the precious and life-
creating Cross, which was for many years preserved by the providence of the Lord. 
And bowing down before it with faith, and kissing it with love, we receive healing of 
soul and body, unceasingly magnifying Christ.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same tone: 
O Virgin Theotokos, * thou hope of Christians, * by thy supplications to thy Son 
and God * protect and preserve us all ** from all want and grief.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
O venerable mother Euphrosynia, thou didst serve Christ the Lord in humility and 
meekness, didst guide many to salvation, and hast therefore received a reward from 
the Lord. Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved.  
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
O venerable mother Euphrosynia, with love do we bless thee, the true confessor 
of the Gospel, zealot of Orthodoxy, instructor in asceticism, converser with the 
angels, feeder of orphans and the poor, whom Christ hath crowned with a heavenly 
wreath. Him do thou beseech, that our souls be saved.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
O venerable mother Euphrosynia, joyfully celebrating thy memorial, we glorify thy 
struggles; for thou didst serve Christ in labors from thy youth, amazing the ranks of 
angels, in that thou didst abide on earth like an incorporeal being in fasting, prayer 
and all night vigil, and in divine contemplation. Wherefore, thou didst receive the 
Holy Spirit in thy soul.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Radiantly lighting thy lamp with the oil of purity and mercy, with the wise virgins 
thou didst ascend to thine immortal Bridegroom in the heavenly bridal-chamber. Him 
do thou earnestly entreat on behalf of those who celebrate thy memory with love.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same tone: 
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * Mother of 
God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, * 
granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting now our supplications, 
** pray thou that we all be saved. 
At the blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Emulating the ten-year old Christ, Who taught in the temple, * O Euphrosynia, at 
the age of ten thou didst follow the Word of God; * and forsaking fleeting glory and 
an earthly betrothal, * and disdaining all the things of this world, * thou didst wed 
thyself unto Christ, * Who is more comely than all. * Taking up thy cross, treading 
the path of the angelic life, * and guiding many thereto, * thou didst ascend to the 
heavenly bridal-chamber * amid the sweet fragrance of myrrh. * There do thou 
entreat Him Whom thou hast loved, * on behalf of those ** who piously honor thy 
memory. (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Emulating the ten-year old Christ, Who taught in the temple, * O Euphrosynia, at 
the age of ten thou didst follow the Word of God; * and forsaking fleeting glory and 
an earthly betrothal, * and disdaining all the things of this world, * thou didst wed 
thyself unto Christ, * Who is more comely than all. * Taking up thy cross, treading 
the path of the angelic life, * and guiding many thereto, * thou didst ascend to the 
heavenly bridal-chamber * amid the sweet fragrance of myrrh. * There do thou 
entreat Him Whom thou hast loved, * on behalf of those ** who piously honor thy 
memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Having loved the commandments of the Lord from thy youth, O venerable 
mother, for many thou didst become a guide in the monastic life, leading many unto 
Christ. Wherefore, celebrating thy most honored memory today, we glorify God Who 
glorifieth His saints.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
With mouth and heart we magnify thee, the Mother of God. * O thou who hast 
given birth unto God, ** deprive us not of thine aid.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Having adorned thy soul with the purity of virginity, O venerable Euphrosynia, 
thou didst enter into the courts of thy Lord with lighted lamp. Him do thou 
unceasingly beseech, that we also may be deemed worthy to be numbered among the 
choir of the elect.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
O Mother of God, speedy helper amid tribulations, * ready haven for the tempest-
tossed: * preserve me from the flood of life, * and let me not be dashed upon the 
rock ** of spiritual destruction.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We bless thee, O venerable mother 
Euphrosynia, and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monastics and 
converser with the angels.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Thou didst shine forth in thine angelic life, O venerable Euphrosynia, adorning 
thyself with beauty of character, asceticism and loving-kindness. Teaching thy 
spiritual sisters with soul-saving discourses, and confirming thy word with thine 
example, thou didst lead many to salvation. Wherefore, O ever-memorable 
Euphrosynia, standing before the throne of the Almighty, entreat Him to grant 
forgiveness of sins unto those who honor thy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
The prophets proclaimed thee beforehand; * the apostles preached thee; * the 
martyrs glorified thee; and holy hierarchs have called thee blessed. * Wherefore, with 
them confessing thee to be the Theotokos, ** we piously magnify thee.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 104 (MT. 25: 1-13)  
The Lord spake this parable: “The Kingdom of heaven is likened unto ten virgins, 
who took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. And five of them were 
wise, and five were foolish. They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil 
with them: But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. While the 
bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry 
made: ‘Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.’ Then all those virgins 
arose, and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise: ‘Give us of your 
oil; for our lamps are gone out.’ But the wise answered, saying: Not so; lest there be 
not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves. 
And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and those who were ready went in 
with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward came also the other vir-
gins, saying: ‘Lord, Lord, open to us.’ But he answered and said: ‘Verily I say unto 
you, I know you not.’ Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour 
wherein the Son of man cometh.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VII:  
O good and faithful handmaid of the Lord, taking the easy yoke of Christ upon 
thyself, and diligently carrying His light burden, thou dwellest now in the kingdom of 
heaven. Pray thou for us, that we may be deemed worthy of great and rich mercy.  
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, including the 
Irmos; and this canon of the venerable one, with 8 Troparia, in Tone VI:  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Studying the sacred commandments of the Lord from thy youth, and desiring to 
serve Him alone, thou didst spurn the glory and riches of this world.  
Loving Christ, thou didst forsake thy parents and kinfolk, and an earthly 
bridegroom, O venerable one, and accepted the monastic life.  
The hearts of thy father and mother were filled with sorrow when they saw thee, 
their beloved daughter, in the monastic habit; but, the Holy Spirit enlightening thee, 
thou didst comfort them with kind words.  
Theotokion: Assaults of tribulations bestorm my lowly soul, and clouds of perils 
cover over my heart, O Bride of God; but as thou hast given birth to the divine and 
pre-eternal Light, shine thou the light of joy upon me.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Desiring to unite thyself in stillness to the Lord alone, thou didst dwell in a narrow 
cell by the Church of the Holy Wisdom, O venerable one.  
Thou didst serve Christ our Savior with the work of thy hands, occupying thyself 
in God-pleasing manner with the copying of holy books; and with the money 
obtained thereby thou didst comfort the least of the brethren of Christ.  
O most honored one, thou didst diligently serve thy Lord in meekness and 
humility, in fasting and prayer, in labors, all-night vigils and prayerful prostrations.  
Theotokion: Thy benefactions and mercies have now truly amazed me, O 
Sovereign Lady, divine Maiden; wherefore, I glorify thee and hymn and honor thy 
great and boundless care for us.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Thou wast deemed worthy of the vision of an angel, O venerable mother 
Euphrosynia; for an angel visited thee thrice, declaring unto thee that it was the will 
of the Lord that thou should go to a certain place, and found there a convent for 
virgins consecrated to God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O only true protectress of Christians, * deliver us from grievous circumstances, * 
misfortunes and sorrows, ** and by thy supplications save thou our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
The angel spake of thee to the holy hierarch Elias, who was the local bishop in thy 
day, O venerable one, commanding him to give thee property whereupon a convent 
was to be built.  
As a crown sitteth upon the head of a king, so doth the Holy Spirit rest upon thee, 
O venerable one. Thus did the angel tell the holy hierarch.  
“As incense ascendeth to God, so doth the prayer of the venerable one ascend; 
and as the sun shineth in the firmament of heaven, so hath the life of Euphrosynia 
shone forth before the angels of God,” said the angel who appeared in a vision to the 
holy hierarch.  
Theotokion: Where else will I find another help? to whom shall I flee? Where shall 
I be saved? What ardent helper will I have when alas! I am shaken by tribulations and 
the storms of life? In thee alone do I hope and boast, and I am of good cheer, having 
recourse unto thy protection. Do thou save me!  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
The holy hierarch of the Lord was filled with joy and amazement by the vision of 
the angel, and summoned thee, O venerable one, to inform thee of the wondrous 
apparition.  
Thou didst fulfill the will of thy Lord with diligence, O venerable one, and didst go 
to the place indicated by the angel, and there madest thine abode.  
Placing steadfast trust in the Lord alone, thou didst not acquire any possessions, 
but abode in the poverty of the Gospel.  
Theotokion: What gift of thanksgiving shall I give thee for thy gifts and the 
boundless goodness, which I have enjoyed? Wherefore, I glorify, hymn and magnify 
thine ineffable mercy toward me.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Seeing thine angelic way of life, many virgins desired to betroth themselves to 
Christ and to serve Him alone in pure virginity.  
Emulating thee, thy sister, the Princess Zvenislava, forsook the glory and pleasures 
of this world, and hastened unto thee to take the easy yoke of Christ upon herself.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Beholding thy spiritual sisters increasing in number, O most honored 
Euphrosynia, thou didst desire to build a church to the Lord Almighty, in honor of 
his glorious transfiguration.  
Theotokion: I know thee to be consolation amid sorrows and the healing of 
infirmities, O Mother of God, the supreme destruction of death, inexhaustible river 
of life, and quick and speedy aid for all amid perils.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
O thou who wast chosen by God from thy very birth and called to His service, * 
who in holiness ministered unto the Lord in the angelic ranks, * living a venerable life 
and now praising the Lord with the hosts of heaven, * ever interceding before the 
Lord on behalf us sinners, * unto thee do we cry aloud with joy and love: ** Rejoice, 
O Euphrosynia, most honored bride of Christ!  
Ikos: Thou didst live on earth angelically, in purity and humility, pleasing the Lord 
with meekness and patience, loving-kindness and abstinence. Dwelling now amid the 
splendors of the saints after thy labors, accept from us this hymnody: Rejoice, thou 
who wast virgin in soul and body; rejoice, all-wondrous instructress of nuns! Rejoice, 
thou who wast deemed worthy of the sight of an angel while yet on earth; rejoice, 
thou who through an angel received the Lord’s command to build a convent! Rejoice, 
thou who zealously fulfilled the will of the Lord; rejoice, thou who for Christ’s sake 
spurned all earthly pleasures. Rejoice, thou who betrothed thyself to Jesus, the 
heavenly Bridegroom most sweet; rejoice, thou who served Him in purity, fasting and 
prayer. Rejoice, thou who acquired an all-precious cross as a priceless treasure, for the 
sanctification and confirmation of thy community; rejoice, thou who in thy labors day 
and night didst perfect thy life! Rejoice, thou who now abidest in the never-setting 
day of the kingdom of God. Rejoice, O Euphrosynia, most honored bride of Christ!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Thou didst not exercise care only for thine own salvation, O venerable mother, 
but for all whom the Lord entrusted to thee, instructing them in the law of the Lord, 
to do His will.  
In good works thou wast a model for thy reason-endowed flock, O most honored 
Euphrosynia, exalting thyself by humility, drawing all to thee by thy meekness, and by 
thy patience causing them to remain steadfast in love for the Lord.  
When the construction of the temple of the Lord commenced, an angel woke the 
builder, saying: “Go thou to the place of the temple of the Almighty, O John!”  
Theotokion: Having enjoyed thy great gifts, thy goodness and boundless miracles, 
I glorify thee with all my soul and mind, my heart and lips, O Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thou didst pray to the Lord with faith and steadfast hope, O venerable one, and 
the Lord hearkened to the supplication of His faithful handmaiden, wondrously 
completing the construction of His temple.  
Thou wast filled with joy and gladness, O venerable Euphrosynia, when they 
performed the consecration of the temple, wherein thou didst pray with tears that the 
Lord hear our petitions. 
Thy supplication is mighty before the Lord, for the temple erected by thee hath 
been preserved intact and unharmed through many years.  
Theotokion: Evil circumstances, sorrows and want have overtaken me, O pure 
one, and the perils and temptations of life surround me on all sides; but stand thou 
before me and shelter me beneath thy holy protection.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Thou didst desire to have in thy convent an icon of the most pure Mother of God, 
which thou didst obtain; and receiving it with joy, thou didst render many thanks to 
the Lord and His most pure Mother.  
In thy zeal thou didst have a precious cross fashioned, O venerable one, and didst 
set therein a drop of the divine blood of Christ the Savior and a portion of the life-
creating wood, for the sanctification and salvation of all who venerate it and kiss it 
with love and fear.  
Thou didst spend many years in a narrow cell by the temple of the Lord, in prayer 
and prostrations, O venerable Euphrosynia, sojourning on earth like an incorporeal 
being.  
Theotokion: Following thy prophecy, O most holy Virgin, with all generations we 
evangelically cry out to thee who received joy from the angel: Rejoice, O thou who art 
full of grace! The Lord is with thee!  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one, in Tone III:  
O venerable Euphrosynia, glorious is thy memory, for in thee was the word of the 
Holy Spirit truly fulfilled: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be. Where-
fore from all misfortune and peril save us who celebrate thy memorial with love.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Rejoice, fiery throne of the Lord! Rejoice, divine jar which contained the Manna! 
Rejoice, golden lampstand! Rejoice, inextinguishable lamp! Rejoice, glory of virgins 
and adornment and boast of mothers, O Birthgiver of God.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spurning the pleasure of earthly food, and the riches and glory of this world, thou 
didst love the heavenly Bridegroom, O most honored Euphrosynia. Thou finishing 
well thy struggle on earth in the monastic rank, thou hast entered in unto Christ the 
Bridegroom with the wise virgins. Standing now in joy before Him, pray thou 
unceasingly on behalf of our souls.  
Thou didst follow after Christ, Who became incarnate of the pure Virgin, O 
Euphrosynia, serving Him in virginity from thy youth, and showing many the path to 
salvation. “My beloved sisters,” thou didst say, “straight and narrow is the path which 
leadeth to life, but the reward is everlasting; wherefore, struggle untiringly, for ye have 
the Judge of the contest, Christ Himself helping you, the bestower of life incorrupt.”  
O Euphrosynia elect of God, like a most radiant star which shone forth from our 
race, illumining the land of Russia, be thou an advocate, and deliver from all 
tribulation and every sickness of soul and body those who with faith and love keep 
the memory of thine honored repose, and earnestly make recourse unto thee, 
beseeching thy prayers to the Lord, and lovingly kiss thy precious image.  
Celebrating the solemnity of the venerable Euphrosynia today, come, ye faithful, 
let us hymn her struggles and labors; let us praise her who loved Jesus most sweet 
with the love of the seraphim and served Him with zeal; and with faith and love let us 
cry out to her: Rejoice, O most honored Euphrosynia, the comely beauty and boast 
of the monastic ranks, chosen bride of Christ, who dwellest with the angels and all 
the saints in the never-waning day of the kingdom of God! Pray thou that all 
Orthodox Christians be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Desiring to go to the holy city of Jerusalem to worship at the tomb of the Lord, 
thou didst reach the earthly Jerusalem, and having offered reverent worship injoy at 
the holy places, O Euphrosynia, thou didst ask of the Lord as a favor, that He receive 
thy spirit in the holy place. And the Lord hearkened to thine entreaty, and sent an 
angel, who informed thee of thy passage from the earthly Jerusalem to that which is 
on high. Joining chorus there with the choirs of the virgins, remember us who cel-
ebrate thy holy memory with love.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign lady, * accept the supplications of thy servants, ** and deliver us from 
all want and grief. 
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: if this day fall within the period of the 
Pentecostarion, 4 from the appointed ODE of the canon from the Pente-
costarion, and 4 from ODE III of the canon of the saint; but if this day fall 
within the Apostles’ Fast, 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the saint’s 
canon, chosen as needed, in the order of those given below: 
Desiring to unite thyself in stillness to the Lord alone, thou didst dwell in a narrow 
cell by the Church of the Holy Wisdom, O venerable one. (Twice) 
Thou didst serve Christ our Savior with the work of thy hands, occupying thyself 
in God-pleasing manner with the copying of holy books; and with the money 
obtained thereby thou didst comfort the least of the brethren of Christ.  
O most honored one, thou didst diligently serve thy Lord in meekness and 
humility, in fasting and prayer, in labors, all-night vigils and prayerful prostrations.  
Seeing thine angelic way of life, many virgins desired to betroth themselves to 
Christ and to serve Him alone in pure virginity.  
Emulating thee, thy sister, the Princess Zvenislava, forsook the glory and pleasures 
of this world, and hastened unto thee to take the easy yoke of Christ upon herself.  
Beholding thy spiritual sisters increasing in number, O most honored 
Euphrosynia, thou didst desire to build a church to the Lord Almighty, in honor of 
his glorious transfiguration.  
Theotokion: I know thee to be consolation amid sorrows and the healing of 
infirmities, O Mother of God, the supreme destruction of death, inexhaustible river 
of life, and quick and speedy aid for all amid perils.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Emulating the ten-year old Christ, Who taught in the temple, * O Euphrosynia, at 
the age of ten thou didst follow the Word of God; * and forsaking fleeting glory and 
an earthly betrothal, * and disdaining all the things of this world, * thou didst wed 
thyself unto Christ, * Who is more comely than all. * Taking up thy cross, treading 
the path of the angelic life, * and guiding many thereto, * thou didst ascend to the 
heavenly bridal-chamber * amid the sweet fragrance of myrrh. * There do thou 
entreat Him Whom thou hast loved, * on behalf of those ** who piously honor thy 
memory.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
O thou who wast chosen by God from thy very birth and called to His service, * 
who in holiness ministered unto the Lord in the angelic ranks, * living a venerable life 
and now praising the Lord with the hosts of heaven, * ever interceding before the 
Lord on behalf us sinners, * unto thee do we cry aloud with joy and love: ** Rejoice, 
O Euphrosynia, most honored bride of Christ!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, § 208 (GAL. 3:23-29)  
Brethren: But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the 
faith which should afterward be revealed. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to 
bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, 
we are no longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are all the children of God by faith in 
Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on 
Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither 
male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ’s then are ye 
Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: Verse: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He 
was attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Verse: And He brought me up out of the pit of misery, and from the mire of 
clay.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 104 (MT. 25: 1-13)  
The Lord said this parable: “The kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, 
who took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. And five of them were 
wise, and five were foolish. Those who were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil 
with them: but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. While the 
bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry 
made: ‘Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.’ Then all those virgins 
arose, and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise: ‘Give us of your 
oil; for our lamps are gone out.’ But the wise answered, saying: ‘Not so; lest there be 
not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.’ 
And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and those who were ready went in 
with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward came also the other vir-
gins, saying: ‘Lord, Lord, open to us.’ But he answered and said: ‘Verily I say unto 
you, I know you not.’ Watch therefore; for ye know neither the day nor the hour 
wherein the Son of man cometh.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
