--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 31st DAY OF THE MONTH OF MAY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR HERMIAS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Having extinguished the fire of ungodliness * with the drops of thy blood, * O 
great martyr, * thou hast richly given drink to the Church of Christ * and illumined 
the hearts of the faithful who piously honor ** thy sacred and precious memory.  
Like an impregnable tower * thou wast in nowise shaken by the assaults of the 
enemy, * whose hearts thou didst pierce as with arrows, O Hermias, * casting down 
all their wiles * like an undefeatable rampart ** with the pain of thy valiant struggles.  
Raising up with the word of God * those who had stumbled into the abyss of 
unbelief, * thou didst endure the great threefold billows of torments, * O most 
praised passion-bearer Hermias, * until thou didst joyously enter with them ** into 
the harbor of heaven.  
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
Plagued by falls into helplessness, O pure one, * yet having thee alone as our 
intercessor, O Virgin, * we cry aloud in thanksgiving: * Cleanse us, O most holy Bride 
of God, * for thou art the refuge of the world ** and the helper of our race!  
With the staff of thine intercession, * O pure Birthgiver of God, * quickly drive 
away the bestial passions * from my wretched soul, * strengthening my life with 
peace; ** and number me among the holy flock of thy chosen sheep.  
Drowning in the abyss of sins, O Birthgiver of God, * I have fled to the calm 
haven * of thy most pure supplication, * and I cry unto thee: Save me, * extending thy 
mighty right hand ** unto thy servant, O most immaculate one!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
Having fallen headlong because of my corrupt character, I lie prostrate, * yet I flee 
from the adverse storm * to thy tranquility, O Virgin: * deliver me from multifarious 
temptations, * that I may unceasingly hymn thy grace, ** O Ever-virgin Mother of 
God.  
Stavrotheotokion: When the immaculate Virgin beheld the Lamb uplifted upon the 
Cross, * she cried aloud, weeping: * “O my sweet Child, what is this new and most 
glorious sight? * How is it that Thou Who holdest all things * in the palm of Thy 
hand, ** art nailed in the flesh to the Tree?”  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Hermias O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyr, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Thou hast been known as a star shining with divine light, radiantly illumining with 
the splendor of martyrdom all who honor thee with pure faith, O Hermias.  
With thy gaze fixed constantly upon God, disdaining all things in this life, O wise 
martyr, thou didst enter upon the struggles of martyrdom, mightily vanquishing the 
enemy.  
Comely of vision and soul, O martyr Hermias, thou didst enlist in the army of the 
King of heaven, and utterly cast down the enemy.  
Thou didst not offer sacrifice to idols, O blessed one and when thy teeth were 
pulled from their sockets, thou didst break the jaws of the noetic lions, arrayed in the 
never-fading wreath of victory.  
Theotokion: O holy Virgin Mother of Christ, thou glory of the martyrs and joy of 
the angels, with them entreat thy Son, that He have pity and save thy servants.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Through divinely radiant grace thou didst become the adornment of spiritual 
athletes, O martyr; wherefore, we who are in the world piously honor thee.  
When thy jaw was broken, O wise martyr, thou didst chant praise in thanksgiving 
unto our God Who strengthened thee.  
Strengthened by the power of the divine Spirit, O most wise one, rejoicing, thou 
didst cast down the serpent who is mighty in evil.  
Theotokion: With mouth and tongue I confess thee to be the most holy temple of 
God, O most pure one; wherefore, deliver me from all affliction.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”:  
Having cast down the uprisings of the enemy, as a mighty warrior of the Master, 
thou hast received the crown of victory. Wherefore, we praise thee as a valiant 
spiritual athlete, celebrating thy most festive memory with faith, do thou pray, O 
much-suffering Hermias, that we be saved from all need.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
O Theotokos, fleeing to thy divine protection after God, * I humbly fall down and 
beseech thee: * Have mercy, O most pure one, * for my sins have submerged my 
being, * and trembling O Sovereign Lady, I fear the torments to come, * O pure one, 
entreat thy Son, ** that I may be delivered from them.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Stavrotheotokion: She who in latter times gave birth to Thee in the flesh, * O 
Christ Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * when she saw Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried out: * “Woe is me, O Jesus most beloved! * How is it that 
Thou Who art worshipped as God by the angels, * art now crucified by iniquitous 
men? ** I hymn Thee, O Long-suffering One!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
The torrents of thy blood have extinguished the fire of polytheism and have been 
shown to be dew for the faithful, O right wondrous martyr and passion-bearer.  
Bedewed by the grace of the Trinity, O all-glorious martyr, thou didst remain 
unconsumed, standing in the midst of the fire for three days.  
The choir of the heavenly hosts witnessed thy valor from on high and marveled at 
the might of thy struggles, O spiritual athlete Hermias.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned Sovereign Lady, in a manner past all telling thou hast 
given birth to Him Who resteth in His saints; wherefore, we honor thee with hymns.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Broken in body, O most glorious martyr, by thy many tortures thou didst wreak 
destruction upon the graven images through grace. Wherefore, by divine grace thou 
dost heal the afflictions of soul of all the pious.  
When thou wast given bitter potions to drink, O martyr, thou didst remain 
unharmed, calling him who administered them to thee unto the excellent Faith; and 
he was most radiantly converted to the beauty of martyrdom by thy splendid wonder-
working.  
O blessed one, thou wast in nowise turned from the goodly stand of Him Who 
strengthened and made thee steadfast, and directed all thy struggles, that thou 
mightest be with Him, gazing upon Him in simplicity of character.  
Theotokion: Of old, the prophet beheld thee in the Spirit, O Maiden, as a noetic 
lamp-stand holding Christ God like a lamp, illumining with ineffable light all of us 
who faithfully honor thee, O most immaculate one.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Having thy desire wholly with God, O all-blessed one, rejoicing, thou didst endure 
the pangs and lacerations of thy divine body as though it were someone else who was 
suffering, looking forward to thy crown.  
Thou didst mightily endure the stripping away of thy sinews, O Hermias, martyr of 
Christ, ripping away the sinews of the greatly crafty enemy through grace, and 
showing thyself to be a model of all manliness.  
Tempered in the fire of the love of Christ, thou didst truly become like unto a 
two-edged sword, manifestly cutting down the ungodly armies like a mighty warrior.  
Theotokion: Thou feedest Him Who as God feedeth all with His hand, O all-
immaculate Sovereign Lady, and holdest in thine arms Him Who sustaineth all things; 
wherefore, we, the faithful, glorify thee as is meet.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Fulfilling Thy dispensation for us ...”:  
Having struggled eagerly for Christ, * thou didst acquire courage at an advanced 
age, O martyr Hermias; * and having trampled underfoot the machinations of the 
iniquitous ones * by the power of Christ, * thou didst remain unharmed by sorcerous 
potions, crying aloud: * “God is with me! Who then can stand against me?”  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
With uprightness of mind, looking toward God Who is able to save, thou didst 
endure the pangs of thy valiant body, O Hermias, chanting: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
With the sprinkling of thy blood thou didst extinguish the fire of ungodliness, and, 
entering the flame, thou wast in nowise consumed, O most noetically rich martyr, 
chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The whole Church calleth thee blessed, beholding thy valiant deeds and the grace 
of thy miracles, O wise martyr Hermias, and the trophies of victory which the Lord 
gave thee for struggling splendidly.  
Theotokion: Thou wast adorned with beauty, O Virgin, having given birth to the 
comely Christ Who assumed our form and hath led to life all those who have been 
broken down. Wherefore, with faith we ever glorify thee in hymns.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Strengthened by the true law, O spiritual athlete Hermias, rejoicing, thou didst 
hold the edict of the iniquitous in contempt; and, enduring great struggles, O blessed 
one, thou didst receive the habitations in the highest throughout the ages.  
“I am not daunted by the pangs decreed by any temporal statute, neither will I 
offer worship unto those things which are not gods!” thou didst cry aloud, O all-
blessed one; “I will only worship the Lord Jesus Who was crucified under Pontius 
Pilate!”  
Like an innocent lamb thou didst go forth to be slaughtered for Him Who like a 
lamb was slain for our sake and hath removed from the earth all abominable 
sacrifices, O martyr Hermias; wherefore, in laudation we hymn thee as is meet.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be more spacious than the heavens, O thou 
who didst contain God within thy womb. Him do thou earnestly entreat, O Virgin, 
that He deliver me from the sins which beset me, that, having accomplished deeds of 
piety, I may bless thee with faith.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Having departed from thy flesh, O most praised spiritual athlete, thou hast been 
deemed worthy to behold the good things which God prepared for thee, and for 
those who suffered with thee, and cast down the evil one. With them do thou now 
beseech the Lord, that we be saved, O right laudable martyr Hermias.  
Thy comely visage was shown to be yet more comely before thy suffering, O wise 
and glorious one, and after thy wondrous struggles was shown to be adorned with 
angelic splendor. Wherefore, thou hast hastened to the beautiful bridal-chambers, 
adorned with wreaths of victory.  
Thou didst spurn an earthly army and didst enlist in the army of the King of 
heaven, O wise martyr. By His mighty power thou hast mightily destroyed all the 
hordes of the demons, and hast been lawfully crowned with wreaths of victory. Pray 
thou ever on our behalf.  
The radiant day of thy memorial hath dawned, illumining our thoughts with the 
beams of thy steadfast struggles. And thereon do we beseech thee: As thou hast 
boldness before Christ, entreat Him unceasingly, that we may obtain mercy on the 
day of judgment.  
Theotokion: God Who clothed Himself in me issued forth from thee and hath 
arrayed in the vesture of incorruption me who stripped myself naked of divine 
raiment, O Lady, Birthgiver of God, thou refuge of all mankind, confirmation and 
rampart of the crowned martyrs, and joy of the angels.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Hermias O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone VI: 
Having struggled eagerly for Christ, * thou didst acquire courage at an advanced 
age, O martyr Hermias; * and having trampled underfoot the machinations of the 
iniquitous ones * by the power of Christ, * thou didst remain unharmed by sorcerous 
potions, crying aloud: ** “God is with me! Who then can stand against me?”  
 
