--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 6th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER BESSARION THE 
WONDERWORKER & THE VENERABLE HILARION THE NEW OF THE 
MONASTERY OF SAINT DALMATUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of St. Bessarion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Thou wast the light of monastics, O wise Bessarion, * and by the rays of thy 
virtues * and the effulgence of grace * thou wast like a most radiant lamp unto the 
desert. * From the gloom of the passions and the darkness of the wicked, * from all 
sorrow and temptation, * deliver those who fervently honor thee * and hymn with 
faith ** thy divine repose.  
Enduring to stand amid thorns * in thy divine love of ineffable struggles, * thou 
didst show forth an effort equal to that of the martyrs. * Thou dost sweeten the bitter 
waters of the sea * and givest drink to souls in thirst, * O most wise one. * Thou didst 
traverse the rushing torrents of the Nile, * making thy passage over its waters 
dryshod, ** O all-famed one.  
Knowing thee to be like unto the wise Elijah, * we all manifestly praise thee, O 
Bessarion, * for thou didst cause torrents of water to fall as rain from the sky * 
through God’s mercy unto thee, * and by thine honored supplications * thou 
bestowest fountains of rain and divine dew from on high * upon all the faithful * as 
well as grace and power ** and invincible protection.  
And 3 Stichera of St. Hilarion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given as sign ...”: 
Having attained a life undefiled, * patience, meekness and love unfeigned, * 
boundless abstinence, * standing all night, * divine compunction, * faith, true hope 
and mercy, * thou didst live on earth like an angel in the body, * O blessed father 
Hilarion, ** intercessor for our souls.  
Thou wast an earthly angel * and a heavenly man, O venerable one, * a well-spring 
of compunction, * a torrent of mercy, an abyss of miracles, * a surety for sinners, * a 
truly fruitful olive-tree of God, * anointing with the oil of thy works * the faces of 
those who praise thee with faith, ** O wondrous Hilarion.  
Thy mind shining * with divine understanding, * thou didst transcend the passions 
of the flesh, * unconfused by things below, * bearing the lineaments * and depicting 
the beauty of God within thyself, * and known as wholly luminous * through the 
activity of the Spirit, O Hilarion our father, ** thou adornment of monastics.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion,  
or this Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Rejoice, O beam of solar radiance, * throne of the never-setting Sun, * having 
shone forth the ineffable Sun! * Rejoice, O mind * shining with divine splendor, * 
flash of lightning illumining the ends of the earth, * true luster of gold. * O most 
comely and most immaculate one ** who hath caused the unwaning Light to shine 
upon the faithful!  
Troparion of the venerable fathers, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
ODE I  
Canon of the venerable Bessarion, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II:  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
The Church chanteth unto God, joining chorus today in thy memory, O divinely 
inspired father Bessarion, and with faith it glorifieth thy great struggles.  
Shown to be a slave of God, thou didst enslave the passions of the body by the 
powers of thy soul, and wast revealed to be free of all evil, O most wondrous father.  
Adorned with the beauties of thy struggles, thou wast shown to be a right suitable 
vessel of the divine Spirit, containing His activity, O blessed Bessarion.  
Theotokion: The deceiver of souls hath dragged me down into the pit of 
destruction; but extend unto me thy mighty hand, O Theotokos, and quickly bring me 
up into the light.  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Having fled to the immaterial and noetic Light out of the darkness of material 
things, O venerable Hilarion, illumine me by thy supplications unto God.  
Having partaken of virtue from thine infancy, thou didst attain unto manhood by 
the pangs of abstinence and the sweat of fasting, reaching unto the spiritual measure 
of the stature of Christ.  
Having traversed the abyss of the passions, and escaped the threefold waves of the 
demons, thou didst make haste to the dry haven of dispassion, O venerable father.  
Theotokion: As thou art higher than all creation, O only Mother of God, in the 
latter times, without knowing a man, thou hast given birth without father to the 
Word, Who was begotten of the Father without mother.  
ODE III  
Canon of the venerable Bessarion  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
Thou didst mount to the heights of dispassion, didst enter into the darkness of the 
vision of God, and there receive the divine law within thy heart; and, strengthened 
thereby, thou didst become a most radiant beacon for monastics, O venerable one.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thou wast shown to be a fruitful olive-tree manifestly planted in the house of 
God, O father, and with the oil of thy struggles thou hast anointed the faces of us 
who praise thy miracles, O venerable Bessarion.  
Having lived a life of non-acquisition, like that of the birds, O blessed one, soaring 
on wings of dispassion thou didst attain unto the mansions of heaven, rejoicing; 
wherefore, with faith we call thee blessed.  
Theotokion: Having lived my life in slothfulness and defiled my heart with 
passions, I approach thee with compunction of soul, O Sovereign Lady, and entreat 
thee to have compassion and save me, making me steadfast through models of 
repentance.  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
With the burning ember of abstinence thou didst utterly consume the thorns of 
the passions, O venerable one, cooling the thoughts of the faithful.  
Having acquired through the Spirit the sharp arrows of virtue, as one mighty thou 
didst wound the heart of the cruel adversary.  
Armed with the sword of abstinence, and with prayer as thy breastplate, O 
venerable one, thou didst vanquish legions of the invisible foe.  
Theotokion: On the day of judgment be merciful unto me, I pray thee, O 
Sovereign Lady, in thy boldness before Him Who was born of thee.  
Kontakion of St. Hilarion, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”:  
Like a shepherd didst thou preserve within thy fold * the flock of thy life-bearing 
pasture, * and wast shown to be great by the loftiness of thy works, * O Hilarion the 
New, * having undergone much suffering and sorrow in thy piety. * Wherefore, thou 
hast made thine abode in the most joyful life in heavenly Sion. ** Pray for us, O 
venerable one!  
Sessional Hymn of St. Bessarion, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Having burned up the passions with the fire of abstinence, thou wast shown to be 
a radiant lamp of dispassion, dispelling the darkness of our souls by grace. Wherefore, 
with gladness of heart we celebrate thy light-bearing memory today, O Bessarion our 
father.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of St. Hilarion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Thou didst dedicate thy life to God, O all-blessed one, as a truly exemplary cleric, 
O priest of Christ. Wherefore, after much toil and pain, thou didst pass over to the 
immaterial habitations, rejoicing. And now thou pourest forth upon us streams of 
healings.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion in Tone IV:  
O all-immaculate Virgin * who hast given birth to the transcendent God: * do 
thou unceasingly entreat Him with the incorporeal ones, * that He grant forgiveness 
of transgressions * and correction of life before the end, * to us who, as is meet, 
hymn thee with faith and love, ** O thou who alone art most hymned.  
Stavrotheotokion: O most immaculate Virgin, * Mother of Christ God, * a sword 
pierced thy most holy soul * when thou didst behold thy Son and God * crucified of 
His own will. * Him do thou never cease to entreat, O blessed one, ** that He grant 
us the forgiveness of our transgressions.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the venerable Bessarion  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.  
Drops of healing didst thou receive from the depths of grace, from whence thou 
didst, by thy supplication, transform the water of the sea into sweetness, O wise and 
right wondrous one, healing the thirst of thy disciple.  
Never didst thou fail in thy life, even unto old age, O divinely wise father, 
wandering in the desert places and the mountains, seeking God by thy will, Who 
illumined thee with splendors surpassing noetic miracles.  
Thou wast lowly and small, yet elevated by dispassion; wherefore, thou didst put 
down the uprisings of the demons, as a beacon for monastics who piously praise thee 
with faith, O father.  
Theotokion: Heal thou the passions of my soul which grow within me, wretch that 
I am, and illumine my thoughts, O pure one, driving far away the darkness of the 
demons which afflict me and ever set their snares for me.  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Planted by the waters of abstinence, O blessed father, thou wast shown to be a 
flourishing vine producing the grapes of piety.  
Being wholly godly and Spirit-bearing, thou didst depart wholly unto God, O all-
blessed Hilarion; wherefore, thou dost ever dance with the angels.  
Thou didst set the feet of thy heart upon the rock of faith, remaining unshaken, 
and undaunted by the assaults of the demons.  
Theotokion: We hymn thee, O most pure one, who art more exalted than the 
cherubim and seraphim; for thou didst bear on thine arm our God before Whom they 
tremble.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE V  
Canon of the venerable Bessarion  
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
The effulgence of the Comforter which abode within thy soul, O most blessed 
one, showed forth the path which leadeth to the kingdom; and treading it, thou didst 
elude the snares of the demons and spiritual darkness.  
Shown forth as a new Joshua, O blessed God-bearer, adorned with divine words, 
enlightened with the splendor of miracles and made comely by the many wonders of 
God, thou didst halt the passage of the sun by thy luminous entreaty.  
Thou wast recorded in the book of life as is meet, having fulfilled all that is written 
in the divine books. Wherefore, I cry out to thee: By thine entreaties unto the all-
seeing God rend asunder the record of mine evil deeds, O father.  
Theotokion: Following the steps of Him Who shone forth from thy womb in an 
ineffable birthgiving, O Virgin Mother, the assembly of the venerable joined the 
choirs of heaven. Pray thou with them, and ask for the cleansing of us who honor 
thee.  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
The unsleeping eye of thy heart didst thou keep unwaveringly upon the divine 
commandments, O glorious one.  
O God-bearer, by thine activity and through abstinence thou didst ascend the 
mount of the virtues to the vision of God.  
In pouring forth oil for the poor, O venerable Hilarion, thou didst draw forth 
heavenly richness from thy heart.  
Theotokion: The Lord of the law showed thee to be the ark of the Word, O 
Theotokos, wherein He ineffably made His abode.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the venerable Bessarion  
Irmos: From within the sea monster Jonah cried unto the Lord: * “Lead me up 
from the abyss of Hades, I pray Thee; * for with a voice of praise as to my 
Redeemer, * in the spirit of truth * I offer myself to Thee.”  
Thou didst not fail when undertaking thy many struggles, O venerable one; for 
thou didst remain standing for forty days and nights, unmoved by the demands of 
nature.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Having mortified thy members which are on earth, O wondrous one, thou wast 
enriched with the vital activity of healing, and now dwellest in the heavens, ever 
healing the passions of our dying souls.  
Ever lamenting thy life, thou didst repose; for divine desire kindled a fire within 
thee, O father. And now thou hast found consolation in the heavens, joining the 
choirs of the venerable.  
Theotokion: The Lord was born of thee in the flesh, making thee the Sovereign 
Lady of all creatures. O pure one, entreat Him to deliver our souls from the enemy 
who hath dominion over them.  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
With faith thou didst slay with dust the noetic Goliath, who rose up in malice 
against thine unarmed conflict; and, uprooting his trophies of victory, thou didst fell 
him who boasted greatly.  
Thou didst emulate Hilarion in the virtues and, spiritually following in his steps, in 
abstinence wast shown to be supreme and a model for thy flock, O venerable one.  
With the sweat of abstinence thou didst utterly quench the burning darts of the 
enemy, and having kindled the fire of faith, thou didst consume the insolence of the 
heretics’ unbelief.  
Theotokion: Thou didst truly conceive God the Word in thy womb, and give birth 
unto Him supra-naturally, O all-immaculate one. By thy supplications entreat Him on 
behalf of those who hymn thee as the true Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the venerable Bessarion, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: The steadfast ...”: 
Emulating the powers on high, * by example thou didst live the life of the birds, O 
venerable one; * putting transitory things far from thy mind, * thou wast led to the 
heavenly beauties of Christ the King * by thy constant desire, thou didst come even 
unto Him. * O Bessarion, unceasingly entreat Him ** on behalf of us all!  
ODE VII  
Canon of the venerable Bessarion  
Irmos: The wise children did not adore the golden idol, * but went themselves 
into the flame and defied the pagan gods. * They prayed in the midst of the 
flame, * and an Angel bedewed them saying: * ‘The prayer of your lips hath 
been heard’. 
Having renewed thy soul with the pious plough of abstinence, O father, thou didst 
cultivate the most fruitful grain; and stored up in the granaries of heaven, thou dost 
nourish therewith those who chant with faith: O Lord God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Having been united to the immaterial Light, thou didst become a pure light; and 
traverse the rushing torrent of the river without thy feet becoming wet, and treading 
the straight paths, O divinely wise Bessarion, thou didst dried up the turgid waters of 
sin.  
What an awesome wonder it is that, by the invocation of God, thou didst render 
potable, waters which once were undrinkable, and traversed the rushing torrent of the 
river, and stayed the passage of the sun, O divinely wise Bessarion, who hast been 
magnified by sacred and divine signs!  
Theotokion: The hypostatic Wisdom of God was born from thee, O pure one, He 
Who destroyed the evil philosophers and gave the multitude of monastics and the 
venerable ones, the wisdom to chant with grace: Blessed art thou who hast given 
birth to God in the flesh!  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
In the pasture of the kingdom on high thou didst nurture thy flock, O father; and, 
driving away the wild beasts of heresy with the staff of thy teachings, and chanting: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Putting forth the radiance of miracles, thou dost dispel the gloom of infirmities, 
emitting beams of health and healing upon those who cry today: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst enter in to the wedding feast of Christ the King in the highest, clad in 
vesture befitting an invited guest. Wherefore, having reclined, thou dost cried aloud: 
O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: In a manner transcending nature and speech thou didst give birth 
unto the Master of all, and nourished at thy breast Him Who will prepare a table for 
all in good time. Do thou earnestly beseech Him on our behalf, O most pure one.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the venerable Bessarion  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
The light manifestly shone upon thee as a righteous man; joy and gladness were 
given thee, O father, as one who wept earnestly on earth and wast a stranger to it in 
thy lack of acquisition and thine endurance of all manner of evils.  
Without attaining thine ultimate desire, O venerable father, thou didst pass 
through many cities and areas of wilderness until, splendidly adorned, thou didst 
attain the city on high.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
With the bright radiance of virtue thou hast shone forth the dawn upon us, ever 
illumining our thoughts. Wherefore, we celebrate this day in thy light-bearing 
memory, O father Bessarion.  
Theotokion: O pure one, thou hast given birth unto a new Son, co-beginningless 
with the beginningless Father, and alone hast renewed our nature which hath grown 
old through grievous transgression. Wherefore, together we hymn thee, O 
Theotokos.  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
With the streams of thy tears thou didst drown the stirrings of the passions and 
constant thoughts, and wast an abyss of longsuffering, O venerable one, leading to 
the tranquility of quietude those who cry: Ye children bless, ye priests praise, ye 
people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Possessing thine admonitions for abstinence like an adamantine diamond, O 
venerable Hilarion, we make firm our hearts and vanquish legions of the passions, 
crying out in faith with our tongue: Ye children bless, ye priests praise, ye people, 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Having caused the passionate nature of the flesh to wither through abstinence and 
temperance, O venerable one, thou didst fill thyself with the spiritual activity of the 
Spirit and attained unto the paths of dispassion, O most wise one, crying aloud: Ye 
children bless, ye priests praise, ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Beneath the shelter of thy holy wings, O Sovereign Lady, do we all 
flee, afflicted by cruel offenses, temptations and tribulations. For, having thee as our 
intercessor, we cry aloud: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, supremely 
exalt God throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the venerable Bessarion  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Girded about with might, thou didst cast down the might of the deceiver, and wast 
shown to be powerful against the passions, O most blessed one; wherefore, receiving 
the grace of miracles from God, thou dost heal the incurable ailments of the faithful.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
The greatness of thy glory hath, through God, been manifest unto all creation, 
illumining the faithful with the sacred scenes of thy blameless life, O divinely wise 
Bessarion, who art truly the adornment of monks and paragon of the fathers.  
Groaning, lamenting and grieving, thou didst ever sprinkle the ground with tears of 
compunction, O divinely wise father, until thou didst acquire divine consolation, 
making thine abode in the city of God with all the saints.  
Thou didst flourish like a lily with the fragrance of the virtues, perfuming our 
souls, O father. Wherefore, we keep thy memory, O Bessarion, entreating that, for 
thy sake, we may be delivered from the stench of sins and from all demonic 
afflictions.  
Theotokion: Sinning insanely, I remain uncorrected, having become foolish in my 
great senselessness. Wherefore, I cry out to thee, O Sovereign Lady: Visit me now, 
who find myself in need, and cure the passions of my lowly heart.  
Canon of the venerable Hilarion  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Christ hath truly revealed thee to be a wellspring of miracles, O blessed one, 
washing away the painful defilements of the passions and easily drowning the pangs 
of infirmity. Wherefore, we all call thee a river of spiritual cleansing, O most blessed 
one.  
Spiritually flourishing like a palm-tree in the house of God, O most glorious one, 
thou didst bring forth the fruit of abstinence like sweetness, by which thou hast 
sweetened thy noetic flock, O most wise one. Wherefore, thou hast received heavenly 
crowns of glory, O ever-memorable father.  
Thou wast shown to be a rule of abstinence, O father Hilarion, a model of 
meekness and a serene instructor for all. By thine entreaties to the Lord still thou also 
the tempest of my passions, and grant profound peace unto me who ask, that I may 
call thee blessed.  
Theotokion: Thee do we have as a weapon amid tribulations and dangers, a haven 
and rampart amid sorrows, a noetic shield amid battles, and a great mercy-seat amid 
grievous sins and temptations. Wherefore, as is meet, we honor thee, the Theotokos, 
and magnify thy birthgiving.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable fathers, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Kontakion of St. Hilarion, in Tone II:  
Like a shepherd didst thou preserve within thy fold * the flock of thy life-bearing 
pasture, * and wast shown to be great by the loftiness of thy works, * O Hilarion the 
New, * having undergone much suffering and sorrow in thy piety. * Wherefore, thou 
hast made thine abode in the most joyful life in heavenly Sion. ** Pray for us, O 
venerable one!  
Kontakion of St. Bessarion, in Tone II:  
Emulating the powers on high, * by example thou didst live the life of the birds, O 
venerable one; * putting transitory things far from thy mind, * thou wast led to the 
heavenly beauties of Christ the King * by thy constant desire, thou didst come even 
unto Him. * O Bessarion, unceasingly entreat Him ** on behalf of us all!  
 
