--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 4th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS METROPHANES, 
PATRIARCH OF CONSTANTINOPLE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried unto Thee ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside all ...”: 
Thou wast shown to be a God-bearer * wholly consecrated, * the holy anointed of 
God, clad in the Holy Spirit, * ever entering with splendor * into the holy of holies, * 
illumined with godly radiance, * partaking of the grace of the holy mysteries * as a 
true and most glorious hierarch, * praying with boldness ** on behalf of our souls.  
Thy life was illumined * with the radiance of the virtues, * and thou hast 
enlightened the faithful * and driven away the darkness of delusion; * for thou wast 
shown to be the bright sun of the truth, * O most blessed and holy hierarch 
Metrophanes. * And now thou hast made thine abode * where shineth never-waning 
light, * and become a child of the day through the grace of the Holy Spirit. * 
Wherefore, honorably celebrating * thy divine and luminous memory, ** we honor 
thee with love, O ever-memorable one.  
Thy mind made beautiful by faith * and through yearning for God, * O divinely 
wise one, * thou wast shown to be radiant; * and having learned incorruption * in thy 
mortal and corruptible body, * O most wise one, * thou didst acquire the splendors of 
the incorporeal ones, * becoming a stranger to pleasures, * adorned with dispassion, * 
O most wise father and hierarch Metrophanes, * thou radiant lamp ** and intercessor 
for those who honor thy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Or this Theotokion in Tone VI:  
Rejoice, thou fulfillment of the law! * Rejoice, O temple of the Holy Trinity, * 
thou incorrupt Bride! * Rejoice, divine chariot of the King of all! * Rejoice, thou who 
like tongs * bore the Ember of immaterial fire in thine arms, * O new paradise, * 
garden enclosed, * divine and most radiant table, * undefiled dove, * throne of the 
Most High, noetic bed of God, ** whom the Holy Spirit covered, O Maiden!  
Stavrotheotokion: When, of old, the unblemished ewe-lamb and immaculate 
Sovereign Lady, * beheld her Lamb * upon the tree of the Cross, * she exclaimed 
maternally, and marveling cried aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new 
and most strange sight I see? * How hath the thankless synagogue * betrayed Thee to 
the judgment-seat of Pilate * and condemned Thee to death, * Who art the Life of 
all? * Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, ** O Word!”  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Metrophanes our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and this canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic 
whereof is: “I sing the glory of the great Metrophanes”, in Tone VI: 
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Standing with the heavenly choirs as a holy hierarch and servant of God, pray thou 
earnestly for us, that by thy supplications we may receive eternal good things.  
Chosen to serve the precious Gospel of the Lord, O blessed father Metrophanes, 
with thy most wise teachings thou didst cause men to grow in a proper 
understanding.  
Enriched with the understanding of God, thou didst pour forth the word of life 
from thy heart, watering souls hardened by the passions, O most wise and divinely 
blessed Metrophanes, hierarch of God.  
Theotokion: From afar the sacred choir of the prophets revealed thee as the one 
who would become the true Mother of God, O pure one, who art more exalted than 
the cherubim and all of creation.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Letting divine sweetness fall from thy lips, O father, thou didst dry up the odor of 
bitter godlessness, giving the pious the proper understanding of God to drink, O 
blessed one.  
Chosen beforehand by the judgment of God, O hierarch father Metrophanes, thou 
wast shown to be a hierarch, offering un-bloody sacrifices to God Who was sacrificed 
for our sake.  
The tomb where thy precious body lieth poureth forth sweet fragrance as if it were 
the garden of God, perfuming the faithful, O most glorious and all-honored 
Metrophanes.  
Theotokion: The human mind is at a loss as to how to comprehend the ineffable 
depths of thy birthgiving, O pure one; for God, having abased Himself in His 
compassion, hath wholly renewed me within thy womb.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...,”: 
Thou didst manifestly preach the Faith of Christ, * and preserving it, thou didst 
truly cause thy faithful flock to increase. * Wherefore, thou dost rejoice with the 
angels, O Metrophanes, ** entreating Christ unceasingly for us all.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...,”: 
Having gained dominion over carnal passions, thou wast revealed to be a godly 
hierarch, O venerable and divinely inspired one, and most gloriously shepherding the 
imperial city, thou didst drive away the hordes of heretics with the staff of thy divine 
words. Wherefore, having come to thine end thou hast worthily inherited endless 
grace, O blessed and holy hierarch, for which cause we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ 
God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who honor thy most precious 
memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the Pentecostarion, or the Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, * we have been overcome by the 
storms of our uncountable sins, * and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, * we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. * Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee * to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O most pure one, * 
unto Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, * that those who worthily 
hymn thee ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Full of the Holy Spirit, O sacred father Metrophanes, thou didst drive evil spirits 
away from all, and by thy spiritual teachings render them faithful.  
Thou didst theologize concerning the uncreated Unity indivisible in three 
Hypostases, inseparable and uncommingled, illumining the pious with thy sacred 
theology.  
Having first mortified carnal thoughts by asceticism and labors, thou didst show 
thyself to be a godly hierarch and a most sacred intercessor before the Trinity.  
Theotokion: Through thee, O most pure Mother of God, the curse of our first 
mother hath been annulled, for thou hast given birth for us to the Well-spring of 
holiness, to Life everlasting.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Performing the divine mysteries in a godly manner and touching pure things with 
the most pure thoughts, serving God thou wast revealed to be immaculate, as a most 
sacred hierarch of God.  
Adherents of idolatry became favorites of God through thine honored teachings; 
and, removing them from unworthy things, thou didst show thyself to be a worthy 
favorite of God Almighty.  
Called by grace, thou didst destroy the ungodliness of idolatry, O venerable, and 
with the rain of thy discourses thou didst render stony hearts fruitful through the 
grace of God.  
Theotokion: After thy strange birthgiving thou didst remain a virgin as thou wast 
before; for God was born, transforming all things by His will, O Mary, thou Bride of 
God who knewest not a man.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Thy tongue wisely sharpened by the Spirit like the pen of a scribe, inscribed the 
word of grace upon the hearts of the pious at the behest of God, O most sacred 
father.  
Learning things divine as one who entereth the mystic holy of holies, with the 
radiance of the Trinity and by the Spirit thou didst render men faithful, O sacred 
father, most perfect Metrophanes.  
Closing off the pretentious commands of the impious with the streams of thy 
precepts, thou wast shown to be like a river of peace, watering the congregations of 
the faithful with piety, O most honored and holy hierarch.  
Theotokion: The Word made His abode seedlessly within thy womb and revealed 
Himself as perfect man, restoring nature in a godly manner, as He alone knew how to 
do, O God-receiving and all-immaculate Maiden.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
From childhood thou wast shown to be a precious vessel, * becoming a chosen 
hierarch of God; * and to Him hast thou cried aloud with gladness: * O Christ, Thou 
art equal to the Father ** and the Spirit!  
Ikos: Such a high priest, an initiate and minister of the Word befitted us, as the 
divine Paul, the instrument of Christ, crieth out, ever offering service to God as one 
blameless and honorable, and though seen to be clad in a corrupt body, thou didst 
converse in thy service with the incorporeal ones, removing the sins of the people 
with a just scale. And now, as a great hierarch, Metrophanes hath appeared unto us, 
preaching with boldness: O Christ, Thou art equal to the Father and the Spirit.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Illumined with the grace of the Spirit and by participating in the will of God, thou 
didst become a radiant star, O wise one, enlightening those who chant: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The most holy Church, illumined by the virtuous deeds, had the uncreated Trinity 
living within thee, O sacred one, crying out: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Driving slumber from thine eyes with divine wakefulness, thou didst receive the 
effulgence of God from an angel of light, which made thee a pillar and support of the 
faithful, a true holy hierarch.  
Theotokion: The Uncircumscribable One Who sitteth in the bosom of the Father, 
O most pure one, now sitteth, circumscribed, in thy bosom, clad in thy visage, having 
become circumscribed for the salvation of Adam.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thou didst humble the prideful serpent by thy humility, O blessed one, being 
elevated to God by thy pure understanding. Wherefore, we honor thee, supremely 
exalting Christ forever.  
Thou didst theologize concerning the incarnate Word, and didst save men from 
slavery to falsehood, driving away the impiety of idolatry, O hierarch father 
Metrophanes, most wise God-bearer.  
Having a life like unto that of thy Master, and discourse befitting such a life, thou 
hast passed over to places of rest on high, O father, full of the spiritual days.  
Theotokion: Delivered from the primal curse by thy birthgiving, O most blessed 
and divinely joyous Maiden, we address to thee the cry of Gabriel: Rejoice, thou cause 
of the salvation of all!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
As one meek and innocent thou hast made thine abode in the land of the meek, O 
holy hierarch, joining the armies of heaven, wholly adorned with the splendors of the 
virtues and clad in the light of virtue.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Beholding the splendors of God and the angels, and the beauties of the patriarchs, 
martyrs and apostles, do thou with them entreat Him Who is the Lover of mankind, 
to grant remission of sins and amendment of life unto us who praise thee, O 
venerable one.  
Thou didst first splendidly adorn the throne of the foremost of all cities, having 
lived therein like an angel and adorned it with thy hierarchy; and anointing, thou hast 
sanctified the people, rendering them divinely wise.  
Theotokion: Like a heavenly rain God descended into thy womb, O Virgin, drying 
up the torrents of falsehood and raining down incorruption upon all mankind, for 
through thee, O divinely joyous one, deliverance hath been granted.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarhc:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...,”:  
We know thee to be a greatly radiant star of the Church, O holy hierarch 
Metrophanes; for with the council thou didst cast down the blasphemy of Arius, 
illumining the Church with Orthodox doctrines. Wherefore, we hymn thee with faith.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Virgin who hast given birth to the hypostatic Wisdom, the transcendent Word, 
the Physician of souls and bodies; heal thou the cruel and long-standing infection and 
wounds of my soul, and ease the pangs of my heart.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Metrophanes our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
From childhood thou wast shown to be a precious vessel, * becoming a chosen 
hierarch of God; * and to Him hast thou cried aloud with gladness: * O Christ, Thou 
art equal to the Father ** and the Spirit!  
 
 
