--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY GREAT-MARTYR JOHN THE NEW,  
SLAIN IN THE CITY OF BELGOROD-DNESTROYSKY, WHOSE RELICS REPOSE IN 
THE CITY OF SUCEAYA  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy great martyr, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Rejoicing, O ye faithful, * let us praise John of great renown, * the most wise 
warrior of piety, * the true preacher of Christ, * who danceth with the ranks of 
heaven ** and suffered with the martyrs. (Twice)  
With faith let us bless * the mighty bulwark of Christians, * the tower unshaken by 
the allurements of the tyrants, * the most excellent merchant, * who traded 
corruptible things for incorruptible, ** and looketh down on us from on high.  
In gladness let us all hymn * the foremost spiritual athlete, * the splendid 
champion, * who hath now shone forth upon us * with rays of true suffering, ** and 
let us bow down before his relics.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Come, all ye who love the martyrs! Come ye, and let us form a chorus, fashioning 
wreaths with praises, and crowning the honored head of John! For this great 
champion, having armed himself with faith in Christ, manfully entered the contest 
and confessed Christ to be the Son of God and God, the Creator and Judge of all; 
and utterly casting down the pride of the Persians and trampling the tyrant underfoot 
by his patience, he became the model and superscription for martyrs, and doth now 
pray to Christ on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
No one that fleeth unto thee, O most pure Virgin Theotokos, * departeth from 
thee ashamed; * for those that asketh grace of thee, ** ever receiveth a gift for their 
profitable petition.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
With rays of suffering thou didst shine forth * like the sun from the eastern 
regions * even unto the parts of the West, * drawing the hearts and thoughts of all ** 
to thy wonders, O glorious one.  
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
O all ye tribes of the North, * inasmuch as ye are pious, * join chorus in spirit, * 
and with hymns glorify John ** who doth love you.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Those who are planted in the house of the Lord, * in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
In these latter times thou hast been revealed * to be the comeliness which maketh 
* new the sufferings of the martyrs, * utterly casting down soul-destroying deception, 
** O blessed one.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
With the glorious John, * the martyrs confessed thee to be * the true Theotokos, * 
O Mary Bride of God; and we also fall down, ** asking forgiveness of sins.  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Haying sustained well thy life on earth with almsgiving, * and frequent prayers and 
tears, * O spiritual athlete, thou didst manfully hasten to suffering, * and denounce 
the ungodliness of the Persians; * wherefore, thou hast become a firm foundation for 
the Church * and the boast of Christians, ** O ever-memorable John.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion from the Pentecostarion, or the Resurrectional 
Theotokion, in tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera:  
If this day fall within the Pentecostarion, 3 Stichera from the Pentecostarion, 
and 5 of the great-martyr, in Tone II: repeating the first Sticheron; but if 
Pentecost hath already passed, then each of the 4 Stichera is repeated:  
Spec. Mel.: “With what wreaths of praise ...”: 
With what good songs of praise shall we hymn John: the true warrior of the great 
King, the splendid champion, the most excellent spiritual athlete of Christ, who made 
the Faith steadfast, casting down deception, who was patient amid temptations and 
undaunted amid tortures the awesome denouncer of the ungodly and ardent helper of 
the pious, through whom Christ granteth us great mercy? (Twice)  
With what wreaths of praise shall we crown John: the restoration of the martyrs, 
the skilled opponent, the champion of piety, who humbled the enemy, who sanctified 
the ground with his blood, who terrified the princes of the air and hath been 
reckoned with the angels of heaven, the pillar of gold which upholdeth all the lands of 
the north and by whom Christ, Who hath great mercy, doth vanquish all their 
enemies? (Twice) 
With what right harmonious voices shall we glorify John: the eagle who soareth 
aloft on the wisdom of words, the pinions of whose wings are golden; the trumpet of 
piety, who hath thundered forth the mysteries of the Word of God, the sword honed 
sharp by the sayings of the prophets, by whom Christ, Who hath great mercy, hath 
humbled the uprisings of the Persians? (Twice) 
With what hymn and beauties shall we crown the wondrous John: who gave his 
flesh over to flogging for the sake of Him Who for our sake gave His shoulders over 
to wounds, and who unsparingly shed his blood for Him Who abased Himself even 
to assuming the form of a servant, astonishing the tyrant by his supra-natural 
endurance, putting him to shame by his mighty opposition, whom Christ God, Who 
hath great mercy, hath crowned with wreaths of immortality? (Twice) 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Today, the denizens of heaven celebrate an honorable festival, calling those on 
earth to gladness for the memorial of John the valiant struggler, the hard diamond; 
for the arms of those who flogged him became exhausted, and the judge became 
weary even considering his tortures; but he remained above them all standing like a 
lion in the midst of the arena and filling the tyrant with fear by his confession of 
Christ, for he right boldly cried out to him: “Touch not my flesh, lest retribution 
overtake thee, O governor! For though thou hast inflicted many wounds, I shall be 
given crowns of incorruption by Christ; Whom I preach with the Father and the Holy 
Spirit!”  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or the Dogmatic, in Tone VIII:  
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth forth 
from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, * twofold in nature 
but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect 
man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O unwedded Mother, ** 
that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: “All the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be 
gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things 
from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let 
them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness,” saith 
the Lord God, “and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, 
and understand that I am He, before Me there was no other God, and after Me there 
shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have 
saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My 
witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that 
can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back?” Thus saith the 
Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall he cover them, 
and with his arm shall he protect them. He shall take to him his jealousy for complete 
armor, and make the creature his weapon for thy revenge of his enemies. He shall put 
on righteousness as a breastplate, and Judgment instead of an helmet. He shall take 
holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall he sharpen for a sword, and 
the world shall fight with him against the unwise. Then shall the right aiming 
thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, shall they fly 
to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone bow, and the 
water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, 
a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: 
thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill-dealing shall overthrow the 
thrones of the mighty. Hear therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be 
judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the 
multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord and sovereignty from the 
Highest.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was loved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated, yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood it not neither laid they up this in their minds, 
that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His 
chosen.  
At Litiya, these Stichera of the holy great martyr, in Tone I: 
Rejoice, all ye people of the north, and leap up in gladness, having in your midst 
the never-setting and greatly radiant star whose rays surpass those of the sun: John of 
great renown, the martyred branch of the root of piety, laden with choice fruit, who 
loved Christ greatly and was greatly loved of Him, and who asketh great mercy for us 
all!  
O all ye generations of the pious, joining chorus in spirit, praise ye our common 
good on the designated day of this feast, having among you, like a right fragrant rose, 
the holy and much suffering body, now glorified with the glory of incorruption, of 
him who imparteth healings of the sufferings of men’s souls and bodies.  
O ye people of the East, join chorus with those of the North, and think not over 
highly of yourselves, for another sun hath been shown forth here, making not his 
circuit toward the lands of the West and setting beyond the western horizon, but 
passing into the heavens from the earth, and making his abode with the immaterial 
intelligences; and from thence shining down, protecting and sanctifying us, and 
beseeching great mercy from Christ.  
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
Let us blow loudly upon the flute of the Spirit on the festive memorial of John, the 
warrior of valiant resolve, and gathering everyone around us with exalted preaching, 
let us say: Behold, he who suffered on earth doth now reign in the heavens! Come, 
brethren, and let us emulate him, and in imitation let us follow his zeal, becoming 
martyrs by volition! Come, ye kings and princes, and emulate him, the abundantly rich 
treasury of alms, that ye may acquire crowns like his! Ye rich and poor, ye healthy and 
infirm, draw forth healings in abundance from the sacred coffer, as from a wellspring 
of incorruption, unto the glory of God the Savior Who hath glorified the one who 
hath glorified Him.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Thou art the temple and portal, * the palace and throne of the King, * O most 
honored Virgin, * through whom Christ the Lord, my Redeemer, * Who is the Sun of 
righteousness, * hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in darkness, * deigning 
to enlighten those * whom He hath fashioned in His image by His own hand. * 
Wherefore, O all-hymned one, * as thou hast acquired a mother’s boldness before 
Him, ** entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be saved. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Thou didst traverse the deep of the sea * like a goodly sheep, * offering thyself as a 
living and animate sacrifice * unto the Lamb of God, * Who was slain for our sake, O 
glorious one. * Receiving from Him honors for thy labors, * pray that those who 
celebrate * thy most honorable memory with love ** may be delivered from cor-
ruption and misfortunes.  
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Neither the savagery of the tyrant, * nor beating with iron rods, * nor the maiming 
of thy flesh, * nor the torrents of thy blood, * were able to turn thy steadfastness 
away from Christ; * and thou didst cry out to those who tortured thee: * “Try me by 
torments as in a crucible, * that I may appear before my Creator ** like gold purified 
by fire!”  
Verse: Those who are planted in the house of the Lord, * in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
Neither the weight of chains, * nor the stench of prison, * nor the inhumanity of 
those who flayed thee, * were able to shake * thy constant loyalty to thy Master, O 
blessed one; * for Christ’s sake thou didst consider thy prison cell * to be a splendid 
bridal-chamber, * thy chains to be coins of gold, ** and thy bitter flaying to be a robe 
of royal purple.  
Glory ..., in Tone III:  
Hastening hither, O brethren, let us delight in the rays of the passion-bearer, 
which have shone forth; for John, the chosen warrior of Christ, having descended 
invisibly to us from the heavens hath set forth a spiritual banquet for us, satisfying in 
abundance every want. Let us fall down with faith, embracing his relics and crying out 
in supplication: O thrice-blessed and much suffering one, who hast been well-pleased 
to place thy precious relics in the church which thou hast loved, with thy boldness 
before God preserve and protect our leaders, who love thee.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion, in Tone III:  
By the will of the Father and without seed * thou didst conceive through the 
divine Spirit the Son of God * Who hath existed from the Father without a mother 
from before the ages, * and Who for our sake came forth from Thee in the flesh 
without a father, * and Him hast thou suckled as a babe. * Wherefore, cease not to 
beseech Him, ** that our souls be delivered from tribulations. 
At the blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV: 
Haying sustained well thy life on earth with almsgiving, * and frequent prayers and 
tears, * O spiritual athlete, thou didst manfully hasten to suffering, * and denounce 
the ungodliness of the Persians; * wherefore, thou hast become a firm foundation for 
the Church * and the boast of Christians, ** O ever-memorable John. (Twice) 
And the Troparion from the Pentecostarion, once; or, if the fifty-day period after 
Pascha be passed, “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once).  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Haying sustained well thy life on earth with almsgiving, * and frequent prayers and 
tears, * O spiritual athlete, thou didst manfully hasten to suffering, * and denounce 
the ungodliness of the Persians; * wherefore, thou hast become a firm foundation for 
the Church * and the boast of Christians, ** O ever-memorable John. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion from the Pentecostarion, or the Resurrectional 
Theotokion, in tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn of the saint, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Thy tomb, O holy one, hath become a new Pool of Siloam for those who 
approach it with faith, pouring forth healing of bodily infirmities and the passions of 
men’s souls; wherefore, assembling today, we celebrate thy holy memory, glorifying 
our one God. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion; or this Theotokion, 
in Tone I: 
In the midst of the tribunal, O Mother of God, the crowned John splendidly 
confessed thee to be the true Theotokos, who hast given birth to One of the Trinity 
yet didst remain a virgin; wherefore, O most hymned one, entreat thy Son and God 
with him, that He grant us forgiveness of sins.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
Thou hast been given to us by God as one more beautiful than gold and topaz, O 
most honorable John, drawing the eyes of the minds and hearts of all to an 
understanding of the wonders of thy sufferings; wherefore, we cry out to thee with 
love: Rejoice, O our most radiant boast! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional hymn from the Pentecostarion; or this Theotokion, 
in the same tone: 
Awed by the beauty of thy virginity * and the exceeding radiance of thy purity, * 
Gabriel called out unto thee, O Theotokos: * What worthy hymn of praise can I offer 
unto thee? * And what shall I name thee? * I am in doubt and stand in awe. * 
Wherefore as commanded, I cry to thee: ** Rejoice, O Full of Grace. 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O passion-bearer and 
great-martyr John, and we reverence thine honored sufferings, which thou didst 
endure for Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Our God is refuge and strength. A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
The tyrant was amazed, beholding the supra-natural endurance which thou didst 
show; the angels received thee, placing crowns upon thy head; and the demons were 
put to shame by thy valor: for they thought to lay thee low by blandishments, but 
were vanquished by thee and fell headlong. And the faithful have been made steadfast 
by thy confession. O Thou Who strengthened the martyr then, enlighten our souls! 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn from the Pentecostarion. 
Or this Theotokion, in the same tone:  
Joseph marveled, beholding that which transcendeth nature, and pondering thy 
seedless conception he dwelt in thought upon the dew which fell upon the fleece, the 
bush unconsumed by the fire, and the rod of Aaron which put forth branches. And 
thy guardian and betrothed cried out to the priests: “The Virgin giveth birth, and even 
after birthgiving remaineth virgin!”  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplications unto Thee.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §106  
The Lord said to His disciples: “Beware of men: they shall lay their hands on you, 
and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being 
brought before kings and rulers for My name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a 
testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall 
answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not 
be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, 
and kinfolks, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye 
shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake. But there shall not an hair of your head 
perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Today the Church holdeth festival, adorning herself with the struggles of the 
passion-bearer as with most costly vesture; crying aloud and offering praise: “Such are 

--- PAGE 10 ---
mine offspring, such are my children, to whom I first gave birth through baptism, and 
reared in the fear of the Lord, and now behold as martyrs, truly chosen and crowned, 
that they may pray to the Lord on behalf of the whole world!”  
Canon of the most holy Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of 
the holy great-martyr, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon to the Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is: “I chant praise unto the Life-
bearing Maiden,” in Tone II: 
Irmos: Traversing dryshod the impassible, peculiar path in the sea, * Israel the 
chosen cried aloud: * Let us chant unto the Lord, * for He hath been glorified!  
The immaterial ladder of old and the path of the sea made strangely firm revealed 
thy birthgiving, O pure one. Her do we all hymn, for she hath been glorified!  
The power of the Most High, the perfect Hypostasis, the Wisdom of God 
incarnate of thee, O most pure one, hath conversed with mankind, for He hath been 
glorified!  
The Sun of thy righteousness hath passed through the impassible door of thy 
locked womb, O pure one, and shone forth upon the world, for He hath been 
glorified!  
Canon of the holy great-martyr, the acrostic whereof is “I offer new praise unto the 
new martyr Gregory”, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O blessed John, newly revealed martyr, thou wast made manifest to the world in 
the latter times; wherefore, by thy grace grant me discourse, that I may worthily hymn 
thy struggles.  
Standing at the tribunal, with noetic eyes thou didst gaze upon the honorable 
company of the martyrs, who joyfully called to thee, O John, and adorned thee with 
fitting crowns.  
By the right wondrous war-craft of thy soldiery we have obtained victories over 
the nature of the tyrant; for, put utterly to shame, he doth no longer dare to resume 
his tyrannical deeds.  
Arrayed in the breastplate of the confession of the Faith, and wearing the most 
splendid helmet of grace, O John, with thy divinely eloquent tongue as with a sword 
thou didst hew down the mindless governor.  
Theotokion: The most lofty mountain, which Daniel beheld, prefigured thee, from 
whom the Stone was quarried not by the hands of men, O Theotokos; for without 
the aid of a man thou hast given birth in the flesh to Emmanuel, for our sake.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath been broken * by Thy might, O Christ, * 
and the enfeebled * have girded themselves with power.  
Let us hymn the womb which is far more spacious than the heavens, through 
which Adam hath come to make his abode in the heavens, rejoicing.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Thou wast tried by torments like precious gold, O glorious spiritual athlete, 
offering thyself to the King of hosts as the true fruits of discourse, slaughtered by the 
sword instead of by the altar’s fire.  
The lawless Jews who slew the prophets were not content with slaying the Master 
and Lord so long ago, but running forth they slaughtered the martyr who was 
pitilessly dragged along by the servants of ungodliness.  
The governor spread out his nets, seeking to lure the most wise spiritual athlete 
into his snares with cunning words; but he cried out to him: “Cease thy many 
blasphemous sayings, for I will not worship a created thing rather than the Creator!”  
The shrine of thy relics hath been revealed to be a fruitful olive-tree in the midst 
of the church of the living God, from which we who have been enriched by thee and 
adorned by thy miracles, pluck the healing of divers infirmities.  
Theotokion: The divine Ezekiel said: “The gate shall be shut.” And this hath been 
fulfilled in thee, O Sovereign Lady; for the Word of the Father ineffably entered into 
thee and from thee appeared unto the world, O Virgin, clad in flesh, preserving thee 
in both maternity and virginity.  
Kontakion & Ikos from the Pentecostarion.  
Sessional Hymn of the great-martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Thou wast a lover of wisdom, O treasury of the virtues, from whence thou didst 
draw forth divine understanding; wherefore, when the time came, thou didst eagerly 
strip thyself naked for the contest, accepting the wounds of martyrdom, the laceration 
of thy flesh and the outpouring of thy blood; and dwelling now with the martyrs in 
ineffable light, we cry aloud to thee; entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of 
sins unto those who with faith venerate thy holy relics. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion.  
Or this Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
I ponder the judgment, and I am afraid; I tremble before the dread trial, and am 
terrified of torment, the pain of the fire, the darkness and Tartar. Alas! What shall I 

--- PAGE 12 ---
do? How can I endure the shame when the scrolls are unwound and my deeds laid 
bare? Wherefore, I fall down before thee, O most pure Theotokos. Stand before me 
then, and rescue me from such violence, for thee do I have as a refuge, O Sovereign 
Lady!  
ODE IV  
Canon to the Theotokos  
Irmos: I have heard report O Lord, * of Thy glorious dispensation, * and I 
have glorified, Thine unapproachable power, * O Lover of mankind.  
Behold! the supremely manifest Mother of God, the divine mountain of the house 
of the Lord, is exalted far above the hosts of heaven.  
O Virgin, who, outside the laws of nature, hast given birth unto the Ruler of 
creation; thou alone hast been deemed worthy of such a divine calling.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
The tongue of the tyrant was a hook of deception dangled by the craftiness of the 
enemy, whose purpose was to capture the brave-hearted one; but its intention was 
annulled, and foiled when the spiritual athlete cried out in joy: Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
“What is it to me, these many words and corrupt promises, mindlessly made by 
thee?” John cried out to the tyrant; “All these things are more bitter than gall to me, I 
rather cry out sweetly: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!”  
“When many wounds blossom forth on my flesh, then shall I hope to be granted a 
most splendid crown,” the spiritual athlete said to the Persian; “Touch me not again, 
O thou evil minded one, for I cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!”  
“In nowise shall I obey thee, seeking to draw me into perdition,” John exclaimed 
to the worshipper of fire, “I would rather readily die for Him Who died for me, that 
with the martyrs I may cry out with splendor: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!”  
Theotokion: Of old, Israel’s crossing of the Red Sea prefigured thy birth giving 
which was without knowing a man, O Queen of all; for as it once passed over 
without getting wet, so did Christ seedlessly issue forth from thy most pure blood, O 
Virgin.  
ODE V  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: The burning Ember was revealed to Isaiah, * and the Sun hath shone 
forth from the Virgin’s womb, * granting the enlightenment of the knowledge 
of God * to those who in darkness have gone astray.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Clouds of light rain down delight upon those who are on earth, for unto us hath a 
Child been given, Who hath existed from before the ages: our God, Who hath 
assumed flesh from the Virgin.  
Light hath shone forth upon my life and my flesh, and hath destroyed the gloom 
of sin: He is the most Exalted One, Who in the latter days was seedlessly incarnate 
from the Virgin.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
They who beat thy martyric flesh grew exhausted, and the tyrant, seeking 
vengeance, grew weary; but the martyr endured valiantly, covered with wounds which 
he endured out of love for his Lord.  
How awesome and glorious was thine opposition, which amazed the peoples who 
attended thy contest, so that they praised thy patience; but the Persians and the Jews, 
put to shame, were clothed in humiliation.  
Multitudes stood round about, looking upon what was taking place, O glorious 
one, and the tyrant, taking his seat, hoped to win thee over; but the mindless one was 
deprived of his hope, Seeking in vain to convert the undaunted one, and beating the 
adamantine one to no effect.  
The divine John, reviling the mindless edict of the ungodly governor, denounced 
the error of Persian arrogance, saying: “I will not worship the sun, for it is a created 
thing, and worshipping it doth enslave men, since it is only one of the great works of 
the hands of God!”  
Theotokion: God the Word, Who on high is equally co-eternal with God the 
Father, and as both God and man with us, hath come down to our lowliness, O 
Theotokos. Wherefore, I have been freed of the curse of mine ancestors, as beheld by 
the Patriarch Jacob, who perceived thee as the ladder of heaven.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: O Master, hearkening unto the sound of entreaties * from a soul in 
pain, * do Thou deliver me from my grievous sins, * for Thou alone art the 
Cause of our salvation.  
Human nature, enslaved to sin, hath obtained freedom through thee, O pure Lady; 
for thy Son hath been sacrificed like a lamb.  
We all cry out to thee, the true Mother of God: Save thou thy servants, the objects 
of wrath, for thou alone hast boldness before thy Son.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
In nowise could the savagery of him who issued the command, nor the beating 
with staves, nor wounds, nor a most violent death, shake the pillars of thy piety.  
The purity of thy mind was likened to the eyes of a cherub, for thou didst manfully 
endure tortures below, but on high hast come to stand before the Master, Who sent 
down upon thee a crown of victory,  
The choirs of the martyrs leapt up in splendor when they beheld thy boldness; 
and, descending with the angels, they invisibly strengthened thee for the contest,  
O John, thou excellent spiritual athlete, thou didst consider thine iron chains to be 
golden necklaces, and the stones which the Jews flung at thee to be steps leading up 
to heaven,  
Theotokion: Gideon accepted the dewy fleece as an image prefiguring thy wonder, 
O Theotokos, for One of the Trinity, assuming flesh, descended into thy womb, like 
the dew upon the fleece.  
Kontakion, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “O Thou who wast lifted up ...”:  
Plying the deep of the sea for trade, * thou didst set out from the East for the 
North; * but when God called thee, as He did Matthew the tax-collector, * thou didst 
forsake thy trade and follow Him * by the blood of martyrdom, * exchanging 
transitory things for those which are eternal; ** thus receiving a crown of victory.  
Ikos: The most wise Creator and Master, the Owner of the noetic vineyard, as He 
said in the parable of the vineyard with His own mouth, hath rendered the same 
payment to those who worked from the eleventh hour as He gave to those who 
worked from the first, And now, by His works, He hath disclosed what was hidden in 
the parable, showing forth John, the radiant martyr, who finally appeared after more 
than a thousand years, glorifying him with incorruption and the gift of healings, like 
unto the passion-bearers of old. For exchanging transitory things for those which are 
eternal, he hath received a crown of victory  
ODE VII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Of old the youths revealed themselves to be rhetors * with a love for 
supreme wisdom, * for from the depths of their God-pleasing souls, * they 
theologized with their lips as they sang: * O supremely divine God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
At night Jacob beheld God as in a dream, and that He was to become incarnate of 
thee, manifesting Himself in splendor unto those who chant: O supremely divine 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
He Who wrestled with Jacob, prefiguring the ineffable union in thee, O pure one, 
willingly uniting Himself to mankind, is the supremely divine God of our fathers!  
The vile one who had not proclaimed Thee, the Son of the Virgin, to be One of 
the all-hymned Trinity, cried out with steadfast thought and with his tongue: Most 
blessed is the supremely divine God of our fathers!  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
O right wondrous John, thou didst consider the sufferings to which thou wast 
subjected to be like the darts of children, and didst chant in joy: O all-hymned Lord 
and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Stretching forth his hand often toward the tyrant, John said: “Why dost thou exert 
thyself in vain, O shameless one? For in torturing me thou adornest my vesture, and 
makest death a crown of incorruption for me!”  
“I am a true martyr of Christ our true God,” the spiritual athlete cried; “for I 
consider flaying to be blossoms of sweet fragrance and the streams of my blood to be 
the laver of baptism.”  
“My life in the flesh do I hold to be as night,” John reasoned wisely; “wherefore, 
sever this bond quickly, that I may inherit life with Christ!”  
Theotokion: Even the tongue of a rhetor falleth mute and silent when he seeth 
thee, O divinely joyous one; for he cannot comprehend the ineffable birthgiving of 
thine unapproachable conception.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Disdaining the golden image, the thrice-blessed children, * beholding 
the immutable and living image of God, * chanted in the midst of the flame: * 
Let all existing creation hymn the Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
He that is incomparable in grace and might hath became visible on earth through 
thee and dwelt among mankind. Chanting unto Him, O all ye faithful, let us cry aloud: 
Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Truly proclaiming thee the pure one we glorify thee, O Theotokos, for thou didst 
give birth to the One of the Trinity Who became incarnate. And to Him, with the 
Father and the Spirit, we sing: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Kings have called thee blessed and hierarchs have blessed thee, on hearing of thy 
manly endurance, acquiring thee as a mediator before Christ; and approaching thy 
precious relics, they bow down before them.  
Once the nations and lawless people raged against Christ the Lord, imagining vain 
things; and now the Persians have gathered together, flaying John, while the Jews slew 
him.  
The incorporeal serpent was seized and held fast by thee, and utterly cast down by 
thine endurance in the flesh; and thou didst quench his might and cruel tyranny for 
Christ Who clothed Himself in the flesh.  
Boasting in the wounds of Christ, thou didst hasten to the eternal mansions; and 
clothed in a robe empurpled by thy blood, O martyr, thou standest in radiance before 
the King of hosts joining chorus with the martyrs.  
Theotokion: Of old, a burning coal was sent to Isaiah, borne on tongs by a seraph, 
and when it touched him it remitted his sins. And thou O Virgin, art the tongs which 
have borne the divine Word unto the remission of the sins of mankind.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Thou art all desire, Thou art all sweetness, * O Word of God, Son of the 
Virgin, * God of gods, most holy Lord of the saints. * Wherefore, we magnify 
Thee * and her who hath given birth to Thee.  
In thy womb, O pure one, the Word of God was given to corruptible nature as a 
staff of strength. And He restored what had been dragged down to Hades. 
Wherefore, we magnify thee, O most pure one, as the Theotokos.  
O Master, mercifully accept Thy Mother as an intercessor on our behalf, as Thou 
hast willed, and all things shall be filled with Thy goodness, that we all may magnify 
Thee as our Benefactor.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Thou wast a true warrior of the preaching of Christ, O John, and a destroyer of 
the deception of ungodliness. Wherefore, by thy supplications suppress now the 
uprisings of the barbarians, casting them down beneath the feet of the pious, O 
glorious one.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Even though thy flesh was cut away and thy blood shed, O wise one, trophies of 
victory were bestowed on thee; wherefore, by thy power put to shame those who rise 
up against us, and show forth our civil authorities as victors.  
Thou didst break the bow unjustly aimed at thy heritage, which thou didst choose 
and love, O invincible warrior, and hast made firm the rule of our civil authorities, 
that we may live our lives in peace and tranquility.  
Thy radiant and honorable memorial for which we have longed, have we received 
and embraced, rejoicing in spirit; and leaping up, O blessed one, we pray: The place 
and the people where thou wast pleased to be glorified, and our civil authorities, do 
thou maintain unharmed.  
Theotokion: Through thee, O Theotokos, have we seen Him Whom all the 
prophets proclaimed in many ways, incarnate for our sake: the perfect God Who hath 
delivered mankind from the curse of our ancestors. By thy supplications may we be 
delivered from everlasting Gehenna.  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Having fallen asleep in the flesh ...”:  
Standing before the never-waning Light with the choirs of the martyrs, O blessed 
one, by thy supplications save from temptations those who hymn thee on thy 
memorial. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion:  
O Ever-virgin, thou litter bearing the never-waning Light Who enlighteneth those 
who sit in the darkness of the deception of ignorance: Shine the light of thy Son also 
upon us sinners.  
On the Praises, if this date fall within the fifty-day period following Pascha: 6 
Stichera: 3 from the Pentecostarion, and 3 of the great-martyr, But if this date 
falls outside the fifty-day period after Pascha, we chant 4 Stichera of the holy 
great-martyr, chanting the first Sticheron twice: in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
O all-famed John, * neither the savagery of the tyrant, * nor his words of 
blandishment, * nor the threat of tortures, nor bitter floggings, * separated thee from 
Christ, * Whom thou hadst loved from childhood. * Unto Him do thou pray, ** that 
He grant our souls peace and great mercy. (Twice) 
“For me naught is sweeter, * nor are fleeting glory or corrupt riches * to be 
preferred to Christ, * the King of heaven!” * thus didst thou say to those * who 
tortured thee, O John. * Him do thou beseech, ** that He grant our souls peace and 
great mercy.  
In the latter years the most noble martyr * became a model of martyrdom, * 
setting the souls of those who love God * aflame with zeal * through the abundantly 
rich glory * of his sufferings; * and he entreateth Christ, ** that He grant our souls 
peace and great mercy.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Come, ye who love the martyrs, and let us noetically delight today in the banquet 
of the Spirit which the martyr John hath set forth for us, and in which the angels 
likewise delight, as the prophet said: “I have eaten the bread of angels!” With them he 
abideth in spirit, begging Christ the Savior to grant remission of sins unto us who 
celebrate his honored memorial.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion, in the same tone: 
All of my hope do I place in thee, * O Mother of God; ** keep me under thy 
protection.  
Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: If this date fall within the fifty-day period 
following Pascha: 4 from the Pentecostarion, and 4 from ODE VI of the canon 
of the saint. But if this date fall after the fifty-day period following Pascha, 4 
from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the saint, given below.  
Thou wast tried by torments like precious gold, O glorious athlete, and didst offer 
thyself to the King of hosts as the true fruits of discourse, slaughtered by the sword 
instead of by the altar’s fire.  
The lawless Jews who slew the prophets were not content with slaying the Master 
and Lord so long ago, but running forth they slaughtered the martyr who was 
pitilessly dragged along by the servants of ungodliness.  
The governor spread out his nets, seeking to lure the most wise spiritual athlete 
into his snares with cunning words; but he cried out to him: “Cease thy many 
blasphemous sayings, for I will not worship a created thing rather than ·the Creator!”  
The shrine of thy relics hath been shown to be a fruitful olive-tree in the midst of 
the church of the living God, and therefrom we who have been enriched by thee and 
adorned by thy miracles pluck the healing of divers infirmities.  
In nowise did the savagery of him who issued the command, nor beating with 
staves, nor wounds, nor a most violent death, shake the pillars of thy piety.  
The purity of thy mind was like unto the eyes of a cherub, for thou didst manfully 
endure tortures below, but on high hast come to stand before the Master, Who sent 
down upon thee a crown of victory,  
The choirs of the martyrs leapt up in splendor when they beheld thy boldness; 
and, descending with the angels, they invisibly strengthened thee for the contest,  
Theotokion: Gideon accepted the dewy fleece as an image prefiguring thy wonder, 
O Theotokos, for One of the Trinity, incarnate, descended into thy womb, like dew 
upon the fleece.  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Haying sustained well thy life on earth with almsgiving, * and frequent prayers and 
tears, * O spiritual athlete, thou didst manfully hasten to suffering, * and denounce 
the ungodliness of the Persians; * wherefore, thou hast become a firm foundation for 
the Church * and the boast of Christians, ** O ever-memorable John.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Plying the deep of the sea for trade, * thou didst set out from the East for the 
North; * but when God called thee, as He did Matthew the tax-collector, * thou didst 
forsake thy trade and follow Him * by the blood of martyrdom, * exchanging 
transitory things for those which are eternal; ** thus receiving a crown of victory.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §233  
Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of His might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.  
Alleluia in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §36  
The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of 
wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: 
for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a 
testimony against them and the gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake: but he who endureth to the end 
shall be saved.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
