--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 7th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR THEODOTUS,  
BISHOP OF ANCYRA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
With joyful heart and steadfast resolve, O martyr, * thou didst truly brave the 
torments, * undaunted by the pangs of the torturers * or a violent death; * wherefore, 
having contended lawfully, ** thou hast been crowned with splendor, O Theodotus.  
By the testing of thy flesh * thou didst wound the adversary, O blessed one, * 
piercing their hearts with thy rebukes; * and with the drops of thy blood * which thou 
didst shed ** thou didst utterly dry up torrents of ungodliness, O most blessed one.  
Burned steadily with torches * and thy back lacerated with stripes, * thou didst 
endure, O martyr, crying aloud: * “Nothing shall ever separate me from the love of 
Christ, * neither death, nor life, ** nor any other torment!”  
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
Beset by hopeless falls, * yet having thee alone as an intercessor, O pure Virgin, * 
we cry out in thanksgiving: * Cleanse us, O most holy Bride of God, * for thou art 
the refuge of the world ** and the help of our race!  
With the rod of thine intercession, O pure Birthgiver of God, * quickly drive the 
bestial passions away * from my wretched soul, * governing my life in peace, * that I 
may be reckoned among the holy flock ** of thy chosen sheep.  
Sinking in the deep of sins, * yet fleeing to the calm harbor * of thy most pure 
supplication, O Birthgiver of God, * I cry unto thee: * Save me, O most immaculate 
one, ** extending thy mighty right hand to thy servant!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone I:  
Having stumbled headlong through my corrupt character, * I lay prostrate, O 
Virgin, yet I flee to thy serenity. * Deliver me from the storm of the adversary * and 
from multifarious temptations, * that I may unceasingly hymn thy grace, ** O ever-
virgin Mother and Theotokos.  
Stavrotheotokion: Standing at the foot of the Cross * of thy Son and God, * and 
looking upon His long-suffering, O pure Mother, * weeping, thou didst say: “Woe is 
me, O my sweetest Child! * How is it that Thou sufferest these things unjustly, O 
Word of God, ** that Thou mayest save mankind?”  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Theodotus, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is “Thou wast truly the gift of 
God, O blessed one,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone VI: 
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
The noetic Sun, showing thee to be a divinely shining star in the heights of His 
Church, O blessed one, illumined all the earth with the radiance of thy sufferings.  
Inclined toward God from the years of thy youth, O Theodotus, thou didst 
manifestly illumine thy soul with divinely bestowed virtues, and hast adorned the 
world with thine honored sufferings.  
Seeing the nets of the deceiver spread out upon the earth, the glorious martyr 
passed through them all, making the souls of the pious steadfast through his teachings 
and grace.  
Theotokion: Bowing down the heavens in His surpassing tender compassion, the 
Son of God descended and became incarnate of thee, O pure one, saving mankind 
from the beguilement of the serpent.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Ever gazing upon God with noetic eyes, O ever-memorable martyr, thou didst not 
feel the wounds inflicted upon thy body when wounded in every part.  
Thou wast in nowise shaken by the onset of pangs, O martyr, nor by the 
allurements of the iniquitous ones, but stood immovably on the hard rock of the 
Faith of Christ, O glorious Theodotus.  
Though he inflicted many wounds upon thy body, the persecutor was unable to 
weaken the resolve of thy soul, O blessed one, having been made steadfast by the 
divine love of the Savior.  
Theotokion: The divinely eloquent choir of the prophets, perceiving from afar the 
profound mystery wrought in thee, O most pure Bride of God, with many and varied 
cries proclaimed thee to be the pure Mother of God.  
Sessional Hymn of the hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
O blessed Theodotus, thou wast truly a star of great radiance, illumining creation 
with gifts of miracles and sacred sufferings; wherefore, celebrating thy resplendent 
memorial today, we magnify Christ in gladness of heart.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone I:  
O pure Virgin Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, thou sole intercessor and 
protection of the faithful: from tribulations, sorrows and cruel circumstances deliver 
all who place their trust in thee, O Maiden, and save our souls by thy divine 
supplications.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
With the wisdom of thy words and the grace of thy deeds thou didst manifestly 
put to shame the prince of darkness, O Theodotus, and gain victory over him, having 
struggled gloriously.  
With the fire of thy sufferings thou didst manifestly consume the delusion of 
polytheism, O martyr, and having mystically lighted thyself with the Holy Spirit like a 
lamp, thou hast enlightened the whole world.  
Thy sides mightily lacerated and truly covered all over with cruel wounds, thou 
wast revealed to be unshaken in mind because of thy faith, O glorious and ever-
memorable one.  
Theotokion: Preserving thee incorrupt after giving birth as thou wast before 
birthgiving, O Virgin, the Creator made His abode within thy womb, restoring those 
who had become corrupt through many sins.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Protected by a divine force, O wise martyr, thou didst manifestly endure the 
onslaughts of the iniquitous ones through thy patience, suffering the affliction of 
tortures and burning.  
Preaching the word of piety, O divinely wise martyr, thou didst journey far on 
paths of travel, and didst turn to the Light those led astray by the darkness of vanity.  
Like a lamb thou wast suspended upon a tree, O martyr, and endured maiming 
with iron blades as though thou wast without a body, stripping away the coarseness of 
mortality, O blessed one.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: O pure Virgin, of thy pure blood thou truly hast given birth to the 
incarnate Word of the Father in two perfect natures but a single Hypostasis, O 
divinely joyous one.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
With thy sacred discourses thou didst prepare the pure women for the contest, O 
martyr, and bringing down the enemy with manly exertions, they have woven crowns 
of incorruption.  
Protecting thy soul with the might of the Spirit, by thine endurance of wounds 
thou didst cast down the spirits of evil, O right wondrous one, receiving from God a 
crown of victory.  
With the drops of thy blood, O martyr of Christ, thou didst quench the flame of 
the idols; and with the dew of thy pangs thou didst moisten the souls of the pious, 
delivering them from the flame of deception.  
Theotokion: He Who is God of every and all created things, noetic and visible, 
truly made His abode within thy womb, and assumed flesh, edifying all mankind, O 
Ever-virgin.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
With the fire of thy pangs, O divinely blessed one, thou didst quench the burning 
of the idols; and in the torrents of thy blood, drown the incorporeal foe, O 
Theodotus, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst offer thyself to the Judge of thy contest like incense of a sweet savor, 
O wise one, annulling fetid deception by divine grace; wherefore, thou dost chant 
with joy: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Preserving thy words, the holy Fortus gave thee over to the God-bearing Fortunus 
for the construction of an honorable temple for the cleansing of all the pious and the 
preservation of men’s souls, O martyr Theodotus.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother, thou hast given birth unto Him Who beareth a 
single hypostasis, yet manifestly hath two wills and essential characteristics; for He 
Who became incarnate for our sake is both God and man.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
An unshakable tower, an unbreakable rampart, an invincible bulwark, a foundation 
of the Faith, a divine gift, a champion of piety, and a destroyer of deception wast thou 
shown to be, O passion-bearer.  
Steered by divine grace, O most wise one, thou didst traverse the great deep of 
torments and, rejoicing, attain unto the calm harbors of the heavenly kingdom, O 
glorious one.  
Directing thy steps and feet to Christ, the God and Lord of all, thou didst give thy 
spirit into His hands, O thrice-blessed martyr and passion-bearer Theodotus.  
Theotokion: The language of the rhetors cannot describe the unfathomable depth 
of thy mystery, for, in a manner past all telling, thou hast given birth to the Word of 
God for the salvation of all, O most pure Virgin.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
That thou mightest receive heavenly glory, O passion-bearer, rejoicing, thou didst 
spurn visible glory; and committing thyself to tortures with divine resolve, thou wast 
undaunted by the prospect of tortures and bitter death; wherefore, having struggled, 
thou hast been crowned with the martyrs.  
Thou didst show thyself to be the pure temple of the Trinity, erected by godly 
deeds and adorned with the brilliance of splendid sufferings, O most noetically rich 
Theodotus; wherefore, with the divine power of the Comforter thou didst manifestly 
demolish the demonic temples of the graven images.  
Thou wast revealed to be a mountain exuding divine sweetness, a wellspring of 
miracles, an abyss of divine gifts, and a radiant stream of the Holy Spirit giving drink 
to men’s souls, drowning the passions, and winning joy for all who hymn thee with 
piety, O glorious martyr.  
Theotokion: At the cry of the angel thou didst conceive the Word Who is without 
beginning, Who took noetic and animate flesh of thy pure blood, O all-pure Virgin, 
and cast down the incorporeal foe, saving all who confess thee to be the true 
Theotokos.  
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Theodotus, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
