--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 5th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR DOROTHEUS,  
BISHOP OF TYRE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy Martyrs O Lord ...”: 
Thou wast revealed to be a tablet of the Spirit of God, O divinely blessed father, 
bearing the doctrines of God engraved upon thy divine mind; and in disclosing them 
thou didst illumine those languishing in ignorance. Wherefore, by thy supplications, 
O father, ask thou great mercy for us all. 
Having dyed thy priestly raiment in the streams of thy divine blood, O 
Dorotheus, thou hast now entered, rejoicing, into the temple of heaven, to appear 
before our God, Who bestoweth crowns upon those who have suffered. Him do 
thou earnestly entreat, that He send down great mercy upon all. 
Angelic was thy life and splendid thy martyrdom, for which thou was deemed 
worthy to rejoice with the angels, O father Dorotheus, illumining the land with divine 
miracles and teachings. Wherefore, in thine entreaties ask God to grant great mercy 
unto all. 
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
O Mistress, wrest me from the hands of the serpent, the slayer of mankind, who 
wars against me with deceit, seeking to slay me utterly. Crush his jaws and destroy his 
wiles, I pray, that, delivered from his talons, I may magnify thy power. 
O all-immaculate one, I am a barren tree devoid of the fruit of salvation, and for 
this cause I tremble at the thought of being cut down, lest I be cast into the 
unquenchable fire, wretch that I am. Wherefore, I fall down before thee, crying: 
Deliver me therefrom, O pure one, and present me to thy Son, rendered fruitful by 
thy mediation. 
The deadly dart of desire hath pierced my heart, and I am wounded by ignorance 
and suffer incurable pain. O Mother of God, disdain me not, wretch though I am, but 
grant me healing, in that thou gavest birth to the Lord and Savior Who alone is 
compassionate. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
My thoughts are impure, and my lips are false, all my works are defiled. What, 
then, shall I do? How shall I meet the Judge? O Virgin Sovereign Lady, entreat the 
Lord, thy Son and Creator, that He accept my soul in repentance, in that He alone is 
compassionate.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished heifer, beholding her Bullock willingly nailed 
to the Tree, cried out aloud, lamenting piteously: “Woe is me, O my most beloved 
Child! How hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, desiring to leave 
me childless and bereft of Thee, my most beloved Child?”  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Dorotheus, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
The Canon of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII,  
ODE I 
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
By thy perfect life and honorable martyrdom thou didst bring thyself to God as a 
most precious gift, O all-blessed Dorotheus. 
Pressing thy thoughts like ripe grapes, O father, thou hast presented thy teachings 
to the faithful like a cup of gladness. 
With the torrents of thy most wise tongue thou hast stopped the streams of 
falsehood, O Dorotheus, and hast watered the minds of the faithful. 
Theotokion: Rain down upon me drops of compunction, O Virgin, washing away 
the defilement which cling to me, that I may glorify thee. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Thou didst dispel all the night of vanity with the brilliance of thy most wise 
preaching, O holy hierarch and father. 
With miracles and sacred teachings didst thou make steadfast the thoughts of all 
the faithful, O wise one, as a sacred pastor. 
With the oil of the priesthood the Lord anointed thee, O father, ordaining thee a 
chief-shepherd of His divine Church. 
Theotokion: Illumine my whole heart with divine light, O portal of the Light, 
driving away the darkness of sin. 
Sessional hymn, in Tone III, Special Melody: “Of the divine Faith ...” 
Ever resplendent with divine dogmas, in thy sufferings thou didst offer thyself to 
the immortal King as a holy gift, O Dorotheus; and now in gladness thou ever 
dwellest in the city on high. O venerable father, entreat Christ God, that He grant us 
great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III: 
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence, * when taking flesh in thy 
womb, * He remained God though He had became a man; * and even after thy 
birthgiving, preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, * as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. * Him do thou earnestly beseech, ** that He grant us great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt 
Virgin Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * sus-
pended upon the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * 
How is it that Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the 
indignity of the passions?” 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
The winter of ungodliness which had arisen didst thou revile, O venerable one, 
and with the warmth of the divine Spirit thou didst preserve thy heart unharmed. 
The mountains of the demons’ violence were reduced to dust before thy face, O 
blessed Dorotheus, and the arrogance of ungodly men withered away. 
Though persecuted and driven from city to city, thou didst endure; wherefore, 
thou hast received the blessed glory and splendor of the martyrs. 
Theotokion: Save me from the tempest of temptations and soul-destroying 
passions, that with faith I may call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin Maiden and 
Mother. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
Noetically looking forward to divine rewards, O Dorotheus, thou didst endure 
great tribulations and trials. 
Preaching the Trinity in the unity of the Godhead, O Dorotheus, thou didst 
destroy the vainglorious arrogance of the madness of polytheism. 
Refusing to worship the works of the hands of the iniquitous, O martyr 
Dorotheus, thou didst endure trials, tribulations, wounds and pangs. 
Theotokion: Thou wast the orient of the Sun Who shone forth before the 
morning star, O pure one, and through thee those who were in the darkness of evils 
have beheld the Light. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Through the inspiration of the Spirit, O Dorotheus, thou didst acquire a burning 
heart which destroyeth the onslaught of the adverse spirits. 
With sacred writings thou didst set forth the lives of the saints, O divinely 
inspired father, enlightening thy soul with divine understanding. 
The sound of thy words and the power of thy beautiful teachings have passed 
round about the whole world with divine grace, O most blessed one. 
Theotokion: O Virgin, entreat God, Whom thou didst bear as a man, that He 
deliver me from fire and torment. 
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone V: 
Resplendent with virtues brighter than the sun * and with thy sufferings, O 
blessed Dorotheus, * thou didst shine forth and illumine the land, * dispelling the 
darkness of polytheism * and putrid heresy. * Wherefore, we radiantly celebrate thy 
memory. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Thou wast shown to be a star of great brilliance, O Dorotheus, illumining with 
the radiance of thy sufferings the souls of those who cry out with faith: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages! 
Treading the straight paths, thou didst fell the groves of the deceiver, guiding to 
the paths of life those who cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, forever! 
With the showers of thy blood thou didst extinguish the furnace of deception, O 
most glorious one; and thou hast made thine abode by the waters of life, crying: 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages! 
Theotokion: Deliver my wretched soul from the bonds of sin, O Theotokos, and 
bind it perfectly to the love of God, that with faith O Theotokos, I may glorify thee 
throughout the ages.  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * ‘Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord’. 
Having humbled thyself in the Lord, O father, thou didst humble the serpent 
who boasted in malice; and cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
When thou wast at an advanced old age, the Creator caused thee to dwell in 
places of rest not subject to age, O sacred father, thou adornment of martyrs. 
Possessed of an angelic life, thou standest now with the angels before the throne 
of thy Master, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Theotokion: Having given birth to the most comely Word, thou wast shown to 
be a comely Virgin. To Him do we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
 ODE IX 
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire of 
the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the salvation 
of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we magnify thee. 
Thou didst guide the flock of Christ to the divine havens, having preserved them 
unharmed by the storm of the adversary, in that thou art a most excellent hierarch 
and a fulfiller of the commandments of God, O wise father. 
As a pure celebrant of the sacred mysteries, a valiant martyr, a wondrous worker of 
miracles, a recorder of divine things, an unshakable pillar of the Faith, O father, thou 
hast received everlasting glory. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having endured many trials and pangs in the tribunal, thou didst pass over, 
rejoicing, to the divine life which is devoid of pain, where thou dost now partake of 
divinity in a pure manner, O right wondrous martyr Dorotheus. 
Thy divinely radiant memory hath enlightened the world, illumining the faithful 
with rays of divine gifts. O father, show forth us who glorify it to be partakers also of 
thy divine radiance. 
Theotokion: Bearing in thine arms Christ Who beareth all things in His divine 
hand, O pure one, do thou ever entreat Him, that He set forth the offerings of our 
hands as incense before His face. 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, In Tone IV: 
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Dorotheus, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone V: 
Resplendent with virtues brighter than the sun * and with thy sufferings, O 
blessed Dorotheus, * thou didst shine forth and illumine the land, * dispelling the 
darkness of polytheism * and putrid heresy. * Wherefore, we radiantly celebrate thy 
memory. 
 
