--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS NICEPHORUS THE 
CONFESSOR,  
PATRIARCH OF CONSTANTINOPLE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy hierarch: 3 in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
O divinely inspired one, manifest in sanctity, * we know thee to be the ground of 
the Truth, * the confirmation of the Faith, * the expounder of dogmas, * the advocate 
of piety, * the abode of purity, * the chosen receptacle, the sweet savor of the Spirit, * 
the great treasury of doctrines, ** the foundation of the Church of Christ.  
O all-wise, blessed and holy hierarch, * we praise thee, the successor of the 
apostles, * who shared in the ways of the martyrs, * the emulator of the fasters, * the 
seal of teachers, * the model of godliness, * the initiate of the mysteries of Christ, * 
the divinely flowing river of understanding, ** drowning the thoughts of the 
iniquitous and blasphemous.  
Having increased the talant of wisdom, * O most noetically rich confessor, * thou 
wast deemed worthy of the joy of thy Lord. * Adorned with the grace * of divine 
radiance, * and shining with the effulgence of the Spirit, * thou dost now stand at the 
right hand of the Bestower of life, * ever illumined, O glorious one, ** with the rays 
emanating therefrom.  
And 3 Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O venerable father, * as a priest of the law of God * thou didst enter within the 
divine and impassable tabernacle of the truth, * which the Lord erected, * not with 
another’s blood, * but with thine own, * and emulating Christ * by not submitting to 
the vengeance of the council, ** thou didst thereby utterly please God, O father.  
Adorned with thy words and deeds, * with thy priestly vesture * and the rightness 
of thy doctrine, * O all-wise Nicephorus, who nurturest with wisdom, * wasted away 
by imprisonment * thou didst receive them through thy confession, * and didst 
zealously endure * all the evils which beset thee ** with strength of mind, O blessed 
one.  
Thou wast shown to be an instrument of the Spirit, * sounded from on high by 
divinely inspired voices * and trumpeting forth the ineffable mystery of the Savior, * 
as a divine trumpet * truly renowned, * proclaiming aloud the incarnation of the 
Word to us, * which is beyond comprehension * and transcendeth all minds and 
thoughts, ** O thou who art most honorable.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
Save me, O most pure Lady, * who hast ineffably given birth to Christ the Savior; 
* for thee alone have I acquired as our intercessor, * an invincible rampart, * 
protection and joy, * and the divine consolation of my soul. * Wherefore, deliver me 
from the worm which sleepeth not * and from the everlasting fire, ** O Mother of 
Christ God.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician * and healer of the infirmities of mankind, ** Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Nicephorus our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos; and that of the holy hierarch, with 4 Troparia, the 
acrostic whereof is: “With songs do I hymn the victorious Nicephorus”, the 
composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Thou didst manifestly show thine active vision to be an ascent, O most noetically 
rich Nicephorus; for thou didst actively call thy soul and excellently soar aloft to the 
uttermost vision.  
Having mortified earthly thoughts by abstinence and guided thy soul with zeal, O 
divinely inspired Nicephorus, thou didst reach the havens of undisturbed delight.  
The wretched and most mindless Leo, infected with the heresy of Mammon, 
dashed himself against thee as against a hard stone, O God-pleasing Nicephorus, and 
hath quickly broken asunder in hell.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate Bride of God, heal thou the broken state of 
mankind, having given birth to the Creator Who hath set aright all of us who have 
been cast down through the fall of our first parents.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Having adorned thy life with thy virtues, thou didst manifestly become a beacon 
of the word of life and a guardian tending the most sacred flock of Christ.  
Thy divinely eloquent tongue of fire hath burned up the thorns of heresy with the 
fire of understanding, O divinely wise and glorious father.  
Having plumbed the depths with thy love of wisdom, O right wondrous one, with 
the cords of thy doctrines thou hast manifestly strangled those who reject the image 
of Christ.  
Theotokion: Confessing as co-beginningless with the pre-eternal Father the Son 
Who was born from thy womb in the latter times, O most pure one, we truly glorify 
thee as the Mother of God.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
The grace of thy wise discourses and the loftiness of thy mystic teachings have 
become a ladder of divine ascent for us; for having acquired a spiritual trumpet, O 
father, thou didst declare divine doctrines. Wherefore, having made thine abode in a 

--- PAGE 4 ---
place of verdure, thou hast driven the wild beast away with the sling of thy words, O 
blessed Nicephorus. Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those 
who honor thy most precious memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
With divine power, O thou who art manifest in sanctity, didst thou break the jaws 
of the impious, vanquishing them by the steadfastness of thy discourse; teaching them 
all to venerate the divine image of the Savior.  
Having splendidly adorned the divine priesthood by thy confession, and subdued 
the savagery of Leo, O father Nicephorus, thou was revealed to be a God-pleasing 
initiate of the ineffable mysteries.  
Fighting like a youth with the pious teachings of the honorable Church, O 
Nicephorus, by thy words and the wounds thereby inflicted, thou didst drive away the 
wolves the Faith betrayng wolves.  
Theotokion: In giving birth to God the Word in the flesh, Who before was 
incorporeal, O all-immaculate one, thou hast restored the world. Wherefore, O Bride 
of God, we honor thee with Orthodox faith.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Possessed of a pure mind ascending to heaven, O all-blessed one, thou didst lay 
hold of the never-fading flower of understanding and wisdom.  
Thou didst let thy healing words fall upon the souls of the Orthodox, O divinely 
revealed one, and by thy teachings till the infertile ground of the ignorant.  
Shining like the sun, with thine active discourse and thine inviolate life, thou dost 
illumine the foundation of the honored Church.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate one, thou wast the annulment of the curse of our 
first mother, having conceived Him Who hath crowned us with divine blessings.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Shining radiantly with spiritual rays, O divinely wise one, thou hast appeared to the 
Churches as an upright pillar and cloud leading to a heavenly inheritance.  
Thou didst dedicate thy whole life to God, and, remaining a leader for the whole 
world, thou wast glorified, O blessed father manifest in sanctity.  
Thy divinely inspired discourse cut apart the bonds of ungodly heresies with the 
two-edged sword of the Comforter, and hath shown forth the light of truth unto all.  
Theotokion: Most gloriously have the laws of nature been set aside; for a Virgin 
hath given birth and a maiden who knew not wedlock, having conceived the Creator 
and Lord of all, doth nourish Him.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
As thou hast received a crown of victory * from God in heaven, O Nicephorus, * 
save those who with faith honor thee * as a hierarch of Christ ** and a teacher.  
Ikos: The great hierarch stood, set like an unassailable city of God upon a 
mountain, protecting the world with his prayers, and conquering hordes of the 
ungodly; and remained unharmed, and untouched by the bolts of the enemy, bearing 
the King and Lord of all in his heart. Wherefore, he illumineth those who venerate 
Christ in His icons and, from the heights of the virtues and the tower of good works, 
with his sling he raineth down stones upon the hordes of the enemy, yet mercifully 
openeth its gates for those who with faith hymn him as a hierarch of Christ and 
teacher.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
We know thee to be a living temple of the living God, having the understanding of 
the Trinity Within thee as a lampstand. Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, 
O Lord!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou didst set at naught the blasphemies of the heretics, O Nicephorus, 
convincing them to venerate the icon of Christ and cry aloud: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Possessing a wealth of wisdom and a godly life, thou didst noetically transform all 
thy senses, and dost now converse with Christ, saying: Blessed art Thou in the temple 
of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Without dividing or commingling that which is united, we glorify the 
one Christ, the Word Who was incarnate of Thee, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in 
the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Delivered by the blood of Christ, thou didst undergo death in mind for His sake; 
for thou didst endure torment following thy conscience, shining with the grace of 
confession, crying: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
Purified in body and soul, in word thou didst sacrifice to the Word Who seeth all 
things, showing Him forth as having first been incorporeal and beginningless, but 
later becoming a man in His mercy; and crying out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
That thou mightest receive a heavenly inheritance and immutable glory, O glorious 
and wise father, thou didst forsake the glory which fadeth away, valiantly enduring 
exile and affliction, crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, the noetic Bridegroom found thee alone to be 
a pure turtle-dove, a most fragrant lily, a most comely flower and a splendid bridal-
chamber; and He led thee forth as His Bride. Wherefore, we hymn and supremely 
exalt thee as Virgin throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
When shadowy reflections passed away and the truth was revealed, thou didst find 
a blessed end through the vision of incorrupt beauty; and delighting now therein, re-
member us in thy supplications.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Surrounding the divine shrine of the God-bearing Nicephorus, come, O ye 
Christians, let us earnestly hymn him as victor, and with gladness let us celebrate his 
festival.  
Having laid hold of every virtue, O hieromartyr, at the end of thy struggles thou 
wast shown to be adorned with the crown of confession, with which thou standest 
now adorned before thy Master.  
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be the root, well-spring and cause of incorruption, 
O Virgin, we, the faithful, honor thee with praises; for thou hast poured forth upon 
us the Hypostatic Immortality.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the disciples beheld ...”: 
As an excellent victor over the passions, O Nicephorus, thou hast received a 
twofold crown from Christ the Savior; for, casting down the God-opposing heresy of 
those who reject the divine icons, O most wise hierarch, thou wast a champion of the 
spiritual athletes of piety. O blessed father, pray for us who honor thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Without leaving the bosom of the Father, Thou wast incarnate of the Virgin, O 
Lord; for, bowing down the heavens, thou didst descend to save me who am fallen, 
desiring to rescue from the mouth of the noetic beast me who am stuck fast in his 
clutches. Wherefore, delivered, I glorify Thy power.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Nicephorus our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
As thou hast received a crown of victory * from God in heaven, O Nicephorus, * 
save those who with faith honor thee * as a hierarch of Christ ** and a teacher.  
 
 
