--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 10th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIERARCH JOHN MAXIMOVICH, 
METROPOLITAN OF TOBOLSK  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Let the land of Siberia rejoice today, for the most radiant day of the 
commemoration of the great hierarch and wonderworker John hath arrived! And let 
all the inhabitants of that land be glad, possessing the holy and much-healing relics of 
the glorious favorite of God! Let the mountains and hills, the deserts and valleys of 
Siberia rejoice, praising the Lord Who hath given us a good pastor, who prayeth 
unceasingly for the salvation of our souls. (Twice)  
O great hierarch and wonderworker John, on the day of thy festival look down 
with mercy upon thy spiritual children who have gathered together to pray. By thy 
supplications grant us healing of body and salvation of soul, that, strengthened by 
thine intercession before God, we may with boldness glorify the Lord Who hath 
given us such a holy hierarch and worker of miracles, who prayeth continually for the 
salvation of our souls. (Twice) 
To thee, O honored father, do we flee on the day of thy solemnity; and, falling 
down before thee, we pray to thee: Help us to bear the cross of our earthly life with 
courage, to render praise unto the Lord for His divine visitations, to live virtuously in 
peace and repentance, and to praise thee, O favorite of God, as a tireless advocate for 
the salvation of our souls. (Twice) 
Standing today before the shrine of the relics of John, the holy hierarch of 
Tobolsk, O ye Orthodox people, let us all cry out unto him with compunction: O 
great ascetic of Siberia, forget not thy children, who have recourse unto thee amid 
their infirmities and tribulations, and who with faith ask thy help, in that thou prayest 
unceasingly for the salvation of our souls.  
The prayer of a righteous man is of great effect. Gazing at the precious shrine of 
the relics of the holy hierarch John, let us with boldness and hope begin to call upon 
the Lord, that He may accept the supplication which the great hierarch maketh for us 
sinners, and that He grant salvation to our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Let us all praise the holy hierarch of Tobolsk, the adornment of hierarchs and 
ornament of monastics, the true lover of the word of God, the wise guide and ascetic, 
the good archpastor who loved the poor, who finished his hierarchal course in the 
land of Siberia, and by his blessed end revealed his holiness. And praising him today, 
let us say: O great advocate, cease thou never to cry out to the Lord for us, that in His 
great mercy He may set us firmly upon the path which leadeth to eternal salvation.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth forth 
from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, * twofold in nature 
but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect 
man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O unwedded Mother, ** 
that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; those who seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord; but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace; but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret; but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths; but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them; but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish; but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 

--- PAGE 3 ---
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens; 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is 
immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the 
Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. 
For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that 
ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of 
God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master 
of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is 
a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image 
of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more 
beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the 
light, she is found preeminent. She hath delivered from pain those who please her, 
and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them 
from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that 
godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall 
judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, 
reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his 
holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our 
strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing 
to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and 
denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have 
the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a 
reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like 
other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery, 
and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. 
Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine 
him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his 
forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall 
he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wicked-
ness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither 
bethought they that Thou alone art God, who hast the power of life and death, savest 
in time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and 
merciful, givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, ye peoples of Siberia! Join in festival, ye who love the great bishop of 
Tobolsk! For, lo! having first taken up the struggle of monasticism and the hierarchal 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ministry in Little Russia, at the end of his life he hastened to cold Siberia, bringing 
thither the great wisdom of his eldership, and received there his blessed end. 
Wherefore, the Lord hath glorified him, enriching him with the gift of miracles, and 
preserving his body incorrupt.  
Thou art the glory of Chernigov and Tobolsk, O most honorable hierarch; thou 
wast the successor of the holy hierarch Theodosius of Chernigov, who loved thee and 
gave thee healing when thou wast ill; thou wast an emulator of Innocent, the great 
apostle of Siberia, and of the humble-minded Sophronius; thou art a lamp set upon 
the mountain of Tobolsk, that we all might strive to emulate thy holy life, that the 
name of our heavenly Father be glorified by us all.  
The Lord, Who is wondrous in His saints, hath in thee provided us with a model 
of humility and meekness, the forgiveness of all and the love of the poor. O brethren, 
let us love these great virtues, that the Lord grant us a painless Christian end and an 
everlasting inheritance with all the saints.  
Glory ..., in Tone III:  
The southern parts of Holy Russia and its northern reaches boast of thy holy life; 
thy great love for God and the people hath been revealed; thy wisdom in the pastoral 
leadership of thy flock hath been impressed upon their hearts and souls like a seal; 
and thy struggle of unceasing prayer moveth all of us to emulation. O great favorite 
of Christ, make those who love thee to be zealous observers of the law of Christ, that 
we may all receive mercy and find grace as our timely aid.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
By the will of the Father and without seed * thou didst conceive through the 
divine Spirit the Son of God * Who hath existed from the Father without a mother 
from before the ages, * and Who for our sake came forth from Thee in the flesh 
without a father, * and Him hast thou suckled as a babe. * Wherefore, cease not to 
beseech Him, ** that our souls be delivered from tribulations. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone V: 
Rejoice, O holy hierarch, father John, guardian of the land of Siberia, mighty hope 
of those who pray to thee, O thou who healest the sick without fee, feeder of the 
poor, wise guide of all Christians! Be thou for us all an invincible helper and an 
advocate for all the world.  
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Rejoice, O thou who wast reared in the Caves, good and spiritual teacher of 
youths, ascetic of the land of Chernigov, like unto the holy hierarch Theodosius, 
superior of the Monastery of Yelets, and kind archpastor of Chernigov! Cease thou 
never to pray for all who flee to thine aid.  
Verse: The Lord keepeth all their bones; * not one of them shall be broken.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Rejoice, splendid model of the monastic life, rule of prayer, eye which sleepeth 
not, converser with angels, instructive pastor, who lookest down upon the flock from 
heaven! Pray thou to the Lord, that our souls may find mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
O John, holy hierarch of Christ, advocate for ice-bound Siberia, undefeatable 
bulwark of the city of Tobolsk, gracious guardian of the land of Russia, who hast a 
share in the lot of the venerable and the righteous, O boast of hierarchs: Forget not 
thy children, and pray thou to the Lord, that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * Mother of 
God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, * 
granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting now our supplications, 
** pray thou that we all be saved. 
After the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O holy hierarch father John, instructor in piety, * feeder of the orphaned, consoler 
of the sorrowful, * physician of the infirm who demanded no fee, * speedy helper of 
those who suffer spiritually, * fervent advocate for all before the Lord: ** Entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved. (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O holy hierarch father John, instructor in piety, * feeder of the orphaned, consoler 
of the sorrowful, * physician of the infirm who demanded no fee, * speedy helper of 
those who suffer spiritually, * fervent advocate for all before the Lord: ** Entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymn, in Tone IV:  
When thou wast ill and lay upon thy deathbed, O holy hierarch John, the holy 
hierarch Theodosius appeared unto thee and commanded: “Serve the liturgy, and thy 
health shall return!” And giving thy promise without hesitation, thou didst order that 
everything be prepared for thee to serve in church; and having served the liturgy in 
full health by the mercy of God, thou didst compose hymns of praise for thy 
heavenly healer, and didst announce to all the people the miraculous aid of the holy 
hierarch Theodosius.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O Virgin Theotokos, we acknowledge God Who was incarnate of thee. Entreat 
Him with the holy hierarch John, that the city of Tobolsk and the whole land of 
Siberia may be saved.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymn, in Tone II: 
At the end of thy life, O holy hierarch John, the Lord, the Chief Shepherd, 
commanded thee to leave the warm and balmy land of Chernigov and to take up 
instead the calling of Metropolitan of Tobolsk and all Siberia. And submitting to the 
will of God, O holy hierarch, thou didst humbly assume the burden of serving in 
Siberia, showing each of us how to perceive the allwise hand of the Lord in the ways 
of our life. Glory to thee, O humble and meek hierarch!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
exceedingly glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch John, and 
we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God on our behalf.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Having acquired pastoral wisdom through humility of mind, O great hierarch, in 
thy brief sojourn in Siberia thou didst keep close to thy heart thy care for the 
enlightenment of the many peoples of the region of Tobolsk - the Voguls, Ostyaks 
and Tatars - with the light of Christian doctrine. Wherefore, the Lord, the Bestower 
of rewards, hath glorified thee in the incorruption of thy relics. Him do thou unceas-
ingly entreat, that He grant forgiveness of transgressions unto those who with love 
honor thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Let us hymn the heavenly gate and ark, * the all-holy mountain, the cloud of light, 
the heavenly ladder, * the spiritual Paradise, the redemption of Eve, * the great 
treasure of the world; * because salvation for the world and forgiveness of ancient 
offences were wrought in her. * Therefore we cry unto her: * Intercede with thine 
own Son and God to grant forgiveness of offences ** to those who devoutly worship 
thy most holy Offspring. 
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 35 (JN. 9: 39-10: 9)  
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “For judgment I am come into this 
world, that those who see not might see; and that those who see might be made 
blind.” And some of the Pharisees who were with Him heard these words, and said 
unto Him: “Are we blind also?” Jesus said unto them: “If ye were blind, ye should 
have no sin: but now ye say, ‘We see’; therefore your sin remaineth. Verily, verily, I 
say unto you: He who entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up 
some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he who entereth in by the door 
is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his 
voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he 
putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for 
they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for 

--- PAGE 8 ---
they know not the voice of strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they 
understood not what things they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus 
unto them again: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: I am the door of the sheep. All that 
ever came before Me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am 
the door, by Me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and 
find pasture.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
O venerable father, wonderworker of all Siberia, holy hierarch John! Beseech the 
Lord to grant us unwavering faith, holy hope and love unfeigned, in that thou thyself, 
O father, didst glorify our heavenly Father by these virtues. In thy supplications 
forget not thy children, who venerate thy precious relics and honor thy memory as 
that of our advocate and one who loveth the poor.  
Canon of Supplication (the Paraclysis) to the Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and that of the holy hierarch, with 8 Troparia, in Tone I: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
O Word of God, help me worthily to hymn the holy hierarch John, the 
wonderworker of Siberia, overlooking my transgressions and granting wisdom to my 
heart and mouth.  
O holy hierarch John, thou wast a pious youth, the consolation of thy parents, 
adept at book-learning, rendering thine intellect wise with exalted understandings, and 
cleaving unto the Lord with all thy heart.  
Thou didst have a share of deep faith, O venerable one, when, teaching young 
men, thou didst wisely plant a yearning for the Lord in their hearts, guiding them all 
to turn to the glory of the Lord.  
Theotokion: O most holy Virgin, with John, the holy hierarch of Tobolsk, entreat 
thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, that He grant us forgiveness of our transgressions and 
save us from all misfortunes.  
Katavasia as prescribed by the Typicon.  
ODE III  
Irmos: The stone which the builders have rejected, * the same hath become 
the cornerstone: * this is the rock upon which Christ hath established the 
Church, * which He hath redeemed from among the nations. 
The Lavra of the Caves of Kiev wholly enthralled thee, O holy hierarch John, and 
kindled a fire within thy heart; and thou didst forsake the world and all that is in it, 
and serve God in the monastic calling.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Thou didst make thy mind wise with the knowledge of the word of God, O holy 
hierarch of God, and in the calling of hieromonk didst show forth great talent in 
preaching the Word of God, thereby winning the love of the people.  
Thou didst move the brethren of the Lavra to compunction, O holy hierarch, 
when with all thy soul thou didst give thyself over to the intense struggle of prayer 
and to fervent and constant attendance at the services of the Church throughout thy 
monastic life, rendering glory to God Whose good pleasure it was to deal with thee 
thus.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, by thine omnipotent entreaties make us emulators 
of the life of the holy hierarch John, that God, Who resteth in the Holy Trinity, may 
be glorified in our lives.  
Sessional hymn, in Tone VI: 
Today the glorious city of Tobolsk is adorned, and all the children of the Church 
of the land of Siberia rejoice, glorifying the day of the blessed repose of the holy 
hierarch John; and they are enlightened with zeal for salvation, beholding his relics, 
which are glorified with incorruption. And they cry aloud unto the Lord: By the 
supplications of Thy favored one, save Thou our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O God and Master, look down from heaven, and, through the supplications of 
Thy most pure Mother, regard our lowliness and take pity upon us, O supremely 
good One Who lovest mankind; for nowhere else do we hope to receive forgiveness 
for the evils we have done. Wherefore, be Thou with us, and none shall be against us.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
Thou didst struggle well in the Holy Lavra, O holy hierarch, and thy solitary prayer 
made thee a chosen vessel of divine grace. And, recognizing the purity of thy 
monastic life, the holy hierarch Theodosius of Chernigov summoned thee to that city, 
and, elevating thee to the rank of archimandrite, entrusted to thy care the governance 
of the Monastery of Yelets.  
Thou didst toil for the holy hierarch Theodosius with love and goodly obedience, 
O holy hierarch John, and after his blessed repose thou wast chosen by the Orthodox 
people to be his successor in the hierarchal ministry, and wast ordained as 
Archbishop of Chernigov by the most holy Patriarch Adrian.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Like a radiant lamp set upon the height of thine Episcopal cathedra, O holy 
hierarch, by thy great virtues thou didst win the great love of thy flock. By thy prayers 
grant also unto us sinners that we may reveal the light of Christ in our lives and be an 
example for all who seek salvation.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, entreat God Who was seedlessly born from thee, 
that He set our lives aright, that we may be pleasing unto the Lord in love for our 
brethren.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, * for we know no other God than 
Thee, * and we call upon Thy Name, * for Thou art the God of the living and 
the dead. 
With great grief thy spiritual children of Chernigov accompanied thee to the city of 
Tobolsk; but the monasteries of Tobolsk joyously greeted thee as a herald of peace 
and teacher of piety. And now all Siberia doth reverently celebrate thy memory, 
praying to thee, that thou fence the whole region with peace and lead those who pray 
unto thee to the kingdom of God.  
O holy hierarch of Christ, all thy leisure didst thou dedicate to the writing of 
spiritually profitable books; and thy spiritual children, nurtured on them, have set 
aside care for what is worldly and striven to obtain everlasting blessedness.  
O good and holy hierarch, who can describe thy love for the poor, thy secret 
visitation of the houses of the destitute, thy conversations with prisoners? Teach us 
also not to live for ourselves, but to take thought for the poor and to visit the 
suffering, that we may obtain blessing from the Lord.  
Theotokion: The holy hierarch John gave to the city of Tobolsk a holy icon of the 
Mother of God which shineth forth in miracles, so that the faithful people might 
glorify the wondrous aid of the Mother of God and the supplications of its holy 
hierarch.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
Thy proclamation of the truths of the Gospel, thy reverent celebration of the 
divine services, thy meekness and humility, won for thee the tender and holy love of 
the people. Remember us sinners also at the throne of the King of glory, and grant 
that we may concern ourselves not with transitory things, but with the acquisition of 
the good things of the Kingdom of heaven.  
The widows and orphans, and all the paupers who resided in Tobolsk, saw thee as 
their father; and, receiving assistance from thee, glorified the Lord, the only Teacher 
of tender mercy.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
By thy works, and thy whole life most of all, thou didst teach all to live according 
to the Gospel of Christ, O holy hierarch. By thy supplications make us also true 
fulfillers of the commandments of the Gospel, that with thee we may be deemed 
worthy to glorify our Savior forever in the mansions of paradise.  
Theotokion: O our fervent advocate, regard our groans, heal our infirmities, 
loosen thou the burden of our sins, plant love for God and our brethren in our 
hearts, that, delivered from evils, we may glorify thee, the cause of our salvation.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Unto those who abide in the darkness of ignorance * hast thou appeared as an 
enlightener, * a consoler of widows and orphans, * a wondrous physician of the 
infirm, * an instructor of children and youths * and the most radiant joy of parents. * 
O holy hierarch John our father, entreat Christ God, * that He grant unto our land 
confirmation in the Faith, * to our army victory * and triumph over our enemies, ** 
and to thy people great mercy.  
Ikos: Blessed was thy repose, O holy hierarch! For after the divine liturgy thou 
didst feed thy friends with whom thou didst labor, as well as the poor; yet thyself ate 
naught at the table, but, following the example of the Savior, didst act as the server. 
Thou didst converse meekly with thy spiritual children, and in the evening, having 
withdrawn to thy cell for prayer, poured forth thy soul in prayer before the Lord and 
the most pure Theotokos, and while prostrate didst surrender thy soul to the Lord. 
Wherefore, with compunction we all cry out to thee: O great and holy hierarch, 
beseech the Lord, that He grant also unto all of us who live in the world an end 
unashamed, strengthened in the Faith, and confirmed in good works, that we may 
receive great mercy from Christ God.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither touched 
nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a single mouth * 
Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * ‘O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou.’ 
O holy hierarch thou didst love spiritual enlightenment, and in both Chernigov 
and the city of Tobolsk diligently taught future pastors, thyself visiting their school; 
and teaching the instructor and pupils of the school to cry aloud to the Lord: O God 
of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Who will not praise thy pastoral labors, O intercessor for Siberia? Who will not 
praise thy care for the heathen people of the region of Tobolsk? Who will not marvel 
at thy guidance of the pastors of the Church in the preaching of the word of God and 
in their unceasing exclamation unto the Lord: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Even during thy lifetime, the suffering and sick received consolation and healing 
through thee; and after thy blessed repose they hasten to thy grave, O holy hierarch, 
and thou dost abundantly pour forth gracious help upon them, that they all may chant 
in thanksgiving, saying: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Incline thyself unto our entreaties, O pure Theotokos, mercifully ap-
proach God in thy supplication, O good one, and render Him merciful unto us who 
ever trust in thee and cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Unto Christ who saved the children * that sang His praises * and who 
bedewed the raging furnace, * let us hymn and supremely exalt throughout all 
ages.  
The voice of the people, which is the voice of God, called thee a merciful 
wonderworker after thy repose, O blessed one; and unto the Lord, Who gave thee the 
grace of healings, they cry aloud: Hymn Christ God, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Thou didst repose amid the heat of summer, O holy hierarch of God, and thy 
body remained unburied for many days, until the blessed Philotheus returned from 
his missionary journey. Then, perceiving thy body to be incorrupt, he cried aloud: 
Hymn Christ God, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
All who suffered in soul and were burdened with sins had recourse to thy tomb, O 
holy hierarch John, and, receiving gracious help from the Lord through thy prayerful 
assistance, they cried aloud: Hymn Christ God, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
The faithful bore witness to thy great boldness before God, and, all telling thy 
mighty intercession, they taught all to cry: Hymn Christ God, and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: The uttermost abyss of my countless transgressions hath engulfed 
me, bringing me down into the depths of grievous despair. O thou who hast given 
birth to the Abyss of loving-kindness, hasten thou to save me, that I may cry out 
from the depths of my heart: Hymn ye Christ God, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of all 
descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom He was 
incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as the pure 
Mother of God.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
O holy hierarch John, entreat the Lord and His most pure Mother, that He grant 
us all the strength to love the Lord with all our soul and all our heart, and to glorify 
and hymn His most pure name. Glory to the Lord Who hath given His hierarch 
strength! Glory to the Lord Who through the holy hierarch doth graciously help us!  
O how great is the power of thy miracles! O how edifying is the splendor of thy 
life! Having forsaken all earthly things, thou dost now enjoy ineffable blessedness in 
heaven. Forget us not in thy holy prayers, O wondrous hierarch!  
O great hierarch John of Siberia, Metropolitan of Tobolsk, accept the supplication 
of us sinners, preserve thy homeland in peace, deprive us not of the good things of 
this earth, and direct our path to the kingdom of heaven.  
Theotokion: O all-holy Virgin, during his life the holy hierarch John earnestly 
poured forth his prayers before thy miraculous image, and now gazing upon thy glory 
in heaven, and he doth hearken to thy supplications for the whole world. With the 
holy hierarch of Tobolsk, O all-immaculate one, pray thou for the land of Siberia, and 
direct our path to the kingdom of heaven.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
The holy hierarch of Tobolsk and advocate for the whole land of Siberia is 
glorified by the Church today as a wise governor of the Church, a model of tender 
compassion and the adornment of hierarchs.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The Prophet of old foresaw thee as a lamp of seven lights, bearing the fire of 
divine knowledge, shining light upon those who languish in the darkness of 
ignorance. Wherefore, we cry out to thee, O all-immaculate one: With the holy 
hierarch John pray that we be granted the light of understanding, the spirit of wisdom 
and the enlightenment of the eyes of our hearts, that we may see our one God.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O most glorious wonder! * In the city of Tobolsk * the holy hierarch John is 
glorified by the Lord in the incorruption of his relics, * the Holy Church entereth his 
name in the roster of the choir of the saints, * the faithful venerate his precious relics 
with reverence, * the sorrowful and sick receive consolation, * and all cry out to the 
holy hierarch in unity of soul: * O protector of the land of Siberia, ** preserve this 
land and thy city from all want and grief.  
O most glorious wonder! * The two holy hierarchs of Siberia the great Innocent 
and the divinely wise Sophronius * stand with the new wonderworker and holy 
hierarch John * before the glory of the holy, consubstantial, indivisible and life-
creating Trinity. * O how great is Thy mercy toward us, * O God Who art glorified in 
Trinity! * Accept the supplications of the three holy hierarchs of Siberia, * and grant 
unto their spiritual children confirmation in good works, ** unto the glory of Thy 
most holy name.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
O most glorious wonder! * The three holy hierarchs of Siberia brought into the 
land of Siberia * the heritage of the venerable Anthony and Theodosius, * and, 
causing the seed of their evangelism to burgeon forth, * they produced fruit an 
hundredfold. * Let us strive, O brethren, to keep the rules of our Siberian instructors. 
* Let these fathers be called our guiding stars; * let these Siberian stars point the way 
to the heavens, ** that their names may be blessed throughout the ages!  
O most glorious wonder! * The holy hierarch John, the lover of the poor, 
surrendered his pure soul * into the hands of the Lord before the miraculous icon of 
the Mother of God; * and the Lord hath rewarded him with the gift of miracles and 
incorruption of body. * In heaven the hierarch is shown to be a tireless advocate for 
us. * Beneath the shelter of his prayer, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, * let 
us not forget the radiant image of our Siberian hierarch, * that our journey to the 
heavens may be successful, ** that we may eternally glorify our Lord.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Today the holy hierarch John of Tobolsk is glorified! Today the Holy Church 
offereth praises to him! Today the faithful children of the Orthodox Church bow 
down before his much-healing relics! Today all the sorrowful receive gracious 
consolation, and all the sick cry out for his gracious aid! Today, we sinners cry out 
with a pure heart: O great and holy hierarch and wonderworker, pray thou to the 
Lord for the salvation of our souls!  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: * Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the saint.  
The Lavra of the Caves of Kiev wholly enthralled thee, O holy hierarch John, and 
kindled a fire within thy heart; and thou didst forsake the world and all that is in it, 
and serve God in the monastic calling. (Twice) 
Thou didst make thy mind wise with the knowledge of the word of God, O holy 
hierarch of God, and in the calling of hieromonk didst show forth great talent in 
preaching the Word of God, thereby winning the love of the people.  
Thou didst move the brethren of the Lavra to compunction, O holy hierarch, 
when with all thy soul thou didst give thyself over to the intense struggle of prayer 
and to fervent and constant attendance at the services of the Church throughout thy 
monastic life, rendering glory to God Whose good pleasure it was to deal with thee 
thus.  
Thy proclamation of the truths of the Gospel, thy reverent celebration of the 
divine services, thy meekness and humility, won for thee the tender and holy love of 
the people. Remember us sinners also at the throne of the King of glory, and grant 
that we may concern ourselves not with transitory things, but with the acquisition of 
the good things of the Kingdom of heaven.  
The widows and orphans, and all the paupers who resided in Tobolsk, saw thee as 
their father; and, receiving assistance from thee, glorified the Lord, the only Teacher 
of tender mercy.  
By thy works, and thy whole life most of all, thou didst teach all to live according 
to the Gospel of Christ, O holy hierarch. By thy supplications make us also true 
fulfillers of the commandments of the Gospel, that with thee we may be deemed 
worthy to glorify our Savior forever in the mansions of paradise.  
Theotokion: O our fervent advocate, regard our groans, heal our infirmities, 
loosen thou the burden of our sins, plant love for God and our brethren in our 
hearts, that, delivered from evils, we may glorify thee, the cause of our salvation.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O holy hierarch father John, instructor in piety, * feeder of the orphaned, consoler 
of the sorrowful, * physician of the infirm who demanded no fee, * speedy helper of 
those who suffer spiritually, * fervent advocate for all before the Lord: ** Entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Unto those who abide in the darkness of ignorance * hast thou appeared as an 
enlightener, * a consoler of widows and orphans, * a wondrous physician of the 
infirm, * an instructor of children and youths * and the most radiant joy of parents. * 
O holy hierarch John our father, entreat Christ God, * that He grant unto our land 
confirmation in the Faith, * to our army victory * and triumph over our enemies, ** 
and to thy people great mercy.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 335 
Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they 
watch for your souls, as ones who must give account, that they may do it with joy, 
and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work 
to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his 
tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 36  
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me it any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he who is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and 
know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 

--- PAGE 17 ---
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be, he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
