--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 19th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS,  
THE HOLY HIERARCH JOHN MAXIMOVICH,  
WONDERWORKER OF SHANGHAI & SAN FRANCISCO (Bulgarian version) 
AT GREAT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VI: 
Thou wast a vessel filled to overflowing with grace, O John our most good master, 
wonderworker of all the world. Who then can say that there are now no grace-filled 
men in the world, that there are no longer any righteous men? O ye unbelievers, be ye 
sober of mind, and understand that God is with us who live in the darkness and 
deadly shadow of falsehoods. Beholding him who though in the tomb abideth in 
incorruption, be ye ashamed and turn to the true God, for God is with us and will 
remain inseparably with us until the end of the world. (Twice)  
Join chorus, O ye east and west, ye north and the sea! Rejoice, receiving a new 
angel, the divinely inspired man of prayer, the unmercenary pastor, the gracious 
healer, the prophet and herald, the all-good John our helper, a mighty surety for us at 
the judgment. (Twice)  
Shall not one who is beloved return that love? Wherefore, how can we not love 
thee who hast loved us utterly, O holy and guileless pastor, our true strengthener 
amid temptations and faithful mediator with the Theotokos before the throne of the 
most holy Trinity, who dost ask for the remission of sins of all of us who honor thee 
with love?  
O the mystery of thy divine love! Thou hast truly been shown to be a son of our 
Father in the heavens, O John, wondrous and righteous; for the Father causeth His 
sun to shine upon both the wicked and the good, and the rain to fall upon the 
righteous and the unrighteous; and thou didst pray for thine enemies, vanquishing the 
devil, the one primeval enemy of all, showing forth the perfection of the virtues.  
Straightway after thy blessed repose thy sepulcher was revealed to be a fount of 
healings and an abundant wellspring of miracles. And how much more is it now, O 
most blessed father, when the Church Militant hath glorified thee, having uncovered 
thine incorrupt relics with compunction and enshrined them with honor in the 
church, where thou grantest joy to all who sorrow, in accordance with its name?  
As a protector of Orthodoxy in America, thou didst truly fulfill the words of the 
apostle; for where sin hath multiplied grace hath abounded. Wherefore we, the 
unworthy, now beseech thee, O blessed wonderworker John: grant abundant grace 
unto our wretched and hardened hearts, and teach us to love one another as thou 
thyself didst love all.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
Rejoice, O little and persecuted Orthodox flock, hated by all, for God hath given 
thee a great treasure: a wondrous comforter amid sorrow, an incorrupt fragrance amid 
the fetor of the present corruption of morals, a calm island of hope unashamed amid 
an ocean of storms.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone V: 
In the Red Sea of old * an image of the Bride who knew not wedlock was 
depicted. * There Moses was the one who parted the sea, * here Gabriel is the 
minister of the miracle. * At that time Israel marched dry-shod through the deep, * 
now the Virgin doth seedlessly give birth to Christ. * The sea after Israel’s passage 
remained impassable; * the Immaculate one after bearing Emmanuel remained 
incorrupt. * O God, who doth exist and is pre-eternal, * and hath appeared as man, 
** have mercy upon us. 
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 

--- PAGE 3 ---
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple 
mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul 
pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This 
the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His 
grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these of the holy hierarch, in Tone VI: 
When thou wast yet a little child, thou wast moved to compunction by the words 
whereby Christ called the holy apostles: “Come, follow Me, and I will make you 
fishers of men!” Yet as thou didst listen to these divine words, O humble-minded 
John, thou didst in nowise think thyself to be a choice like unto the latter messengers 
of God who were appointed to die (for Him). But Christ Himself, knowing thee, hath 
glorified thee. May thy crowning be for us a call to unfeigned repentance, and the 
salvation of our souls.  
With faith and love we all honor thy memory today, O heavenly man and earthly 
angel; for in the midst of this greatly tumultuous world thou wast a true desert-
dweller and, having mortified all the passions, thou didst reach a spiritual height hard 
to contemplate, and wast truly a most splendid wonder amid the darkness of this age. 
Wherefore, we marvel at the great glory which thou hast obtained in heaven, and cel-
ebrate thy glorification with compunction.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
The love of the Lord is the most glorious wisdom, saith the son of Sirach; 
wherefore, thy divine love seemed as foolishness to the corrupt world, O blessed and 
holy hierarch John; for, as saith the apostle of the gentiles, the preaching of the Cross 
is to those who perish foolishness. But we, casting off the wisdom of this vain world, 
like children bless thee with purity, O John our beloved father.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
O most pure Theotokos, good surety of sinners and most wondrous joy of all who 
sorrow: Before the end overtaketh us, turn us to repentance and deliver us from 
grievous torments throughout the ages.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
O protector of infants and youths, make us wise with angelic purity, and preserve 
the children of the Church from the wickedness of this world, granting love of 
chastity unto all by thy supplications, O holy one who lovest God.  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of my heart shall be 
of understanding.  
O John, wonderworker of San Francisco, light of monastics and joy of virgins, 
founder and protector of holy monasteries, fiery pillar of the Orthodox Church, 
faithful child of the holy fathers: Pray that we all be saved.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, * all ye that inhabit the world.  
O preacher of the apostolic Church who art the peer of the apostles, divine 
instructor in Orthodoxy, zealous servant of the Gospel and good protector of the 
Orthodox: Entreat Christ God, that the world may be enlightened and all may be 
saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
As one truly foreign to covetousness, thou didst utterly vanquish anger, and thy 
countenance was ever illumined with paschal joy. As a father full of abundant love for 
all, thine ascetic feats knew no bounds; for day and night thou didst immerse thyself 
in prayer. Wherefore, O father John, pray that we all be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplication of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone V: 
Lo, thy care for thy flock in its sojourn * prefigured the supplications which thou 
dost ever offer up for the whole world. * Thus do we believe, having come to know 
thy love, * O holy hierarch and wonderworker John. * Wholly sanctified by God 
through the ministry of the most pure Mysteries, * and thyself ever strengthened 
thereby, * thou didst hasten to the suffering, O most gladsome healer. * Hasten now 
also to the aid of us ** who honor thee with all our heart.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone V: 
Lo, thy care for thy flock in its sojourn * prefigured the supplications which thou 
dost ever offer up for the whole world. * Thus do we believe, having come to know 
thy love, * O holy hierarch and wonderworker John. * Wholly sanctified by God 
through the ministry of the most pure Mysteries, * and thyself ever strengthened 
thereby, * thou didst hasten to the suffering, O most gladsome healer. * Hasten now 
also to the aid of us ** who honor thee with all our heart. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Resurrectional Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of those 
who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * and who 
knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * Cease not to 
intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, these Sessional Hymns, in Tone I:  
In the wilderness Thy people thirsted and called upon Thee, O almighty Lord, and 
Thou gavest them a most wise and blameless guide: this new Moses who stuttered 
and spake with difficulty, who led forth the exiles from China as Moses (of old) once 
led (the children of Israel) forth from Egypt. And he escorteth the souls of those who 
love him to the Jerusalem which is on high.  
Glory ..., in Tone I: 
Grant healing unto those who are consumed with the fire of many passions amid 
the desert of corruption, O greatly merciful Christ our God; and as once Thou didst 
cause water to issue forth from a hard stone, so now cause compunction to pour 
forth from our hearts, through the supplications of thy wondrous saint, O Master of 
those in heaven and on earth.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Who is this who springeth up like the dawn, who is as beautiful as the moon, and 
as lovely as the sun? The good Shepherd who was tended in her womb giveth 
splendid answer to all the Orthodox: “She is mine all-good Mother, the most comely 
Virgin, who hath crushed the head of the devil granting everlasting gladness unto 
those who love her!”  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, these Sessional Hymns, in Tone I: 
O father John, great wonderworker, we praise thee as a grace-filled apostle of 
times devoid of grace, a most wise emulator of the fools for Christ, and a highly 
moral emulator of fasters.  
Glory ..., in Tone I: 
O father John, great and righteous, we hymn thee as one who is speedily 
hearkened to in prayer, a great and clairvoyant wonderworker, and a faithful preserver 
of the monasteries and churches of the Orthodox.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
All of us, the generations of mortals, truly ever bless thee, the Theotokos, as the 
rose of sweet fragrance, the incense of sweet savor, the cup full to overflowing with 
the quenching of divine thirst.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch John, and 
we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God on our behalf.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice).  
After the Polyeleos, these Sessional Hymns, in Tone II: 
Multiplying thy labors, thou didst seek incorruptible riches, O blessed one, 
opposing the world, the flesh and the devil; and like a new Stylite thou didst never lie 
down to rest on thy back, but didst put to shame the carnal wisdom of this corrupt 
age, restoring the unfading bloom of Orthodox asceticism. Wherefore, O John our 
father, we earnestly praise thee as an emulator of Symeon the Stylite.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Our Father in the heavens did not hesitate to send us, even in these last times, an 
angelic guide, a true hierarch who laid down his life for the sheep, this blessed 
wonderworker John, to whom we all cry aloud: O our comforter and advocate, harp 
of God and radiant star amid the darkness! Ever console us, and protect thy flock 
until the end from the assault of false Christ’s!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
Thy name is like myrrh poured forth in every generation and generation, O all-
immaculate Bride of God, and the fragrance of thy virtues is beyond all perfumes. 
Wherefore, thou impartest unto us purity of soul, with the nard of thy supplications 
freely washing away the stench of sin from the hearts of those who hymn thee.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 36 (10:9-16) 
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good Shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 

--- PAGE 7 ---
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and 
know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
O John, namesake of grace, thou hast been shown to be a true God-bearer, 
shining forth the light of salvation upon the pagan world, a preserver of the 
Orthodox in dispersion, a wondrous defender of those persecuted for the sake of 
righteousness, an almighty protector of those who stand against falsehood, a steadfast 
hierarch of the universal Church. O our beloved master, earnestly entreat the loving 
Christ that we may be delivered from the coming torments of Hades.  
Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia; and that of 
the holy hierarch, with 8 Troparia, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
It is good to hymn the favorites of God, among whose choir the holy John joyfully 
shineth upon us, comforting and healing those who call upon him, and teaching us by 
the example of his life of many labors to be zealous in helping those in misfortunes.  
O the desire of a heart which loveth God! While yet a child thou didst desire to be 
a champion of the truth; for thus did the accounts of the multitudes of wondrous 
saints who did not spare their lives for the righteousness of God captivate thee.  
For a time thou wast at a loss whether to choose a military path or one in civilian 
life; but an even stronger thought appeared in thy soul: to commit thyself wholly to 
the ministry of the Holy Church of Christ.  
Theotokion: Thy soul doth magnify our Lord, O Sovereign Lady, and thy spirit 
rejoiceth in God, thy Son and Savior. How then would we dare to chant thy hymn if 
thou thyself hadst not been well pleased to say prophetically that all generations will 
call thee blessed?  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Celebrating thy memory with gladness, O our archpastor and instructor, we bow 
down before thy precious and incorrupt relics.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou didst receive the holy tonsure, putting on the full armor of God, arming 
thyself against the spirits of evil in high places, and vanquishing them.  
Thou didst not give sufficient sleep to thine eyes, neither didst thou lie down upon 
a bed to take thy rest; and thus wast like the fathers of old, O ascetic.  
Theotokion: O pure Virgin, divinely chosen Maiden who wast led into the temple 
of the Lord and raised in the temple, in the Holy of holies: Thou art truly higher than 
all others.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Beholding thee humble, bereft of form and beauty, vain people despised thee, O 
blessed one; but, emulating Christ, thou didst accept their reproach. Yet they could 
not ignore thine ascetic struggles, for thy virtue shone forth more brightly than the 
sun. Wherefore, those who before reviled thee glorified thee, and thou, O wise one, 
didst cry out: “O Christ, King of all, conceal my lowly soul, that I be not led utterly 
into temptation!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All of us, the generation of mortals, call thee, the Virgin, blessed, who alone 
among women hast given birth unto God in the flesh without seed; for the fire of the 
Godhead dwelt within thee, and with milk thou didst nurture the Creator and Lord as 
a babe. Wherefore we, the race of angels and mankind, glorify thy most holy birthgiv-
ing as is meet, and cry out to thee together: Entreat Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of sins unto those who with faith worship thy most holy birthgiving!  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
Instructor of a multitude of Russian arch-pastors, leader of the Church in the 
diaspora, thou wast a veritable mountain of love; wherefore, the assembly of the 
faithful hath called thee a miracle of our days, O John who stood firmly in thine 
ascetic feats.  
“If ye desire to see a living saint, make haste to the city of Bitol, O ye people, and 
there behold Father John!” Thus did a renowned Serbian archpastor say, captivated 
by the character and works of the holy one.  
The young men of Carpatho-Russia, students of theology in Serbia, told of thee 
with great compunction: how thou didst not spare thyself, and of thy love for them, 
and how, while walking among them when they were sleeping, thou didst make the 
sign of the Cross over them, preserving their rest.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin Mother of our Lord, who hast mercy even on thy 
most sinful servants! As the most rich treasury of loving kindness, restore us who 
have impoverished ourselves beyond all measure, O helper and joy of all who sorrow.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Thou wast a true emulator of Christ, laying down thy life for thy flock, and hast 
come to stand unashamed before the Chief Shepherd.  
The gift of healings was given thee even when thou wast a priest, and thou didst 
increase it in the days of thine episcopacy, and dost perfect it in the other life which is 
eternal.  
Thou didst labor together with the venerable Nahum of Okhrid in healings, 
visiting the homes of the suffering with his holy icon.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, good helper of the whole world, healer of our 
souls and bodies: On the day of judgment hearken unto us who pray to thee!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
Christ the Master revealed thee as an edifier and teacher of His Holy Church, O 
wondrous and holy hierarch, who wast graced with the gift of healings and 
consolations.  
Thou didst hasten to the homes of the suffering, and to those lying afflicted in 
hospitals, of whom the Lord informed thee, as an imparter of His most pure 
Mysteries.  
Thou wast shown to babes as the mediator of their healing, O holy John, 
transforming the sorrow of their parents into joy; and wast revealed to all from all 
ages as the helper they desired.  
Theotokion: All the saints joyfully celebrate thee, O Virgin Theotokos, and we, thy 
greatly sinful servants, place our trust in thee. Be glad and rejoice, O Mother of Christ 
the Almighty!  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Thy heart hath gone out to all who entreat thee with love, * O holy hierarch John, 
* and who remember the struggle of thy whole industrious life, * and thy painless and 
easy repose, ** O faithful servant of the most pure Directress.  
Ikos: Truly such a hierarch, of whom the whole world hath been found to be 
unworthy, hath been found fitting for the Orthodox Church: a fiery minister of the 
divine Mysteries, possessed of great reverence, honorably and blamelessly observing 
the canons of the Church. For as a pastor he warmed our hearts and made us firm in 
the Faith; by his supplication he poured forth the dew of consolations upon the 
sorrowful, and taught piety to us all, that though we are weak, we also may be deemed 
worthy to join him in his abode in the kingdom of God.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
In the Lesna Convent a nun beheld thee suspended in the air over the ground, 
shining most radiantly with beams of uncreated light, while thou wast praying ardently 
before the Iveron Icon of the Mother of God which thou so loved. And marveling at 
the height of such holiness, we cry out to God with compunction: Blessed art Thou 
in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
In the church in Shanghai a wondrous vision was revealed to the Nun Augusta; for 
she beheld fire descending from heaven into the holy chalice while the holy John was 
serving. And marveling at the manifestation of such grace, we cry out to God with 
compunction: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
In a Brazilian hospital a most glorious wonder was wrought: John, the good 
shepherd, made the sign of the Cross, and cried out with a loud voice to a dying 
Jewish woman: “Christ is risen!” And she straightway arose from her death bed, her 
physicians marveling greatly, and cried: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, 
O Lord!  
Theotokion: With thy protecting veil cover thy servants who are beset by 
misfortunes and temptations, O Sovereign Lady who art blessed by all generations, 
and at the hour of testing show us all to elude the pursuit of the aerial tormenters, 
that we may unceasingly cry out to thee: Blessed art thou among women, O thou who 
hast given birth to the Redeemer of our souls,  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Emulating the fiery spirit of Meletius, who slept not, thou didst never lie down to 
rest on thy side, assiduously adding labors to labors; wherefore, thou hast not been 
deprived of ineffable rest in heaven, and dost now eternally enjoy the sweetness of 
the sight of Jesus face to face.  
Thou wast deemed worthy of the gift of prophecy for the sake of the chaste purity 
of thy soul and thy great humility. And thou hast appeared in dreams unto many, 
delivering them from death and perils, and faithfully showing us the path to salvation, 
O righteous John.  
Thou wast revealed as a minister of the universal Church and an apostle of these 
times; wherefore, even after death thou dost proclaim Orthodoxy to the whole world 
through the sweet fragrance of incorruption.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: O pure and blessed one, heavenly ladder reaching from earth to the 
heavens, whereby God the Word descended unto mankind, O ineffable wonder and 
incomprehensible sight: Save those who have recourse unto thee!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
By thy supplications unto God thou hast dried the tears of many who sorrow, O 
John who art quickly heard, and thou preparest everlasting joy for the souls of those 
who love thee.  
The new Chrysostom, Nicholas, the angel of the Church of Okhrid, said thus of 
thee: “Pay heed unto Father John, my children; for he is an angel of God in human 
garb!”  
Showing the wisdom of this world to be foolishness, thou didst play with children 
in church, mindful of a higher divine liturgy, revealing to them and to us that the 
kingdom of heaven is given only to those who are as simple and humble as children.  
Theotokion: O most blessed Virgin, thou wast a chamber of the Light which hath 
illumined all and shown forth His favored one as light-bearing. And now, removing 
the darkness of the passions, O only Ever-virgin, deliver from the gloom of eternal 
torments those who have recourse unto thee.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Who can understand the mystery of piety? Yet we approach thy shrine with faith 
and are enlightened, drawing forth never-fading grace with thanksgiving.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou wast the Mother of the Light, O Virgin. Wherefore, we cry out to thee with 
compunction: Rejoice, O most radiant lamp who shone forth the Sun of salvation 
upon the world!  
On the Praises, 6 Stichera of the holy hierarch, two in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you ...”: 
What shall we call thee, O all-wondrous John? A most wise one, who for Christ’s 
sake assumed the guise of foolishness. An Innocent one, for thou didst maintain 
angelic guilelessness toward all who did thee wrong; A Traverser of the heavens, for 
thou wast borne up to heaven, like Elijah, by thy fiery prayer, as upon a chariot; A 
wanderer, for in this world thou hadst no place to lay thy head. Wherefore, thou didst 
weave an incorrupt wreath for thyself. Pray to Christ on behalf of us all, O our most 
good master.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
What shall we call thee, O right laudable John? Turtledove, for in prayer thou didst 
soar aloft to heaven in prayer. White dove bearing from paradise in thy mouth the 
olive branch of the hope of salvation for us, that, setting our mind on heaven, we may 
not fear the coming antichrist, having thee as our helper to the end of time.  
And these Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec, Mel.: “Having set aside ...”: 
Beholding the incorrupt relics of the holy hierarch, marvel, O world enamored of 
the lies of the devil! O false teachers who say that death is the end of the body and 
the soul, be ye ashamed! Be enlightened, O ye ends of the earth, and rejoice with us, 
for a radiant festival hath dawned today.  
Emulating John thine ancestor, the enlightener of Siberia, the first to send 
preachers of Orthodoxy to the land of China, thou didst become the bishop of the 
city of Shanghai, and like a new Moses, led forth the Russian exiles from the Egypt of 
the new godless ones, conveying them across the ocean. Wherefore, by thy 
supplications lead us also to the land of the never-waning Light, O blessed one.  
Come, let us marvel at the incorruption of the wonderworker! come, let us bless 
this sun which imparteth abundant warmth amid the winter of our fall! This is a 
victory won over the world which would drag us down! Wherefore, rejoice, ye 
Orthodox people, and joining chorus, leap up. Where is the corruption of death? 
Where is the stench of the grave? For with his sweet fragrance John, the 
incomparable boast of piety, doth enlighten the whole world,!  
Thou wast as innocent as a lamb, O John our master, as meek and humble as 
David; and judging no one while thou thyself wast unjustly condemned, thou didst 
never complain. Wherefore, we pray that thou wilt deliver from condemnation to the 
fire us whose ways are evil, and that thou wilt impart childlike innocence and purity of 
heart unto those who stand before thee.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
O new wonder surpassing the understanding of the world! Who perceived this sun 
which was hidden in a cloud of humility? Who knew this righteous man who lived in 
the midst of this sinful world? For, wickedly indifferent to the glory of God, this 
accursed world did not desire to honor thee even during the days of thy glorification, 
O right wondrous father. Yet, lo! we, the unworthy, joining chorus and rejoicing, sing 
unto thee: Rejoice, O most splendid rainbow, binding unto God those who love thee! 
Rejoice, pillar of the Church and unshakable confirmation of all the Orthodox! 
Rejoice, most tranquil haven for souls which love God! Rejoice, O John, our all-good 
master!  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took flesh 
from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve set free, * 
death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise we cry: ** 
Blessed art thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased, glory be to 
thee. 
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the holy hierarch.  
Celebrating thy memory with gladness, O our archpastor and instructor, we bow 
down before thy precious and incorrupt relics. (Twice) 
Thou didst receive the holy tonsure, putting on the full armor of God, arming 
thyself against the spirits of evil in high places, and vanquishing them.  
Thou didst not give sufficient sleep to thine eyes, neither didst thou lie down upon 
a bed to take thy rest; and thus wast like the fathers of old, O ascetic.  
Christ the Master revealed thee as an edifier and teacher of His Holy Church, O 
wondrous and holy hierarch, who wast graced with the gift of healings and 
consolations.  
Thou didst hasten to the homes of the suffering, and to those lying afflicted in 
hospitals, of whom the Lord informed thee, as an imparter of His most pure 
Mysteries.  
Thou wast shown to babes as the mediator of their healing, O holy John, 
transforming the sorrow of their parents into joy; and wast revealed to all from all 
ages as the helper they desired.  
Theotokion: All the saints joyfully celebrate thee, O Virgin Theotokos, and we, thy 
greatly sinful servants, place our trust in thee. Be glad and rejoice, O Mother of Christ 
the Almighty!  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone V: 
Lo, thy care for thy flock in its sojourn * prefigured the supplications which thou 
dost ever offer up for the whole world. * Thus do we believe, having come to know 
thy love, * O holy hierarch and wonderworker John. * Wholly sanctified by God 
through the ministry of the most pure Mysteries, * and thyself ever strengthened 
thereby, * thou didst hasten to the suffering, O most gladsome healer. * Hasten now 
also to the aid of us ** who honor thee with all our heart.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Thy heart hath gone out to all who entreat thee with love, * O holy hierarch John, 
* and who remember the struggle of thy whole industrious life, * and thy painless and 
easy repose, ** O faithful servant of the most pure Directress.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord, for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  

--- PAGE 15 ---
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 335 (HEB. 13: 17-21)  
Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they 
watch for your souls, as ones who must give account, that they may do it with joy, 
and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work 
to do His will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, but the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (LK. 6: 17-23)  
At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre 
and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who 
were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude 
sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He 
lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the 
kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye 
who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when 
they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your 
name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, 
behold, your reward is great in heaven.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
Note: This service was, with the exception of the Troparion and Kontakion, was composed at the 
Holy Dormition Monastery in Sofia, Bulgaria. In anticipation of the publication of a full service by 
the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad, we are supplying it to those who wish to glorify the saint 
with hymns specific to Saint John, rather than resorting to the General Menaion.  
 
 
