--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 15th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS JONAH, 
METROPOLITAN OF MOSCOW & ALL RUSSIA  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy hierarch; 4 in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel: “Called from on high ...”: 
When the divine calling * came upon thee, * O divinely wise Jonah, * thou didst 
forsake the world and that which is in the world, * and with unwavering resolve, * 
follow after Christ * Hence, the all-seeing Eye, * beholding thy good intentions, * 
adorned thee with the episcopacy. * Entreat Him and pray unto Him, ** that He save 
and enlighten our souls. (Twice)  
When divine effulgence * made its abode within thy heart, * O holy hierarch 
Jonah, * thou didst acquire most radiant joy * and all-honorable glory. * Wherefore, 
thou didst hold all things to be transitory, * and with all thy heart thou didst cleave 
unto God alone. * Entreat Him * and pray unto Him, * O thou who art great among 
hierarchs, ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
When divine love * came upon thee, O holy hierarch, * inclining thyself wholly * 
unto Christ the Master from thy youth, * desiring desire Him, * thou didst cleanse 
thyself of all the passions which drag us down. * Wherefore, thou wast shown to be * 
the abode and habitation of the most holy Spirit, * working most glorious miracles. * 
Entreat Christ, ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
And 4 Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Having dwelt on earth like an angel, * O all-blessed and holy hierarch Jonah, * 
thou didst gain mastery over the passions, * and didst make what is lower subject to 
that which is higher; * wherefore, having passed over to the kingdom which passeth 
not away, * ever pray * that Christ send down * cleansing of sins and great mercy ** 
upon those who honor thee with faith. (Twice)  
By thy teachings thou didst nurture well * with the grass of life * the flock given 
thee by God, * O holy hierarch Jonah; * and having now passed over into never-
waning radiance * and everlasting gladness, * be thou mindful, O most blessed one, * 
of those who honor thine honorable repose, ** and pray that our souls be saved.  
Celebrating today the sacred memory * of the blessed Jonah, * the great hierarch, * 
come, let us all * honor with divine hymns, * him who ever prayeth for us, * that a 
multitude of compassions * and salvation ** be sent down upon our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Idiomelon, in Tone VI:  
The divine shrine of thy relics is redolent with sweet fragrance, O holy hierarch 
Jonah, imparting healing to the souls and bodies of all. Wherefore, we beseech thee to 
preserve thy God-given flock, our civil authorities and all of Orthodoxy in peace, that 
we may all unceasingly magnify thee as our true pastor and advocate before God.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple; understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught; imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord; but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace, but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 

--- PAGE 3 ---
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
When the righteous man is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is 
immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the 
Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. 
For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that 
ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of 
God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master 
of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is 
a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image 
of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more 
beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the 
light, she is found pre-eminent. She hath delivered from pain those who please her, 
and guided them, in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them 
from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that 
godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall 
judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, 
reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his 
holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our 
strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing 
to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and 
denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have 
the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a 
reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like 
other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery, 
and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. 
Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine 
him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his 

--- PAGE 4 ---
forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall 
he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own 
wickedness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither 
bethought they that Thou alone art God, who hast the power of life and death, savest 
in time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and 
merciful, givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
O divinely wise and holy hierarch Jonah, * by thy prayers and fasting, * and by 
keeping vigil and giving alms, thou didst unite thyself unto God; * wherefore, thou 
wast shown to be the abode and dwelling of the most holy Spirit. * As thou wast a 
hierarch of the Church of Christ, ** pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of my heart shall be 
of understanding.  
Thou didst submit to the commandment of God Almighty, * wherefore thou didst 
follow in His steps from thy youth, O holy hierarch; * for this cause thou didst 
receive from Him * the grace to work most glorious miracles * and to expel evil 
spirits ** from all who honor thee with love.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, * all ye that inhabit the earth.  
Thou didst remain meek and innocent * throughout thy whole life, O holy 
hierarch Jonah; * wherefore, as thou didst desire, thou didst find rest with the saints 
in the heavens. * For this cause we honor thy divine memory, * celebrating with faith, 
** O divinely blessed and most honored one.  
Glory ..., Idiomelon, in Tone IV:  
When with God’s aid, O holy hierarch, thou didst reach the Imperial City, thou 
wast received with honor by the patriarch, and from thence wast sent back to the 
lands of Russia, bearing with thee peace and blessing. Wherefore, the Russian land 
lovingly received thee as its father, and in accordance with the sovereign’s will, thou 
wast most gloriously elevated upon the hierarchal cathedra, whereon thou didst 
remain for many years, until thy departure to the Lord. Him do thou entreat, that He 
save those who hymn thee.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to 
thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of 
our souls! 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Having dedicated thyself wholly to the Lord from thy youth, * thou didst become 
a model of virtue in prayers, labors and fasting; * wherefore, beholding thy goodly 
intent, God appointed thee * a hierarch and pastor of His Church: * wherefore, thy 
precious body hath been preserved * whole and incorrupt after thy repose. ** O holy 
hierarch Jonah, entreat Christ God, that He save our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Having dedicated thyself wholly to the Lord from thy youth, * thou didst become 
a model of virtue in prayers, labors and fasting; * wherefore, beholding thy goodly 
intent, God appointed thee * a hierarch and pastor of His Church: * wherefore, thy 
precious body hath been preserved * whole and incorrupt after thy repose. ** O holy 
hierarch Jonah, entreat Christ God, that He save our souls. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed by the Jews ...”: 
Thou didst adorn the Church of Christ with thy teachings and works, O holy 
hierarch Jonah; wherefore, thy virtuous life shone forth in the world, and thou wast a 
model for the Church in prayer, fasting and the keeping of vigils: wherefore, we cry 
out to thee: Glory to Him Who gave thee strength! Glory to Him Who hath crowned 
thee! Glory to Him Who through thee granteth healing unto all! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”:  
Because thou didst prefer humility of mind, O holy hierarch Jonah, thou wast 
therefore glorified as a divine hierarch, offering sacrifice unto Christ our God Who 
sacrificed Himself of His own will. Him do thou beseech, that our souls be saved. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
exceedingly glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
Polyeleos, and magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Jonah, and we 
honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God on our behalf.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Selected Psalm verse:  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. 
Glory ..., Now and ever ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having preserved that which was created according to the image of God by thy 
works, as one virtuous and meek, thou didst illumine the Church of Christ, O great 
hierarch Jonah; for thy virtuous life shone forth in the world, and hath been glorified 
by all. Wherefore, we all cry out to thee in thanksgiving: Entreat Christ God, O 
divinely blessed and holy hierarch, that He grant remission of sins unto those who 
with love honor thy godly memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the earth.  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, §43 (MAT. 11:27-30) 
The Lord said to His disciples: All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and 
no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save 
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Come unto me, all ye that 
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn 
of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls, for my 
yoke is easy, and my burden is light.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron of the saint, in Tone VI:  
The divine shrine of thy relics is fragrant with a sweet aroma, O holy hierarch 
Jonah, imparting healing to the souls and bodies of all. Wherefore, we beseech thee to 
preserve thy God-given flock, our civil authorities and all of Orthodoxy in peace, that 
we may all unceasingly magnify thee as our true pastor and advocate before God.  
Canon of the Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, including its Irmos; and that of the holy 
hierarch, with 8 Troparia.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE I  
Canon of the Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is:  
“O Mother of God, grant unto me abundant grace”, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
When Eve partook of the forbidden fruit of the garden, she brought the curse 
upon herself; but in giving birth to Christ, the First-fruits of blessing, O pure one, 
thou hast annulled it.  
O pure one who hast given birth to Christ as a pearl is engendered by the lightning 
of God, with the light of thy radiance dispel the gloom of my passions and the 
turmoil of transgressions.  
With noetic eyes, Jacob mystically foresaw the expectation of the nations: God, 
incarnate of thee, Who through thy mediation hath delivered us.  
When princes were lacking in the tribe of Judah, O most pure one, thy Son and 
God, coming forth as a leader, hath now truly become king over the ends of the 
earth.  
Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
As thou delightest in the divine gifts given by God, and dost answer the petition of 
each with miracles, O father, grant me the power to sing thy sacred festival.  
Divine grace was poured forth in thy lips, O holy hierarch Jonah, and thou wast a 
shepherd of the Church of Christ; for thou wast adorned by God, Whom thou didst 
glorify by thy life.  
The precious shrine of thy relics exudeth sweet fragrance and poureth forth 
healings, so that the infirmities of the faithful who piously honor thee are ever driven 
away, O holy hierarch.  
Having acquired thee as a firm rampart, O holy hierarch, the Church of Christ ever 
abideth, praising its Master, Who hath glorified thee.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou, the undefiled Maiden, became a temple of God 
for Him Who made His abode within thee in a manner beyond understanding, 
driving delusion away from men’s souls. 
ODE III  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
The Good One, assuming my corruptible and mortal flesh through thy womb, O 
most pure Mother of God, rendered it incorruptible, eternally binding it to Himself.  
Beholding God incarnate of thee O Virgin the choirs of angels were filled with 
awe and fear; and with never-ceasing hymnody they honor thee as the Mother of 
God.  
O Mother of God, the Prophet Daniel was stricken with awe, beholding thee, the 
noetic mountain from whence the Stone was cut without the aid of men’s hands, 
which hath mightily crushed the temples of the demons.  
Neither speech nor the tongue of man is able to worthily praise thee, O Virgin; for 
from thee Christ, the Bestower of life, was well pleased to become incarnate, O most 
pure one.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Thou didst ascend to the summit of the virtues, O holy hierarch, and, receiving the 
sacred anointing of thy superior life, on an exalted cathedra thou didst serve God as a 
great high priest.  
Having acquired thee as a beacon, O most wise and holy hierarch, the Church of 
Christ is illumined by thy virtuous instructions, saying: Thou, O Lord, art my strength 
and confirmation!  
Having cut off all carnal desire with divine desire, thou didst shine forth in a 
perfect life; wherefore, thou hast passed from hence into never-waning effulgence.  
As thou wast the successor of hierarchs O holy hierarch, thou didst strive in word, 
deed and upright teaching to emulate them; wherefore, we honor thee as a holy 
hierarch of Christ.  
Theotokion: O lustrous tongs of the divine Ember, O bush which was not 
consumed by the Godhead: Burn up the tinder of my passions, and rescue me from 
everlasting fire.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Thy life hath been shown to all as brilliant, and thy most festive memorial, 
resplendent with miracles, filleth the faithful with awe. Wherefore, we honor thee 
now with joy. O boast of hierarchs, pray thou that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
We hymn thee, O Bride of God, Mother of Christ God, glorifying thine unap-
proachable Offspring, by Whom we have been delivered from the deceit of the devil 
and from all misfortune, O Sovereign Lady Theotokos; and we faithfully cry out: 
Have mercy on thy flock, O thou who alone art all-hymned!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE IV  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
O most pure one, we who have been saved by thee hymn thee, the all-immaculate 
one, and piously chanting, we cry aloud: Blessed art thou who hast given birth unto 
God, O Ever-virgin!  
O all-blessed Virgin, thou hast given birth to the never-waning Light Who in the 
flesh shineth upon those in the darkness of life; and thou hast poured forth joy upon 
those who hymn thee, O Ever-virgin.  
Through thee, O all-holy one, grace hath blossomed forth and the hath law ceased 
to be; for thou hast given birth to the Lord Who granteth us forgiveness, O pure 
Ever-virgin.  
Tasting of the fruit rendered me mortal; but the Tree of life Who revealed Himself 
through thee, O most pure one, rose from the dead and made me a partaker of the 
sweetness of paradise.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
As a great lamp, O holy hierarch, with the radiance of thy virtues and the splendors 
of thy miracles thou dost enlighten the faithful, who earnestly hymn thee.  
Planted in the house of the Lord like a most comely olive-tree, O holy hierarch 
and father, thou didst flourish in the courts of the house of our God, imparting 
health unto men’s souls and bodies.  
Thy most precious body became the abode of the most holy Spirit, O holy 
hierarch Jonah; and lying in the tomb it driveth evil spirits away from men through 
the power of Him Who dwelleth within thee.  
Thou didst shine forth in word, deed and simplicity of heart, O holy hierarch 
Jonah. Be thou mindful of us who honor thy memory, O venerable one.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, He Whom naught can contain, confined Himself 
within thy womb, in His goodness saving me who am sunk in sin.  
ODE V  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Shining forth radiantly in purity, O all-hymned one, thou wast the divine dwelling-
place of the Master; for thou alone hast been revealed to be the Mother of God, 
bearing Him in thine arms as a babe.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Bearing the noetic beauty of thy most comely soul, thou hast become the Bride of 
God, O pure one, thy virginity sealed, illumining the world with the light of purity.  
Let the assembly of the ungodly lament, they who do not profess thee openly to be 
the pure Mother of God; for thou hast been revealed unto us as the divine portal of 
the Light, dispelling the gloom of transgressions.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Having thy pure mind ever turned toward God, O holy hierarch, thou didst guide 
well the flock of Christ; wherefore, with the angels and hierarchs thou hast inherited a 
habitation which passeth not away, O venerable one, for which cause thou art 
resplendent with miracles.  
With a mind most pure thou didst gaze upon the Mind which is the cause of all; 
wherefore, having received gifts of miracles, O most wise and holy hierarch, thou 
dost amaze the faithful who honor thee with love.  
From the time of thy youth thy life shone forth, adorned with the virtues and 
arrayed with exalted miracles, O holy hierarch Jonah, and even after thy repose it hath 
manifestly glorified thee.  
O right praiseworthy father, thou wast truly the glory of hierarchs, the helper of 
the faithful, the adornment of the Church, the foundation of the virtues and the 
confirmation of piety.  
Theotokion: In divers forms the honorable prophets beheld the unfathomable 
abyss of the divine mystery of thy pure birthgiving, O most pure and divinely joyous 
one, insofar as they were able so to do.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Moses, great among the prophets, perceived thee beforehand as the ark, the table, 
the lamp, the jar, as prophetic tokens of the incarnation of the Most High through 
thee, O Virgin Mother.  
Death is slain and the corruption brought about by Adam’s condemnation is 
abolished, struck down by thy Fruit, O Sovereign Lady for thou hast given birth to 
Life, Who doth deliver those who hymn thee from corruption.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
The Law lapsed impotent, and the shadow passed away when grace appeared unto 
me, in a manner beyond understanding and comprehension, through the birth of 
God the Savior by thee, O greatly hymned one.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Thou dost now shine, O holy hierarch, adorned with a crown of majesty; and as a 
true bishop, truly clothed in righteousness, thou hast preserved the inheritance of the 
Savior; wherefore, the voice of God cried out to thee: Enter into the joy of thy Lord!  
Meek and innocent, thou didst follow in the steps of the Master and pass over 
from things corruptible to things eternal; wherefore, with the saints thou hast attained 
unto the land of the meek, for which cause the councils of the pious hymn thee.  
Because of thy great light and purity, Christ revealed thee to be a child of the light 
and of the day, and made thee a hierarch and pastor of His Church, which thou didst 
serve as an excellent shepherd before departing unto the heavenly mansions.  
Aflame with prudence of mind and desire of spirit, O holy hierarch, thou didst 
pass through thy life, avoiding tangible things as transitory, O father Jonah, and wast 
translated unto the divine habitations.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Who hast given birth to the holy Word, our one God Who 
truly resteth in the saints, sanctify my soul, and as thou art merciful grant unto me an 
outpouring of compunction, O most immaculate one.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”: 
O wise one from childhood thou didst give thyself over wholly to the Lord, * 
laying waste to thy body through fasting and the keeping of vigils; * wherefore, thou 
wast revealed to be a pure vessel and abode of the most holy Spirit. * For this cause 
He ordained thee as hierarch and pastor for His Church, * and having tended it well, 
thou didst depart unto the Lord Whom thou didst love. * We therefore beseech thee: 
Be thou mindful of us who honor thy holy memory with faith, * that we may all cry 
aloud unto thee: ** Rejoice, O father Jonah, most honored and holy hierarch!  
Ikos: As a man by nature, O father, thou didst struggle in a superhuman manner, in 
fasting and the keeping of vigils, in prayer and labors, becoming a model of virtue for 
many; wherefore, God ordained thee as a hierarch and pastor of His Church. 
Wherefore we entreat thee: Pray thou to God, the Benefactor of all, that He grant our 
civil authorities victory over our enemies, and that we may find grace and mercy on 
the day of judgment, that we may all cry aloud unto thee: Rejoice, O father Jonah, 
most honored and holy hierarch!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
ODE VII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
The furnace, which prefigured thy birthgiving, did not consume the three youths; 
and the divine Fire, without consuming thee, dwelt within thee, and hath taught all to 
cry: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
As thou didst foretell, O all-pure Mother, the ends of the earth, enlightened by thy 
brilliant radiance and grace, call thee blessed and, chanting, cry aloud: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The most evil serpent sank his pernicious fangs in me, O Mother of God, but thy 
Son Himself broke them and gaveth me the power to cry: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  
Thou art the cleansing of nature, O thou who alone art divinely blessed, for, 
bearing in thine arms God Who sitteth upon the shoulders of the cherubim, thou 
dost cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
When Christ God beheld thy goodly disposition, in that thou didst live not for 
thyself, but for the Lord Who worked within thee, therefore He hath adorned thee 
with healing miracles.  
Shining forth like a lamp in thy pure works and corrections, thou didst shepherd 
well the Church given thee by God, chanting unto Christ: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  
As thou didst study the law of the word day and night, O holy hierarch, forgetting 
the things which thou didst leave behind, and yearning for the things which lay before 
thee, thou didst cry aloud unto the Creator and Master: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  
Thine excellent life was known unto all, O holy hierarch, wherefore, Christ hath 
glorified thee after thy repose. Him didst thou fervently serve, O Jonah our father, 
chanting: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: The fire of the Godhead did not consume thee, O Virgin; for the 
bush on the mountain, which once burnt yet remained unconsumed, prefigured thee, 
O most pure one. 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VIII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thy Son, adorning thee as Queen with the radiance of the Spirit, as with a golden 
robe, set thee at His right hand, O most pure one. Him do we supremely exalt 
throughout all ages.  
He Who established the world by His will alone took flesh of thy most pure 
womb, desiring to restore what He had created. Him do we supremely exalt 
throughout all ages.  
Through the union of the Word to me, a man, thou didst become a divine 
habitation, manifestly shining forth with the radiance of virginity; wherefore, we 
hymn thee throughout all ages.  
The golden lamp-stand prefigured thee who ineffably received the unapproachable 
Light Who illumineth all things with His radiance; wherefore, we hymn thee, O pure 
one, throughout the ages.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Humble and meek, thou didst live an angelic life on earth, O holy hierarch; 
wherefore, thou dwellest with the saints in the land of the meek, chanting unto Christ: 
Praise and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
The most precious shrine of thy relics is a temple of sanctity, O holy hierarch, and 
drawing forth the grace of healing therefrom, we hymn the Lord, the Master of all, 
Who hath given thee to us as a healer, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Deified by the will of God, O holy hierarch, thy mind became utterly estranged 
from carnal passions, chanting unto Christ: Praise and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages!  
As is meet, we, the faithful, venerate the precious shrine of thy relics, O holy 
hierarch Jonah, drawing forth sweet fragrance like myrrh for those who believe, 
crying out to Christ the Master: O all ye works, supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages!  
Theotokion: Heal thou the sufferings of my heart, O thou who hast given birth to 
the Wellspring of dispassion, and guide me to the divine life, that I may glorify thee 
throughout all ages.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE IX  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
A Star, shining forth beams of divinity from out of Jacob, hath shone upon those 
held fast by darkness; for through thee, O all-pure one, Christ God the Word, hath 
become incarnate; and illumined by Him, we bless thee with the armies of heaven.  
Strengthened by thy power and grace, I fervently offer up hymnody to thee with all 
my heart. Wherefore O pure Virgin, do thou accept it, and grant me thy grace of 
surpassing radiance, from thy treasuries of incorruption, O divinely blessed one.  
Thou wast manifestly shown to be the material of the Godhead, from which the 
Word wove the robe of His body, deifying my form, O Virgin; and having clothed 
Himself therein, He hath saved all who magnify thee with a pure mind.  
Through thine ineffable and indescribable birthgiving resurrection hath now been 
given to the dead, O all-pure Theotokos; for, clad in the flesh through thee, Life hath 
shone forth upon all and manifestly destroyed the gloom of death.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Thou gavest wings to thy mind with a pure heart and divine ascents, desiring to 
gaze upon the beauty of the one God; and art illumined by the effulgence thereof, O 
divinely wise and holy hierarch.  
O holy hierarch Jonah, with the grace of Christ preserve thou thy fold and thy 
flock, entrusted to thee by God, which hath thee as a shepherd driving the terrible 
wolves away from all the faithful.  
As of old Israel translated the body of the chaste Joseph, so now the faithful, 
receiving the shrine of thy relics, O holy hierarch Jonah, venerate it with love, 
magnifying Christ.  
Today thy splendid memorial, shining forth, illumineth the hearts of the faithful, O 
holy hierarch; wherefore, entreat Christ God, that he who hath composed this 
hymnody may be preserved from the pursuit of the evil one, and receive mercy on the 
day of judgment.  
Theotokion: With the light of repentance, O most immaculate one, enlighten me 
who am darkened by slothfulness, that I may hymn, magnify and glorify thee, the all-
immaculate Sovereign Lady.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Grace hath visited us ...”: 
As the namesake of chastity from the years of thy youth, O holy hierarch, through 
that which is corruptible thou didst strive to acquire that which is incorruptible; 
wherefore, as thou wast honored with the archiepiscopal rank, ever entreat the Master 
on behalf of us who hymn thee with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Send down thy compassions upon thy people and flock, O God, through the 
supplications of Thy most pure Mother and of all Thy saints, and grant us Thy great 
mercy.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O divinely wise hierarch, father Jonah, * having studied temperance from thy 
youth, * drawing nigh unto the Lord * in vigils, prayers and fasting, * and ever 
invoking the Theotokos as an advocate, * because of thy trust in her thou didst not 
err; * wherefore, Christ ordained thee for His Church * as a hierarch and pastor. ** 
Him do thou ever entreat on behalf of our souls. (Twice)  
O divinely wise father, holy hierarch Jonah, * from childhood thou didst forsake 
the tumult of the world * and shaking off its turmoil, * drew nigh unto God through 
purity of mind; * wherefore, God appointed thee fittingly * a hierarch of the Church 
and a godly benefactor of the people. * Ever pray on our behalf, * that He send down 
upon our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
O divinely wise father, holy hierarch Jonah, * having loved Christ from childhood, 
* thou didst cleave unto His love, * and having illumined thy heart with the divine 
beams of the most radiant Spirit, * thou didst truly become wholly luminous. * 
Wherefore, grant petitions which are conducive to salvation * unto those who have 
recourse to thy temple with faith, * and entreat Christ God, ** that our souls be 
saved.  
Glory ..., Idiomelon, in Tone VI: 
Thou wast a most excellent servant of the Master and King of heaven, O holy 
hierarch Jonah, preserving that purity without which no one shall behold God. 
Wherefore, thou hast received thy reward as is meet; for thy precious body, lying in 
the tomb, hath been preserved whole and incorrupt, and thy soul hath passed over to 
the choirs of heaven. For this cause, ever beseech the Creator of all on behalf of all 
who honor thee with love, that He send down peace and great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
The Son and Word of God, * begotten of the Father before the ages without a 
mother, * hast thou borne in these later days, * incarnate of thy pure blood, * without 
the aid of a man. * Him do thou entreat O Birthgiver of God, ** that we be granted 
the remission of sins before the end.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI, of the saint. 
Thou didst ascend to the summit of the virtues, O holy hierarch, and, receiving the 
sacred anointing of thy superior life, on an exalted cathedra thou didst serve God as a 
great high priest.  
Having acquired thee as a beacon, O most wise and holy hierarch, the Church of 
Christ is illumined by thy virtuous instructions, saying: Thou, O Lord, art my strength 
and confirmation!  
Having cut off all carnal desire with divine desire, thou didst shine forth in a 
perfect life; wherefore, thou hast passed from hence into never-waning effulgence.  
As thou wast the successor of hierarchs O holy hierarch, thou didst strive in word, 
deed and upright teaching to emulate them; wherefore, we honor thee as a holy 
hierarch of Christ.  
Thou dost now shine, O holy hierarch, adorned with a crown of majesty; and as a 
true bishop, truly clothed in righteousness, thou hast preserved the inheritance of the 
Savior; wherefore, the voice of God cried out to thee: Enter into the joy of thy Lord!  
Meek and innocent, thou didst follow in the steps of the Master and pass over 
from things corruptible to things eternal; wherefore, with the saints thou hast attained 
unto the land of the meek, for which cause the councils of the pious hymn thee.  
Because of thy great light and purity, Christ revealed thee to be a child of the light 
and of the day, and made thee a hierarch and pastor of His Church, which thou didst 
serve as an excellent shepherd before departing unto the heavenly mansions.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Who hast given birth to the holy Word, our one God Who 
truly resteth in the saints, sanctify my soul, and as thou art merciful grant unto me an 
outpouring of compunction, O most immaculate one.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Having dedicated thyself wholly to the Lord from thy youth, * thou didst become 
a model of virtue in prayers, labors and fasting; * wherefore, beholding thy goodly 
intent, God appointed thee * a hierarch and pastor of His Church: * wherefore, thy 
precious body hath been preserved * whole and incorrupt after thy repose. ** O holy 
hierarch Jonah, entreat Christ God, that He save our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O wise one from childhood thou didst give thyself over wholly to the Lord, * 
laying waste to thy body through fasting and the keeping of vigils; * wherefore, thou 
wast revealed to be a pure vessel and abode of the most holy Spirit. * For this cause 
He ordained thee as hierarch and pastor for His Church, * and having tended it well, 
thou didst depart unto the Lord Whom thou didst love. * We therefore beseech thee: 
Be thou mindful of us who honor thy holy memory with faith, * that we may all cry 
aloud unto thee: ** Rejoice, O father Jonah, most honored and holy hierarch!  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. 
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, §335 (HEB. 13: 17 - 21)  
Brethren: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they 
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and 
not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, that 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, Make you perfect in every good work 
to do his will, working in you that which is wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his 
tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 11 (MT. 5: 14-19)  
The Lord said to His disciples: Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a 
hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a 
candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine 
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come 
to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot 
or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever 
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he 
shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach 
them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
