--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 17th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS MANUEL, SABEL & ISMAEL  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Like stars of surpassing splendor, * O all-famed passion-bearers, * ye illumine the 
ends of the world * with divine radiance, * dispelling the darkness of the demons, * 
the corrupting passions and misfortunes. * Wherefore, assembling today, O glorious 
ones, * we praise your luminous, ** light-bearing and holy festival.  
With sacred hymns * let the wondrous Manuel, * the blessed Sabel * and the most 
wise Ismael, be honored; * for, confessing the uncreated Trinity in a sacred manner * 
in the face of the enemy, * they extinguished the delusion of polytheism * with the 
outpouring of their blood, ** and have received the glory which fadeth not away.  
O blessed Manuel, Ismael and Sabel of great renown, * ye wisely put to shame * 
the lawless king * who iniquitously commanded you * to worship and render honor * 
to his mindless, inanimate gods; * and, having suffered patiently and lawfully, * ye 
have woven for yourselves wreaths of victory, ** praying for the world.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
The glorious martyrs, loving Thee in purity, O Word of God, having forsaken the 
worship of fire and spurned the land of Chaldea, were illumined by Thy light; and 
having armed themselves with the weaponry of faith, they put the tyrant Julian to 
shame. The glorious Manuel, the wondrous Sabel, and Ismael thrice rich, hymning 
Thee with the Father and the Spirit, pray ye that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all? * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Both Canons from the Oktoechos, and one of the holy martyrs,  
with 4 Troparia, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Unto Him Who overthrew the tyranny of Pharaoh in the sea * and led 
Israel over dry land, * let us chant unto Christ our God, * for He hath been 
glorified throughout the ages. 
Let us all chant a hymn to God, the Almighty Creator, Who, as is meet, hath 
honored throughout the ages the glorious Manuel and those who suffered with him.  
Having cast off their ancestral worship of fire, they fended off the assault of the 
tyrant and became spiritual athletes through their honorable confession of the Trinity.  
Having suffered for the Trinity, being equal in number thereto, O martyrs, ye were 
right magnificently crowned; wherefore, pray ye unceasingly, that God deliver us all 
from misfortunes.  
Theotokion: He Who was the supra-natural Offspring of the Virgin in being born 
set back the prince of darkness, as is written, and hath opened Eden unto those who 
confess her to be the Theotokos.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as our God, 
* Whom the whole of creation doth hymn: * There is none more righteous 
than Thee, O Lord. 
It is not possible, O saints, to praise your sacred suffering as is meet, whereby ye 
have been crowned with wreaths woven in heaven, entreating God our Redeemer 
that we be saved.  
Consumed by fire, failing not in intelligence, forged by blows and sharpened with 
pangs, O martyrs, ye became swords wrought in heaven against the impious foe.  
The tyrant was put to shame, the iniquitous apostate suffered a terrible fall when 
Christ strengthened the three martyrs valiantly to oppose his ungodliness.  
Theotokion: O Christ our God, we bring before Thee her who gave Thee birth in 
the flesh, and the assembly of martyrs, to supplicate Thy might. By their entreaties 
grant peace to Thy world.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Like a thrice radiant lamp set alight with the fire of the Trinity, ye burned away the 
darkness of the Persians who worship fire and with boldness preached Christ, Who 
shone forth from the Virgin who knew not a man; and ye received a blessed end, O 
martyrs three in number.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Do thou guide to the path of repentance, * we who have ever wandered away into 
the trackless wastes of evil * and have angered the supremely good Lord, * O blessed 
Mary who knewest not wedlock, ** thou refuge of despairing men and dwelling-place 
of God.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O Christ, 
Thine all-immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the 
Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, wherewith Thou hast 
saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
O blessed Trinity, from a sorcerous root, an ungodly father, yet also from a pious 
mother did the martyred brethren spring forth, producing fruits of piety.  
O thrice-radiant trinity - Manuel, Sabel and Ismael - like the sun ye were steadfast 
stars of the Faith, manifestly shining forth upon the world.  
O ye three holy martyrs, pray ye as one to the Trinity, that those who keep your 
memory with true faith may be granted cleansing and remission of sins.  
Theotokion: Thou hast truly been shown to be the beautiful palace of the King of 
all, the throne of the Most High, transcending creation, O Mother of God, and an 
intercessor for our souls.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
We all celebrate the memory of the martyrs as is meet; for by their blood all the air 
of the world hath been sanctified.  
Of old the Church of the faithful fought the forces of night, and the martyrs 
illumined it with the radiance of their Orthodox Faith.  
The bosom of Abraham received the souls of the martyrs, by which the kingdom 
on high was proclaimed in allegory.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God who truly hast given birth to the incarnate God, 
One of the Trinity, pray thou, that He deliver thy servants.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Saved from the waves and steered by the rudder of the Cross, the holy martyrs 
escaped spiritual defilement.  
Gaping wide, the earth covered your blood, O saints, and suddenly your relics 
were enclosed in treasuries below.  
Grant peace to the world, O God, and in that Thou art merciful save Thy flock 
unharmed, through the supplications of Thy glorious passion-bearers.  
Theotokion: Having conceived God without seed, thou hast given birth without 
corruption to the Creator of nature. Him do thou beseech, O Mother of God, that we 
be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Wounded by the Faith of Christ, O most blessed one, * and having faithfully 
drained the cup thereof, * ye cast the worship and audacity of the Persians down to 
the ground, * making supplications on behalf of us all, ** O ye who are equal in 
number to the Trinity.  
Ikos: O Jesus, Bestower of life, Who hast existed from the beginning, with Thy 
divine goodness do Thou manifestly illumine me, that I may hymn the martyrs who 
struggled for Thee even unto death, who valiantly cast down all the might of the 
enemy and escaped the delusion of the idols, strengthened by the power of the Cross; 
for, having suffered tortures, they have received the glory of the Trinity. Entreat God 
on behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: O Thou who in the beginning founded the earth * and by Thy word 
made the heavens firm, * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * O Lord God 
of our Fathers. 
The light-bearing Church of Christ kindled the three lamps as with a single light: 
the glorious crown-bearer and victorious Manuel and those who suffered with him.  
Forsaking their Chaldean homeland, the three honored warriors of the Trinity 
abandoned the Zoroastrian religion, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou throughout the 
ages, O Lord God of our fathers!  
The three children, Shadrach and those with him, spurned the worship of the 
Chaldeans; and the three warriors from Persia, Manuel and those with him, suffered 
for Christ.  
Theotokion: Among women a virgin hath never given birth, save thee alone, O 
Virgin Theotokos; for no infant hath ever had both a father above and a mother 
below; yet Christ hath both.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the mystery of the 
Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning bush: * praise ye and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Having invigorated their bodies by abstinence and strengthened their spirit with 
piety, the passion-bearers of Christ brought to bear all the ability of spiritual spiritual 
athletes upon the invisible princes of darkness.  
The Church of Christ, crowned with the martyrs’ wreaths as with flowers, arrayed 
itself in bridal vesture dyed in blood, the martyrs’ dye of incorruption.  
O Christ, Thou hast vouchsafed thy martyrs to receive the portion and lot of the 
saved, and glory which cannot be taken away, for they confessed Thee to be the only 
Son of the Father and the Virgin.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, cease thou never to beseech the One of the Trinity to 
Whom thou hast given birth, that we be delivered from our iniquities and granted His 
epiphany and kingdom.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire of 
the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the salvation 
of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we magnify thee. 
Grace united you together with a triple bond, O Manuel, Sabel and Ismael, uniting 
with unshakable faith the single-minded virtue of your confession of Christ.  
With a sling of three thongs ye vanquished the vile apostate Julian, the lying tyrant, 
O ye three warriors of the Trinity, and together ye have been crowned.  
Right memorable was the miracle of the martyrs; for after their demise the earth 
gaped wide and covered them, yet in a little while, like luminous stars they shone 
forth from the bosom of the earth.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, Virgin among mothers, who at the ineffable word 
of the archangel hast given birth through thy womb to the transcendent Word Who 
was begotten of the beginningless Father: Save the souls of those who hymn thee.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs: 
Truly the wondrous and most sacred memorial of the great Manuel and the most 
glorious martyrs Sabel and Ismael, woven as of three golden strands, hath dawned! It 
hath illumined the hearts of all the faithful with light, making glad their souls.  
Theotokion: As thou hast tender compassion and great mercy, O most hymned 
Virgin Theotokos, look upon my lowliness, do away with the turmoil of the passions 
and the temptations of life, and deliver me from the fire of Gehenna, O Maiden.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY  
 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II: 
Wounded by the Faith of Christ, O most blessed one, * and having faithfully 
drained the cup thereof, * ye cast the worship and audacity of the Persians down to 
the ground, * making supplications on behalf of us all, ** O ye who are equal in 
number to the Trinity.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel  
 
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §233 (6: 10-17)  
Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §106 (LK. 21:12-19)  
The Lord said to His disciples: Beware of men. They shall lay their hands on you, 
and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being 
brought before kings and rulers for my name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a 
testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall 
answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not 
be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, 
and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye 

--- PAGE 7 ---
shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your head 
perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
