--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 11th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY PROTO-MARTYRS OF CHINA, SLAIN DURING 
THE BOXER REBELLION 
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
From Christ, the Judge of the contest, ye have received wreaths woven in the 
heavens; O all-glorious new-martyrs of the land of China, who in love for God are 
emulators of the angels. Pray ye on our behalf, that we may navigate the sea of this 
deceptive life and reach the safe harbor of heaven. (Twice)  
O ye choirs worthy of heaven, ye sacrificed yourselves for the risen Christ, that ye 
might obtain higher things; and by your pangs and sufferings ye have gladdened 
multitudes of angels and mortals. Wherefore, heal the many pangs and sufferings of 
those who celebrate your memory.  
Like stars shining on high in the firmament of the Church of God, ye shed your 
light upon the Orthodox faithful, gladdening them during their earthly struggle, and 
filling their souls with the joy which awaiteth those who endure to the end.  
Glory ..., in the same melody: 
Ye were shown to be luminaries of the Far East, full of heavenly light, and ye 
destroyed the hellish gloom of the dark madness which is from of old. Disdain not 
the meagerness of our praises, but ever enlighten with rays of heavenly wisdom the 
souls of those who honor your struggle.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
Through thee are abundant healings bestowed upon all who have recourse unto 
thee with faith, O most pure one, in that for us thou hast given birth unto Christ, the 
Healer of infirmities. Wherefore, by thy supplications heal thou my soul, that with a 
pure heart I may hymn thy tender compassion.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Hymning the beautiful corrections * of the martyrs of China, * we find the faithful 
intercessors * for the faithful to be curative springs ** of heavenly dew.  
Verse: The righteous cried, * and the Lord heard them.  
Having received enlightenment * through the laver of regeneration, * ye were later 
more perfectly * baptized in your own blood, ** O passion-bearers.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Mounting the chariot of your blood, * O glorious new-martyrs, * ye traveled the 
path to heaven, * and thereby have come to dwell ** in the new Jerusalem.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V:  
Who can worthily hymn the abyss of thy loving-kindness, O all-immaculate Bride 
of God? Even the wise fall silent and the eloquent are at a loss. But as thy children we 
cry out to thee: Rejoice, joy of the sorrowful, wealth of the poor, mother of orphans 
and glory of the downtrodden!  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone V:  
In a pagan land ye were enlightened by the Orthodox Faith, * and having lived in 
the Faith but for a little while, * ye have inherited the eternal kingdom. * By the purity 
of your Christian ways ye put to shame * the false Confucian piety * and as refuse 
trampled underfoot demon-inspired Buddhism, * sanctifying the Chinese land with 
your blood. * Wherefore, we pray: * Entreat the Master of all, that He enlighten your 
land with Orthodoxy * in these latter times, ** and strengthen us therein.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of those 
who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * and who 
knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * Cease not to 
intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy martyrs; 4 in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Behold, now bless the Lord, O ye faithful! Lo! rejoice now, O Orthodox Church, 
wondrously hymning the joy of the martyrs; for heaven is adorned with new 
luminaries; and the angels join chorus, giving them crowns; mankind rejoiceth, 
offering up praises; the land of China, adorned, is triumphant; and we celebrate the 
radiant glorification of the holy martyrs. (Twice) 
Rejoice now, O father John, luminary of Tobolsk, who sent the first preachers of 
Orthodoxy into China! And do thou rejoice also, O most wondrous Innocent, lamp 
of Irkutsk, protector and fellow-laborer of the Orthodox evangelizers in China! 
Behold, your children have been glorified as valiant proto-martyrs of their land! Lo! 
that which was barren hath given birth; a waterless desert poureth forth rivers of life! 
O wondrous miracle! O great joy! Entreat Christ on our behalf, O ye martyrs!  
Rejoice, O holy hierarch John, bright beacon of Shanghai and the land of China, lit 
by God as a guide for those who amid pagan darkness, have been caught in the raging 
sea of polytheism! With the new martyrs of China send forth the light of the true 
Faith of Christ, for which they laid down their lives, that those who are sinking may 
take heart and steer for the calm harbor of Jesus our Helmsman, Who safely bringeth 
all to salvation.  
And 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
“O Lord, it was Thy good pleasure that light be revealed to Thy land and its pagan 
people, and Thou didst extend the wings of the preaching of the Truth over our 
land!” Thus did the martyrs cry out when they were slaughtered for Thy sake; O Jesus 
most sweet; and thus do we also glorify Thee. O Lord, our light and resurrection, 
glory be to Thee! (Twice)  
“O the wondrous mystery of the Faith! O the depths of Thy wisdom, O Christ! 
Thy salvation is among all the nations, for Thou wast well pleased to freely bestow 
repentance upon our fallen race. What, therefore, shall we render unto Thee?” Thus 
said the assembly of the holy new-martyrs, through whom we now pray with tears: 
From all misfortunes free us who honor you with love.  
Like lambs led to the slaughter ye were led by the heathen, who, in their great 
malice and hatred for the true Faith of Christ, pitilessly slew you, employing all 
manner of cruel tortures. Yet like the Chief Shepherd, our Lord and, savior, ye 
uttered not a word, but meekly accepted bodily death, that your souls might be fed by 
Him in the meadows of paradise, by the waters of everlasting life.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, and clapping our hands in gladness, 
let us chant hymns to the new martyrs of China, for like the spiritual athletes of 
ancient times they entered the arena of martyrdom and engaged the wicked foe in 
combat, shedding their blood for the sake of Christ; and having trampled the enemy 
underfoot and gloriously triumphed, they received the wreath of victory from the 
right hand of the Judge of the contest.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Who can worthily hymn the abyss of thy loving-kindness, O all-immaculate Bride 
of God? Even the wise fall silent and the eloquent are at a loss. But as thy children we 
cry out to thee: Rejoice, joy of the sorrowful, wealth of the poor, mother of orphans 
and glory of the downtrodden!  
Entrance. O gladsome Light. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: all the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be 
gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things 
from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let 
them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith 
the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, 
and understand that I am He; before Me there was no other God, and after Me there 
shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have 
saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My 
witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that 
can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the 
Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
forever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall he cover them, 
and with his arm shall he protect them. He shall take to him his jealousy for complete 
armor, and make the creature his weapon for the revenge of his enemies. He shall put 
on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of an helmet. He shall 
take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall he sharpen for a sword, 
and the world shall fight with him against the unwise. Then shall the right aiming 
thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, shall they fly 
to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone bow, and the 
water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, 
a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: 
thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill-dealing shall overthrow the 
thrones of the mighty. Hear therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be 
judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the 
multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the 
Highest, who shall try your works, and search out your counsels.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera: 
In Tone I: O all-praised martyrs, divinely crowned assembly of China, forget not 
your race, but as ones called from on high fervently entreat God Most High, that He 
be not utterly angered by our sins, that He consume the blasphemies of the heretics 
with the word of wisdom, that He increase the True Faith in your land, melt our 
hardened hearts, and illumine with salvation and divine light those who honor you.  
In Tone II: With what hymns of praise shall we glorify your radiant end, O 
unblemished lambs of Christ who now glorify the Trinity with sacred mouths, O 
champions of piety, lovers of heavenly glory, inexhaustible wellsprings of gracious 
healings, ardent allies of the faithful, who entreat Christ to grant us great mercy?  
In Tone III: O council of holy new-martyrs, divine regiment of the land of China, 
confirmation of the faithful, joy of all the saints! O wondrous ones! Ye endured all -
the pangs of cruel maiming, the shedding of torrents of blood, beheading, 
dismemberment, the laceration of your flesh. And established firmly upon the rock of 
the True Faith, ye sent up hymnody to God amid your torments; and having been 
made as lustrous as gold in a crucible, ye strengthen amid sorrows those who magnify 
you.  
In Tone IV: Once the divinely eloquent David chanted: The nations shalt Thou 
guide upon the earth, unto Thy path. Wherefore, the time also came, in accordance 
with the prophecy of the Psalmist, for the land of China to bear sweet and goodly 
fruit for the Husbandman: the most radiant multitude of the new-martyrs, who 
entreat Christ for the salvation of our souls.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Celebrating the splendid solemnity of your memorial, we are filled with gladness. 
As ye are bold intercessors for us, pour forth for us fervent entreaty: heal the infirm; 
grant health to the sick and consolation to those who suffer and are afflicted, humility 
to those who rejoice, chastity to those smitten by the storm of the passions, 
enlightenment to unbelievers, and the forgiveness of all sins to the faithful.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Now hath the counsel of the devil been set at naught; now hath the might of Satan 
been crushed! For by thine Offspring, O Virgin Mother, have the new-martyrs been 
delivered like birds from a snare, and have been illumined with the light of the Truth. 
And lo! standing with thee before the throne of God, they pray for the salvation of all 
who honor thee as the true Theotokos.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
Your radiant memorial hath dawned today, * O divinely wise council, * heirs to the 
kingdom of Christ, * strugglers to the death for obedience and love divine. * The 
whole Church hymneth you with love; * the sun and the stars * join chorus together. 
* Grant peace, joy and hope of salvation unto those ** who assemble in your church.  
Verse: From the rising of the sun unto its going down, * let the name of the 
Lord be praised.  
O most glorious wonder! * O Christ our God, * Thou hast shown the passion-
bearers of the land of China * to be utter destruction for the demons and helpers of 
mortals; * for, arrayed in the armor of light, * they endured cruel tortures. * And 
soaring aloft like eagles, * confounded the aerial spirits, ** and have made their abode 
in the bridal-chamber of heaven.  
Verse: From the lands hath He gathered them, * from the east, from the west, 
from the north, and from the sea.  
Rejoice, O council of martyrs called by God! * Rejoice, divinely planted garden of 
radiant fruit, * godly company two hundred strong! * The land of China hath 
produced its own fruit for the Fashioner of all! * The streams of your blood * are 
rivers of healing for the faithful, * the mortification of your flesh * gladdeneth the 
angels, ** and your supplications are salvation for all mankind.  
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
Rejoice, divine assembly of passion-bearers, who broke the fangs of the invisible 
beasts, O emulators of the angels, fervent intercessors for mortals, weepers over the 
land of China, protectors of the Russians who sojourn there, O ye fervent 
intercessors for our souls!  
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Thou art the temple and portal, * the palace and throne of the King, * O most 
honored Virgin, * through whom Christ the Lord, my Redeemer, * Who is the Sun of 
righteousness, * hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in darkness, * deigning 
to enlighten those * whom He hath fashioned in His image by His own hand. * 
Wherefore, O all-hymned one, * as thou hast acquired a mother’s boldness before 
Him, ** entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be saved. 
After the Blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the new-martyrs, in Tone V: 
In a pagan land ye were enlightened by the Orthodox Faith, * and having lived in 
the Faith but for a little while, * ye have inherited the eternal kingdom. * By the purity 
of your Christian ways ye put to shame * the false Confucian piety * and as refuse 
trampled underfoot demon-inspired Buddhism, * sanctifying the Chinese land with 
your blood. * Wherefore, we pray: * Entreat the Master of all, that He enlighten your 
land with Orthodoxy * in these latter times, ** and strengthen us therein. (Twice)  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...,” (Once).  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...” the Troparion of the new-martyrs, in Tone V: 
In a pagan land ye were enlightened by the Orthodox Faith, * and having lived in 
the Faith but for a little while, * ye have inherited the eternal kingdom. * By the purity 
of your Christian ways ye put to shame * the false Confucian piety * and as refuse 
trampled underfoot demon-inspired Buddhism, * sanctifying the Chinese land with 
your blood. * Wherefore, we pray: * Entreat the Master of all, that He enlighten your 
land with Orthodoxy * in these latter times, ** and strengthen us therein. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of those 
who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * and who 
knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * Cease not to 
intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI:  
When the Emperor Huan-tsu reigned in the land of China, Christ made His abode 
within you, O mighty martyrs, and invisibly bestowed upon you His own kingdom; 
for, bearing upon yourselves the image of Him Who wrought salvation upon the 
Cross, in a single hour ye were deemed worthy of paradise. Wherefore, remember us 
before the throne of the Master.  
Glory ..., Another Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI:  
O martyrs of Christ, ye lamps made luminous by God, enlighten your race amid 
the darkness of life, that having passed through the night of unbelief, they may come 
to love the nobility of Christ, and that, strengthened by your following after Him, 
they may chant to you a hymn of thanksgiving.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Prefiguring thee of old, O most pure one, Israel traversed the Red Sea dryshod; 
and now the New Israel hymneth thine unwedded state, and crieth out with the 
martyrs: O thou who hast illumined the human race with never-waning light, 
enlighten all who seek the Lord, thy Son.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Christ acquired you as the first-called martyrs of the Chinese race, wherefore ye 
cast down the pride of the serpent and, hastening boldly to the contest, ye glorified 
Christ in your bodies. Him do ye now earnestly entreat, O holy ones, that He grant us 
great mercy.  
Glory ..., another Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Ye who were born in the darkness of unbelief were shown to be full of divine 
radiance after death. O your love for God! Even though ye lived in the Faith for a 
short time, amid tortures ye remained strong for Christ. Wherefore, we chant unto 
you together: Rejoice! beacons of the Chinese race, leading them to God!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
O thou who hast given birth to Christ, the Author of light: with the holy hierarchs 
of the Far-East - Innocent, John, Nicholas, and John and Jonah the newly glorified - 
fervently pray to Him, that with the brilliance of the divine word He may proclaim 
His glory also among the Chinese people, O Virgin Theotokos.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify you, O holy new-martyrs of 
China, and we reverence your honored sufferings, which ye endured for Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Our God is refuge and strength, a helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Enlightened with exalted mind through the tree of the Cross, O company 
sanctified in tortures, led by Metrophanes ye initiated a splendid undertaking for your 
race. May your tearful entreaties never cease, that all who honor you with love may 
safely pass through this life which is full of tears.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O most pure Mother of God, unblemished ewe-lamb, who can describe thy love 
for all mankind? By thee all creation is gladdened; in thee doth the newly-glorified 
council of the proto-martyrs of the land of China rejoice. Accepting their 
supplications on our behalf, bring them to thy Son, that He may save our souls.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, * and the Lord heard them.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous; and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 36 (MT. 10: 16-22)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of 
wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: 
for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a 
testimony against them and the gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye who speak, but the Spirit of your Father Who speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake: but he who endureth to the end 
shall be saved.”  

--- PAGE 10 ---
After Psalm 50: Glory ..., Through the prayers of the new-martyrs of China ..., Both 
now ..., Through the prayers of the Theotokos ..., Have mercy on me, O God ...,  
And this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
The land of China is sanctified today with radiant blood; the passage of time is 
made luminous by the splendors of the martyrs; and the Church of Christ is adorned 
with right brilliant stars! For enlightened by the light of Christ’s sufferings, the new-
martyrs gloriously finished their contest, received crowns of eternal life, and were 
shown forth as radiant guides for all who thirst for righteousness.  
Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and that of the holy new-martyrs of the land of China, in Tone VI: 
ODE I  
Irmos: He Who in ancient times * hid the pursuing tyrant beneath the waves 
of the sea, * is hidden beneath the earth by the children of those * whom once 
He saved. * But let us, like the children, sing unto the Lord, * for gloriously 
hath He been glorified. 
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
I hide not Thy truth in my heart, O Christ God, and hymn Thy salvation among all 
the nations. Wherefore, touch Thou my mouth, cleansing my defilement with the 
burning coal of the Spirit, O Word, that with goodly words I may hymn the beautiful 
struggle of the proto martyrs of China.  
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
O holy Apostle Thomas, first to preach the Gospel in the land of the Yellow 
Emperor, rejoice now, beholding a worthy branch of Christ, the choir of the new-
martyrs for the Orthodox Faith preached by thee of old, a new boast and joy for the 
faithful.  
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
When ye sat in darkness and the shadow of death, ye were illumined by the light of 
Orthodoxy, and with your whole heart hastened to the one God, the Trinity alone. 
Wherefore, the faithful are now enlightened by your radiance.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
The most sacred name of Christ hath now been magnified by you in China, O all-
praised passion-bearers; for remaining unshaken in your confession to the end, ye 
emulated the angels and astonished mortals.  
Refrain: Both Both now ..., and unto the ages of ages, amen. 
Theotokion: Truly, all generations magnify thee, O most blessed Virgin! For, lo! 
even the land of China speaketh gratefully to thee by the mouths of the new-martyrs, 
saying: Rejoice, thou who without corruption gavest birth to our Savior!  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE III  
Irmos: When creation beheld Thee, * Who founded the whole earth upon the 
waters, * covered in the flesh by the waters, * it was seized with awe, and cried 
aloud: * None is holy save Thee, O Lord!  
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
Even though ye were born in a godless land, with love for God ye searched for the 
Truth; and in the Orthodox Church ye found the living Water which floweth unto life 
everlasting.  
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
An unexpected outpouring of trials fell upon you, rivers of wrath arose, and the 
heathen assailed you like violent storms, O valiant martyrs of Christ. Yet, faithful to 
Christ unto death, ye calmly endured to the end.  
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
We hymn your journey to the Jerusalem on high, and are amazed by your manly 
valor, O right wondrous ones; and our souls are delighted by your love for God. 
Wherefore, travel with us amid both joys and sorrows.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
If we are amazed at the lily which sprung forth amid thorns, how much more are 
we astonished by these brilliant stars which have shone forth clearly amid the depths 
of pagan darkness? We hymn you, O divinely radiant luminaries of the Far East!  
Refrain: Both Both now ..., and unto the ages of ages, amen. 
Theotokion: Having made His abode within thee, God in nowise disturbed the 
purity of thy virginity, O pure one. Earnestly beseech Him, that He make steadfast all 
who hymn thee.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
Today doth this temple shine forth with heavenly light! The assembly of the new-
martyrs, an inexhaustible wellspring healing infirmities, giveth the life-bearing 
sweetness of its waters unto those who honor them with love, drying up the bitter 
outpouring of pleasures.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Having torn themselves away from their sojourn in this deceptive life, and cut 
themselves off by the torments of their crucified flesh, unto death they remained 
faithful to our crucified God, Who was born of thee in the flesh, O Virgin Mother. 
By their supplications and the divine Cross cleanse us of every sin, in that thou art 
good.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Foreseeing Thy divine self-emptying upon the Cross, * Habakkuk, in 
amazement, cried out: * “Thou hast cut asunder the strength of the mighty, * 
O Good One, * and preached to those in Hades, * as the Almighty One. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
O most blessed martyrs, ye gave yourselves over to voluntary slaughter, and 
sanctified the land of China with your blood; and now, entreat Christ God on behalf 
of all who celebrate your memory with love.  
Refrain: O holy martyr Paul, pray to God for us! 
O martyr Paul, namesake of Paul the great apostle of the nations! Full of joy, thou 
didst serve the preaching of the Gospel, and with prayer on thy lips didst surrender 
thy soul unto God Who was beloved of thee.  
Refrain: O holy martyr Ya Un, pray to God for us! 
Ya Un, the blessed instructor in the Faith, was not afraid to suffer for Christ; and, 
twice tortured, finished the beautiful race in the pure Faith, as an unblemished ewe-
lamb of Christ.  
Refrain: O holy martyr John, pray to God for us! 
O child John, who lived in the world for eight years from thy birth, thou didst 
attain the measure of the stature of Christ, for thou wast slain for Christ, and like a 
lamb wast wholly consumed by fire. Rejoice now, O new Isaac! Rejoice, O most 
wondrous martyr!  
Refrain: Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: O most wondrous Theotokos, who hast given birth to the 
enlightenment of the world! With the new-martyrs now glorified cease thou never to 
entreat thy Son and God, that He grant enlightenment also to the Chinese people, 
steeped in idolatry, even at the end.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thy Theophany, O Christ, the Unwaning Light, * that mercifully came 
to pass for us, * Isaiah, keeping watch, beheld out of the night, * and he cried 
aloud: * “The dead shall arise, and those in the tombs * shall be raised up, * 
and all that are born of earth shall rejoice.” 
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
Your memorial shineth forth, O faithful servants of Christ, and illumineth with 
fervor the hearts of the faithful who bow down with love before your honored image 
and chant unto you: Rejoice, for ye are the great boast of the Orthodox Faith!  
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
O blessed favorites of Christ, forget not your earthly homeland. Dispel the 
darkness of opposition to God; enlighten those who slumber in ignorance; and 
unfailingly beseech Christ, that He grant unto all a time for repentance.  
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
Let us hymn the radiant children of China, slaughtered for Christ by the demonic 
pagans. And let us celebrate their memory now, looking mystically upon their struggle 
as like unto that of the innocents in Bethlehem, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Refrain: O holy martyr John, pray to God for us! 
O child John, who didst smile in the face of death, thou didst say unto the 
torturers: “It is not hard to suffer for Christ!” O wondrous scion of the land of 
China, fill thou our hearts with the sweet fragrance of thy meekness.  
Refrain: Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: Through the divine Spirit thou didst conceive in thy womb the 
Creator, God and Fashioner of all, O pure and all-immaculate one. Glorifying Him, 
we hymn thee, O Virgin, as the palace of the King of all and the help of the world.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Jonah was caught but not held * in the belly of the whale; * for, bearing 
the image of Thee, * Who hast suffered and wast given to burial, * he came 
forth from the sea-monster as from a bridal chamber, * and he called out to the 
watch: * “O ye who keep guard falsely and in vain, * ye have forsaken your 
own mercy.” 
Refrain: O holy hieromartyr Metrophanes, pray to God for us! 
It is especially worthy to sing thy praise, O first hieromartyr for the Orthodox 
Faith in China. Bless us from on high, O right laudable father, and offer up prayer 
unto God for us.  
Refrain: O holy hieromartyr Metrophanes, pray to God for us! 
Born into a family of Orthodox Christians, thou wast raised well in piety, and from 
thy youth didst love the True Faith, O right blessed Metrophanes.  
Refrain: O holy hieromartyr Metrophanes, pray to God for us! 
Remaining unshaken in the Faith of Christ, thou wast deemed worthy to suffer for 
Christ even unto death. Wherefore, rejoice, O rule of faith, model of meekness, boast 
of piety!  
Refrain: O holy hieromartyr Metrophanes, pray to God for us! 
Even though thou didst consider thyself unworthy of the priestly calling, Nicholas, 
the great apostle of Japan, raised thee up upon the mountain of pastoral service to thy 
people; and now, standing before the Trinity with thy most sacred instructor, do thou 
earnestly pray, that our souls be saved.  
Refrain: O holy hieromartyr Metrophanes, pray to God for us! 
Having first watered the field of souls with the sweat of thy ministry, and later 
strengthened the weak plants with the outpouring of thy blood, even after death thou 
carest for thy people, O glorious one.  
Refrain: Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: He Who was born of thee in the flesh made thee holier than the 
angels and higher than all creation; wherefore, as thou art our Sovereign Lady, with 
the new-martyrs of the land of China entreat thy Son and God on our behalf.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone I: 
O martyrs of these latter times, * ye whitened your garments in the blood of the 
Lamb, * and shed your own blood for Christ; * for which cause ye now minister unto 
Him day and night in the Church of heaven. * Wherefore, entreat Christ for us, O 
glorious martyrs, * that He hide His little flock from the beguilement of the 
Antichrist, * and that He lead all of us out of great tribulation ** into the land of 
never-waning light.  
Ikos: The armies of the angels rejoiced when ye fled from the darkness of 
paganism to the light of Orthodoxy, cleansing your souls and bodies of sins through 
holy baptism. And having accepted the heavy lot of serving Christ in this age of new 
paganism, we offer up before your icon such hymns as these: Rejoice, confessors of 
Christ amid this blasphemous age; rejoice, radiant stars of the East! Rejoice, faithful 
worshippers of the true God; rejoice, mighty contenders against the demons! Rejoice, 
beacons dispelling pagan darkness; rejoice, ye who trampled underfoot the vile idols! 
Rejoice, all-wondrous lilies of China; rejoice, ye who pray fervently for the 
enlightenment of your race! Rejoice, much-suffering sheep of the Shepherd Who was 
slain for us; rejoice, towers of God-loving patience! Rejoice, fiery suns of divine love; 
rejoice, ye who from the night of ignorance have attained unto the dawn of the 
knowledge of God! Rejoice, O glorious martyrs of China, who strengthen us to 
endure even unto the end!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: O ineffable wonder! * He Who delivered the holy Children from the 
fiery furnace * boweth His head and asketh baptism of a servant, * cleansing 
those who cry: * O God our Redeemer, blessed art Thou!  
Refrain: O holy martyr Tatiana, pray to God for us! 
Let us praise the martyr Tatiana, who was beheaded for Christ; for she doth 
intercede for us before the throne of the divine Trinity, that all who hymn her may be 
saved.  
Refrain: O holy martyr Isaiah, pray to God for us! 
Possessed of prophetic zeal for Christ, O blessed Isaiah, thou didst not spare thy 
material flesh, considering temporal sufferings unworthy of the heavenly glory which 
would be manifest through them.  
Refrain: O holy martyr Maria, pray to God for us! 
Betrothed of the all-glorious Isaiah, O wondrous martyr Maria, as the namesake of 
the most pure Mother of God thou didst desire to die near her church, where thou 
wast born.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Rejoice, ye adamantine diamonds, confessors of Christ! Rejoice, sure guardians of 
the faithful, partakers of the cup of Christ, who were baptized with His baptism! The 
whole Church now hymneth your great love for God.  
Refrain: Both Both now ..., and unto the ages of ages, amen. 
Theotokion: Through the Virgin, in place of our first mother, Thou hast become a 
new Adam in place of the first: true and immortal Life in place of death. Wherefore, 
acknowledging the Theotokos who gave Thee birth, all of us, the faithful, bless Thee 
as is meet.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos Be ye astonished and afraid, O heaven, * and let the foundations of the 
earth be shaken; * for lo! He Who of old burnt the sacrifice of the righteous 
man with water * doth clothe Himself in water! * Him do ye children bless, ye 
priests hymn, * ye people supremely exalt throughout all ages!  
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
O new-martyrs elect of God, ye surrendered yourselves into the hands of the 
torturers with unwavering faith - children and mothers, boys and girls, youths and 
maidens, the old and the young, those known and those unknown - O ye faithful 
worshippers of the true God, hymning and supremely exalting the Lord throughout 
all ages.  
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
O glorious regiment of fearless warriors, ye tore apart the nets of the devil by the 
severing of your members, and like stars of golden radiance illumined the land of 
China. With your effulgence enlighten us also, who glorify and supremely exalt the 
Lord in your temple.  
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
We glorify you, O all-praised new-martyrs, chosen beforehand by the Lord, Who is 
the Lover of mankind; and we pray: O assembly of silvery radiance, with your fervent 
supplications to God luminously shine forth rays of Orthodoxy in your land.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
O divinely eloquent David, prophesy now that the Lord hath brought together the 
nations whom He hath delivered from the hand of the enemy - from the east, and the 
west, from the north and the sea. For having found the word of God to be living 
water, they give drink to the souls of those who hymn them with love.  
Refrain: Both Both now ..., and unto the ages of ages, amen. 
Theotokion: Rejoice, thou who didst shine forth the Sun of righteousness upon 
the world, star of golden radiance, now illumining with rays of joy the first-crowned 
martyrs of the land of China! With them entreat thy Son, that He grant unto the 
world peace and great mercy.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: Weep not for Me, O Mother, * beholding in the tomb the Son Whom 
thou hast conceived * without seed in the womb; * for I shall arise and shall be 
glorified, * and as God I shall exalt with glory unceasing, * those that with 
faith and love magnify thee. 
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
O our joy, assembly of wondrous saints, honoring your great torments and tears, 
we beseech you with all our soul: Fail not to entreat Christ the King, that He grant 
salvation unto all who hasten to your church.  
Refrain: O holy new-martyrs of China, pray to God for us! 
We hymn you, the pillars of the Orthodox Church established firmly in the Far 
East, O all-praised ones. Wherefore, make us also firm in the Faith, and impart rivers 
of healings to the faithful.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
Though sharing a mortal body, ye transcended the infirmity of human nature and 
became an astonishment for the angels. Wherefore, ye strengthen the weak, heal the 
pangs of those who have recourse unto you with faith, and do away with the passions 
of those who pray to you, in that ye are most wondrous passion-bearers.  
Refrain: Both Both now ..., and unto the ages of ages, amen. 
Theotokion: As the intercessor for all Christians, O all-immaculate Mother of God 
and Sovereign Lady, in that thou art merciful deliver thy suffering servants from 
misfortunes and temptations, and heal those afflicted with cruel transgressions and 
held fast by grievous wounds and ills.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs, Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...” 
Today the firmament of heaven is adorned with new stars, with whose radiance 
the earthly sea emitteth rays of joy, and the faithful, illumined, join chorus, singing a 
hymn of victory to the Bestower of light.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Entreated by the supplications of the honored new-martyrs of China, O Virgin, 
Queen of all, remove from us darkness of the soul, in that thou hast given birth for all 
to the only Bestower of light.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
The land of China hath now produced * the choir of blessed passion-bearers for 
Christ, * the ten-score fruit of the two-century sowing of Russian preachers. * 
Behold, they have enriched the beautiful wilderness * with the outpouring of the 
blood of the sacred martyrs, * whose healing memorial * the Church of Christ doth 
now celebrate, * whereby we also offer up the heartfelt praise: ** Rejoice, sure 
intercessors for those who hymn you!  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Today is glorified the choir * of the holy new-martyrs who pleased the God of all * 
in the land of China; * and as we who honor them stand with compunction in their 
temple, * they invisibly pray for us to Christ, * healing the infirm, comforting the 
sorrowful, * and granting peace and spiritual light to the tempest-tossed, * all by their 
splendid entreaties to God ** on behalf of us sinners.  
Today the East imparteth its rays to the whole world. * Today the gloomy vales of 
deception have been destroyed, * and heathen superstition confounded by 
worshippers * of the Bestower of light, * who hath shone forth from among the 
nations. * O glorious martyrs, stars illumining the setting sun of the corrupt world, * 
today the divine Church is filled with your effulgence, * and the assembly of the 
faithful ** doth splendidly join chorus for your sake.  
Today the heavenly granaries are filled with a multitude of wheat; * today the land 
of China offereth Thee the first-fruits of its crop, O God, Creator of all. * And 
receiving it upon Thine altar which is above the heavens, * confirm that which Thou 
hast done for us. * Increase the time we have for repentance, * pour forth Thy mercy 
upon the whole world, * and before the end enlighten the land of China with the rays 
of Orthodoxy, * having as fervent intercessors the choir of most excellent ** new-
martyrs who glorified Thee therein.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
O vineyard planted by God, ye Cross-bearing multitude of wondrous passion-
bearers, on your memorial which hath arrived do we flee to you, O kind-hearted ones. 
Accept from us these unworthy praises, and be ye helpers and sure mediators for 
those who with all their hearts cry out to you: Rejoice, O greatly merciful martyrs, 
never leaving those who honor you.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the prayers of Thy servants, and deliver us from all want 
and grief.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia, 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the martyrs.  
Even though ye were born in a godless land, with love for God ye searched for the 
Truth; and in the Orthodox Church ye found the living Water which floweth unto life 
everlasting.  
An unexpected outpouring of trials fell upon you, rivers of wrath arose, and the 
heathen assailed you like violent storms, O valiant martyrs of Christ. Yet, faithful to 
Christ unto death, ye calmly endured to the end.  
We hymn your journey to the Jerusalem on high, and are amazed by your manly 
valor, O right wondrous ones; and our souls are delighted by your love for God. 
Wherefore, travel with us amid both joys and sorrows.  
If we are amazed at the lily which sprung forth amid thorns, how much more are 
we astonished by these brilliant stars which have shone forth clearly amid the depths 
of pagan darkness? We hymn you, O divinely radiant luminaries of the Far East!  
It is especially worthy to sing thy praise, O first hieromartyr for the Orthodox 
Faith in China. Bless us from on high, O right laudable father, and offer up prayer 
unto God for us.  
Born into a family of Orthodox Christians, thou wast raised well in piety, and from 
thy youth didst love the True Faith, O right blessed Metrophanes.  
Remaining unshaken in the Faith of Christ, thou wast deemed worthy to suffer for 
Christ even unto death. Wherefore, rejoice, O rule of faith, model of meekness, boast 
of piety!  
Theotokion: He Who was born of thee in the flesh made thee holier than the 
angels and higher than all creation; wherefore, as thou art our Sovereign Lady, with 
the new-martyrs of the land of China entreat thy Son and God on our behalf.  
 Troparion of the holy new-martyrs, in Tone V: 
In a pagan land ye were enlightened by the Orthodox Faith, * and having lived in 
the Faith but for a little while, * ye have inherited the eternal kingdom. * By the purity 
of your Christian ways ye put to shame * the false Confucian piety * and as refuse 
trampled underfoot demon-inspired Buddhism, * sanctifying the Chinese land with 
your blood. * Wherefore, we pray: * Entreat the Master of all, that He enlighten your 
land with Orthodoxy * in these latter times, ** and strengthen us therein.  
Kontakion of the holy new-martyrs, in Tone I: 
O martyrs of these latter times, * ye whitened your garments in the blood of the 
Lamb, * and shed your own blood for Christ; * for which cause ye now minister unto 
Him day and night in the Church of heaven. * Wherefore, entreat Christ for us, O 
glorious martyrs, * that He hide His little flock from the beguilement of the 
Antichrist, * and that He lead all of us out of great tribulation ** into the land of 
never-waning light.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: From the rising of the sun unto the going down of 
the same, * the name of the Lord is to be praised.  
Verse: From the lands hath He gathered them, from the east, from the west, 
from the north, and from the sea.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS, §99 (ROM. 8: 28-39)  
Brethren: We know that all things work together for good to those who love God, 
to those who are the called according to His purpose. For whom He did foreknow, 
He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be 
the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom He did predestinate, those He 
also called: and whom He called, those He also justified: and whom He justified, 
those He also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who 
can be against us? He Who spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, 
how shall He not with Him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay any thing to 
the charge of God’s elect? Shall God Who justifieth? Who is he who condemneth? It 
is Christ Who died, yea rather, Who is risen again, Who is even at the right hand of 
God, Who also maketh intercession for us, Who shall separate us from the love of 
Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, 
or sword? As it is written: For Thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are 
accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than 
conquerors through Him Who loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor 
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor thing$ to come, 
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the 
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath 
called the earth from the rising of the sun and unto the setting thereof.  
Verse: Gather together unto Him His holy ones who have established His 
covenant upon sacrifices.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 52 (IN. 15: 17-16: 2)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “These things I command you, that ye love one 
another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated Me before it hated you. If ye 
were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, 
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember 
the word that I said unto you: The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have 
persecuted Me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept My saying, they will 
keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for My name’s sake, 

--- PAGE 20 ---
because they know not Him Who sent Me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, 
they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin. He who hateth Me 
hateth My Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other 
man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both Me and 
My Father. But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in 
their law: They hated Me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, Whom I 
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, Who proceedeth from 
the Father, He shall testify of Me: and ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been 
with Me from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not 
be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that 
whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.”  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
