--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHERS, ONUPHRIUS THE GREAT, 
AND PETER OF ATHOS 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 for the venerable Onuphrius, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O divinely wise father Onuphrius, * thou didst cut thyself off from the tumult of 
the world * and ascended to celestial perfection, * having desired Him * Who is the 
Well-spring of good things; * and there thou didst attain true love, O blessed one * 
Illumined with the effulgence thereof, * by thy supplications rescue us ** from the 
darkness of sin.  
O divinely wise father Onuphrius, * the cold of night and the burning heat of day 
* didst thou endure, O venerable one, * in the hope of things to come, * and having 
mortified thy members on earth, * thou hast received the life of heaven * and entered 
joyously into the bridal-chamber, O holy one, * to behold the infinite beauty ** of thy 
Creator.  
O divinely wise father Onuphrius, * the glorious Paphnutius found thee in the 
desert * hidden like a treasure, * and clearly proclaimed to those in the world * the 
corrections of thy struggles, * enriching the faithful with his account * of thy God-
pleasing life, O all-famed one. * By thy supplications, O glorious one, ** show us to 
be emulators thereof.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable Peter, in the same melody: 
We have recognized thee, O venerable one, * as the namesake of the divine Peter, 
* and one who truly followed him * and who piously shared * in his zeal for the Faith; 
* for thou didst love the good law, * and desire the divine precepts thereof, O father, 
* adorning thy soul with the virtues. ** Wherefore, we honor and bless thee.  
O spiritually rich and venerable father, * having in compunction of soul * acquired 
true patience, * love unfeigned, steadfast hope and perfect humility, * thou didst 
become a temple of the divine Spirit, * and having received His effulgence in purity, * 
thou wast seen by mortals * to be a secondary luminary ** through the purity of thy 
life.  
O venerable and divinely inspired father, * though thou didst hide unseen * for 
many years on earth, * yet thou didst become known through the Spirit * in signs and 
wonders, * and by the sweet savor of myrrh; * for thou didst pour forth a living 
radiance and holiness, * truly showing the grace of the divine Spirit ** to those who 
love thee.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O venerable fathers, the sound of your corrections hath gone forth into all the 
earth; wherefore, ye have found the reward of your labors in the heavens, having 
destroyed hordes of the demons, and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose 
lives ye blamelessly emulated. As ye have boldness before the Lord, ask ye peace for 
our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or the Theotokion;  
Or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone VI: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Beholding Thee nailed to the Cross, O Bestower of light, the sun became 
darkened and the earth quaked in fear. Yet the iniquitous ones among the Jews in 
nowise took pity.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Octoechos, and Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Having preserved unharmed that which was created according to the image of 
God and through fasting established your mind as master over the pernicious 
passions, ye arrived at that which is according to His likeness, in as far as ye were 
able; for having manfully done violence to your nature, ye strove to make that which 
is worse subject to that which is better, and to enslave the flesh to the spirit. Where-
fore, ye have been shown to be the summit of monastics, citizens of the desert, 
teachers of those who run the good race, the manifest rule of the virtues. And now, in 
the heavens, reflections having been abolished, ye behold the Holy Trinity in purity, 
praying together for those who honor you with faith and love.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or the Theotokion; 
 Or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
“Pondering Thy seedless conception and ineffable birthgiving, I marvel greatly: 
How is it that it is Thy good pleasure to die thus as a malefactor, O my Son?” 
exclaimed the most pure one, weeping.  
Troparion of the venerable fathers, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Octoechos, and two canons of the venerable ones, with 8 
Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the venerable Onuphrius, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: The chariots of pharaoh and his power * were cast into the sea by Him 
Who is mighty in battles: * Let us chant a new hymn, * for He hath been 
glorified!  
Illumined with the light of the thrice-radiant splendor, O most noetically rich 
father Onuphrius, by thy supplications rescue me from the deadly darkness of 
offenses, that I may hymn thy memory.  
Having rejected the world and cleaved unto Christ, thou didst make thy flesh 
subject to thy mind, and wast revealed to be a receptacle of the Holy Spirit, O 
divinely wise father Onuphrius.  
Guided by a pillar of divine light, thou didst abandon the Egypt of the passions 
and attain unto the heights of dispassion, where thou didst converse with God.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth unto Him Who before thee was begotten of 
the Father, and didst remain an incorrupt virgin even after giving birth; wherefore, we 
all confess thee to be the true Theotokos, O all-hymned one.  
Canon of the venerable Peter, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II:  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Today the Church setteth thee before us as another Peter, illumining our minds 
with thy divine memory, O most noetically rich father.  
Having washed the mire of the passions from thy noetic eyes, O venerable one, 
thou didst clearly see the infinite beauty of Christ the King Who hath glorified thee.  
He Who shone forth upon thee the never-waning light of the three-Sunned 
Godhead, O most blessed and divinely wise father, made thee the pure receptacle of 
divine gifts.  
Theotokion: He Who for our sake clad Himself in the nature of man through thee, 
O Virgin, in His surpassing goodness, is supremely glorified by the assemblies of the 
venerable who love Him.  
ODE III  
Canon of the venerable Onuphrius  
Irmos: Having established the thunder * and fashioned the wind: * do Thou 
make me steadfast O Lord, * that I may hymn Thee in truth and do Thy will; * 
for there is none holy like unto Thee, O our God.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Following the vision of the angel, thou didst reach the desert; and having caused 
carnal pleasures to wither away through abstinence, thou didst live angelically therein, 
O blessed one.  
Shown forth as a tree planted by springs of the waters of abstinence, O father 
Onuphrius, in due season thou didst truly produce the fruit of the virtues through 
husbandry.  
Having shone forth from the desert like a most radiant star upon the world, thou 
hast enlightened the assemblies of the pious and faithful with the beams of thy 
struggles, O Onuphrius our venerable father.  
Theotokion: Thou hast abolished the grief of our first parents, having given birth 
unto Joy for us: the Bestower of life and Redeemer, O most holy Theotokos. Him do 
thou earnestly entreat, that He save thy flock.  
Canon of the venerable Peter  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Having mortified thy members on earth, O venerable one, with divine precepts 
thou didst impart life to thy soul, and receive everlasting life and splendor.  
Having lived in goodness, thou hast joined the choirs on high, O most blessed 
one, abiding in stillness and gazing upon the beauty of God.  
Manifestly hiding in the mountains, thou didst withdraw from human society, and 
in gladness, furnish thy mind with wings to soar aloft to the beauty of heaven.  
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be a beautiful palace of indescribable richness, O 
Virgin, we glorify thee as is meet, having been saved by thy birthgiving, O all-
immaculate one.  
Kontakion of the venerable Peter, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...” 
Having withdrawn thyself from human companionship, * out of divine desire and 
love for thy Lord, * O Peter, thou didst dwell in caves of stone and deep ravines, * 
receiving from Him a crown. ** Pray thou unceasingly, that we be saved.  
Ikos: Having fled the tumults of the world and the tempest of lire as frightful and 
evil, thou didst attain unto the impassable places; and like a bird, lived alone for many 
years, hiding thyself in caves, and ravines, looking unto the Lord and fulfilling His 
precepts. And having received grace from Him, O venerable father, thou hast shone 
forth like the sun, praying unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
Sessional Hymn of venerable Onuphrius, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Thou didst withdraw, O venerable one, and manifestly make thine abode in desert 
places, ever awaiting the Lord, Who delivered thee from evils. Wherefore, having 
pleased the Master well, O all-blessed one, thou didst receive the kingdom of heaven 
which waxeth not old; and, dwelling therein, be thou now mindful of those who 
honor thee.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of venerable Peter, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Thou didst bury all the uprisings of the passions by the mortification of the flesh, 
O sacred father, and after death received life without end. Wherefore, the Church of 
Christ today doth celebrate thy right wondrous memory, O adornment of the 
venerable.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion,  
Or this Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Do thou guide to the path of repentance, * we who have ever wandered away into 
the trackless wastes of evil * and have angered the supremely good Lord, * O blessed 
Mary who knewest not wedlock, ** thou refuge of despairing men and dwelling-place 
of God.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O Christ, 
Thine all-immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the 
Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, wherewith Thou hast 
saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the venerable Onuphrius  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord and I am afraid. * Having 
understood Thy works, * I am in awe of Thee O Lord, * for the earth is full of 
Thy praise.  
Having shed the corrupt vesture of sin, O father Onuphrius, thou didst clothe 
thyself in the raiment of righteousness and hast passed within the bridal-chamber.  
By constant supplications thou didst gather the light of divine understanding in thy 
heart, O Onuphrius our father, and hast escaped the dark deception of ignorance.  
Having trodden the narrow path of sorrows on earth, O divinely wise and 
venerable one, thou didst reach the wide road full of the joy of heavenly delights.  
Theotokion: At every hour, in every place, I call upon thee, my salvation: Disdain 
me not, O all-immaculate one who hast given birth to God, my Redeemer and Savior!  
Canon of the venerable Peter  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Appointing divine ascent in thy heart while among the mountains and caves, O 
wise one, thou didst cause all the torrents of the passions to dry up by divine grace.  
Protected by the shield of the Faith, thou didst utterly escape the arrows, darts and 
pursuit of the demons, O venerable one.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Beholding the lying serpent cast down beneath thy feet and mocked, though he 
rageth savagely, O most glorious Peter, we praise thy greatness before the Lord.  
Theotokion: The Lord Who was born of thee, O all-immaculate Sovereign Lady, 
hath delivered all from the enemy who hath dominion over the world, and 
magnifying the venerable as those who love Him.  
ODE V  
Canon of the venerable Onuphrius  
Irmos: Shine upon me, O Lord, * the light of Thy commandments, * for my 
soul riseth early to Thee and hymneth Thee: * For Thou art our God, * and 
unto Thee do I flee, O King of peace. 
Paphnutius found thee in the desert to be a companion of angels, a great luminary 
equal to the angels, O wise one, and he piously revealed to all the corrections of thy 
life.  
The Lord, Whom thou didst desire with all thy heart, shone forth upon thee the 
never-waning light of dispassion, O wise Onuphrius, and thou hast illumined the 
whole world in the account of thy blameless life.  
While preaching well that men ought to cleave unto our God, O blessed 
Onuphrius, thou didst set the hope of thy soul upon Him, ever having His praise in 
thy mouth.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Sovereign Lady, shine forth the radiance of thy mercy on 
me who am in the darkness of transgressions, and, I pray, guide me to the light of 
repentance and salvation of life.  
Canon of the venerable Peter  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Going about the mountains of the precious commandments like Moses, O 
venerable one, thou didst manifestly behold God, as one who received them, and 
illumined in all the senses of thy soul, thou wast greatly glorified.  
Ever adorned with divine benefactions, O wise Peter, thou didst remain 
untouched by any passion, and clothed thyself in dispassion as it were a garment, O 
venerable one.  
Thy body, hidden for many years, was revealed for our enlightenment, pouring 
forth upon us rivers of healings and the myrrh of grace.  
Theotokion: With sacred voices we hymn thee, the beauty of Jacob, who for the 
world hast given birth in the flesh to the Light begotten of Light, Who illumineth the 
assemblies of the venerable.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE VI  
Canon of the venerable Onuphrius  
Irmos: The tempest of evil thoughts, hath overwhelmed me, * dragging me 
down into the abyss of my numberless sins; * but, going before me, O good 
Helmsman, * govern me as Thou didst the Prophet, * and save me.  
While thy flesh was being frozen with cold, thy spirit was warmed by the fervor of 
the Spirit; and while thou wast burned by the intense heat of the day, O wise one, a 
heavenly dew cooled thee through grace.  
Whilst thou wast in the desert, God made an effulgent light go before thee, there 
prefiguring thee who wouldst receive light and everlasting glory.  
He Who was born in a cave, was held in the elder’s arms as a babe, and thou, 
likened to a babe in good works, wast taught of the elder higher things in the cave.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Birthgiver of God, who hast given birth to the 
Abyss of mercy, having engulfed the abyss of my passions in the depths of thy 
compassions, grant me an outpouring of tears from the depths of my soul.  
Canon of the venerable Peter  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Made steadfast by the might of the Spirit, thou didst humble all the might of the 
enemy; and as a crowned victor hastened unto Christ.  
Following in the footsteps of the preeminent Peter, the rock of faith, O venerable 
one, thou didst take his name, and wast richly enriched with faith.  
Thou didst struggle in divine feats, O father, keeping the faith; and the crown of 
good works was added unto thee.  
Theotokion: The Lord dwelt within thy womb and deified all human nature, O 
pure one; and He hath drawn to Him a multitude of the venerable by sanctity.  
Kontakion of the venerable Onuphrius, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Illumined by the radiance of the most holy Spirit, * O divinely wise one, * thou 
didst forsake all the tumults of life; * and upon reaching the desert, O venerable 
father, * thou didst gladden God the Creator, * Who is over all things. * Wherefore, 
Christ, the great Bestower of gifts doth glorify thee, O blessed one.  
Ikos: Who can recount thy struggles, O all-blessed one? Who among mortals can 
fittingly praise thy life, O father Onuphrius? For like one of the incorporeal beings 
thou didst subsist on herbs, having as thy food Christ God, upon Whom thou didst 
set thy hope, going about the desert places naked, and enduring burning heat and cold 
like one without a body. Wherefore, the great Bestower of gifts hath shown thee to be 
a luminary, O blessed one.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE VII  
Canon of the venerable Onuphrius  
Irmos: Thou didst speak with Moses on the mountain * and prefigure the 
Virgin in the bush: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
He Who through a raven fed Elijah on the mountain, sent thee food by an angel, 
O venerable one, magnifying thee who didst magnify Him.  
Like a palm-tree flourishing by the streams of the waters of abstinence, thou didst 
produce dates for thy food, feeding thyself by the sweat of thy brow.  
Expanding thy perception by visions, O father, thou wast nourished by the pangs 
of asceticism; and now thou hast received heavenly sustenance, O Onuphrius.  
Theotokion: O Lord God of our fathers, Who dwelt within the Virgin’s womb and 
showed it to be more spacious than the heavens: Blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the venerable Peter  
Irmos: The wise children did not adore the golden idol, * but went themselves 
into the flame and defied the pagan gods. * They prayed in the midst of the 
flame, * and an Angel bedewed them saying: * ‘The prayer of your lips hath 
been heard’. 
Taking thy cross upon thy shoulders with steadfast resolve, as a consecrated monk 
thou didst follow after Him Who was crucified, O most blessed one, burning up all 
the passions like tinder, and crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our 
fathers!  
The divine Word revealeth thee as a treasure hidden in secret for many years, an 
heirloom revealed, O venerable Peter, and a manifest advocate for all who have in 
secret acquired sinful defilement and openly repent.  
By the vow thou didst make unto Christ thou wast revealed to be incense of sweet 
savor, pouring forth fragrant myrrh from thy precious relics unto the astonishment of 
all who see it; for thou didst live an angelic life in the flesh.  
Theotokion: Having found thee to be good and beautiful among women, O most 
holy one, the most comely Word made His abode within thy most holy womb, 
illumining all the choirs of the venerable, who cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
God of our fathers!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the venerable Onuphrius  
Irmos: The earth and all that is therein, * the seas and all wellsprings, * the 
heaven of heavens, light and darkness, * frost and heat, ye sons of men, and ye 
priests, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages. 
Forsaking the world below, thou didst acquire a heavenly life and wast enrolled 
among the choirs of the incorporeal even though bearing flesh, O blessed Onuphrius; 
and thou hast inherited the land of the meek, which Christ hath given thee unto the 
ages.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Thou didst truly acquire tear-drops as a means of extinguishing the burning of the 
passions, and to the dew of dispassion thou wast united by the love of the divine Fire, 
Christ our God; wherefore, we honor thee, O divinely wise Onuphrius.  
O father, Christ, Who is truly the Angel of great Counsel, showed thee to be an 
emulator of the life of the angels by thine unceasing supplications, and by the hand of 
His angel revealed thee to be a partaker of His mysteries. Him do we supremely exalt 
throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Mother of God, thou holy ground from whence 
Christ, the Grain of life, hath sprung forth: thou hast built up human nature, which of 
old was ruined by the famine of the ancient evil. Wherefore, we hymn thee 
throughout the ages.  
Canon of the venerable Peter  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Thou hast truly been deemed worthy of divine blessedness, O divinely wise Peter, 
having beggared thyself of thine own will; and ever weeping and embracing meekness, 
O wise one, thou hast inherited the land of the meek.  
Possessed of a vigilant mind, thou didst lull to sleep the uprisings of the passions; 
and having fallen now into the sleep which befitteth all the righteous, O most 
noetically rich father, thou hast been shown to be a tireless advocate for all who 
honor thee. 
Having vanquished the demons’ winter by winter’s cold and summer’s heat, O 
wise one, with the fervor of the Spirit thou hast manifestly destroyed them, and 
having mortified the passions of the body, thou hast irradiated them with the 
effulgence of dispassion.  
Diligently seeking God in stillness, thou didst make thine abode on Mount Athos, 
as Elijah the Tishbite did on Carmel of old, O divinely wise and right wondrous 
Peter; and as one venerable thou wast deemed worthy of the vision of Him.  
Theotokion: Possessed of a downcast mind and a soul weighed down by the 
passions, O pure Birthgiver of God, I flee to thee crying aloud: Raise me up and save 
me who am despairing and condemned!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the venerable Onuphrius  
Irmos: For the Mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His 
name; * and His mercy is upon them that fear Him * unto generation and 
generation. 
Thy gaze ever directed toward God, O divinely wise father, and deified by 
communion with Him, thou didst become a god; and offering up worship with the 
angels, thou dost ever glorify Him.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Having mortified the flesh, thou didst vanquish the enemy, and pass over to the 
never-waning Light, becoming an heir to the good things of heaven, O father 
Onuphrius.  
By thine entreaties thou dost ever deliver all who with love celebrate thy holy feast, 
from the threefold billows of the passions, O Onuphrius, for thou hast found 
boldness before the Savior.  
Theotokion: We who have acquired thee as a hope and rampart, O most pure one, 
trust that through thy supplications we may obtain the good things which Christ, 
Who for our sake became incarnate of thee, hath promised.  
Canon of the venerable Peter  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Girding thee about with might and strength, Christ God made thee strong, that 
thou mightest overcome the machinations of the demons, O most noetically rich 
father, as one who loved Him with all thy heart and soul. Wherefore, we bless thee 
with faith and love.  
O divinely wise one, thou wast revealed to be like an olive-tree planted in the 
house of the Lord, anointing with the oil of thy sweat the faces of us who celebrate 
this, thy glorious and divine festival, thou adornment of monks, preeminent among 
the venerable.  
Thy most glorious body, which hath poured forth fragrant and beautiful myrrh, O 
most glorious Peter, hath filled the faithful with sweet savor; for while alive and even 
after thy demise thou hast manifestly shown thyself to be a sweet fragrance for God. 
Wherefore, we bless thee as is meet.  
A vessel consecrated to the Lord God, converser with the martyrs, apostles and 
angels, pray thou on behalf of us who honor thee on earth with faith, that we may all 
find the forgiveness of sins.  
Theotokion: Spare me! Spare me, O Lord, when thou shalt come to render 
judgment. Condemn me not to the fire, neither denounce me with wrath, for the 
Virgin who gave birth to Thee, O Christ, entreateth thee, as do the assemblies of 
angels and the companies of the venerable.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable Onuphrius:  
The ranks of the angels marveled at the struggles which thou didst undertake in 
the desert, O God-bearing Onuphrius; for thou didst fast for sixty-three years, O 
father. And now, O blessed and venerable one, thou dost reighn with Christ for ages 
without end.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Exapostilarion of the venerable Peter: 
With hymns, as is meet, let us all honor aloud the namesake of the preeminent 
Peter, the boast of fasters, the glory of the venerable, the pillar of heaven, the flower 
of Athos, for He is an intercessor for us all.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Saved for thy sake, O Sovereign Lady, we truly confess thee to be the Theotokos; 
for thou didst ineffably give birth to God Who by the Cross hath destroyed death, 
and hath drawn to Himself the assemblies of the venerable. With them we praise 
thee, O Virgin. 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Octoechos, and Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
O most honored fathers, we honor thee, the instructors of a multitude of monks, 
by whom we have truly learned to walk the right path. Blessed are ye who have 
labored for Christ and cast down the power of the enemy, O favorites of the Lord 
and companions of the holy angels. With them pray ye to the Lord, that our souls 
find mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
The unblemished heifer, * beholding her Bullock * willingly nailed to the Tree, * 
cried out aloud, lamenting piteously: * “Woe is me, O my most beloved Child! * How 
hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, * desiring to leave me 
childless * and bereft of Thee, ** my most beloved Child?”  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the venerable 
Peter, and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the venerable Onuphrius.  
Following the vision of the angel, thou didst reach the desert; and having caused 
carnal pleasures to wither away through abstinence, thou didst live angelically therein, 
O blessed one. (Twice) 
Shown forth as a tree planted by springs of the waters of abstinence, O father 
Onuphrius, in due season thou didst truly produce the fruit of the virtues through 
husbandry.  
Having shone forth from the desert like a most radiant star upon the world, thou 
hast enlightened the assemblies of the pious and faithful with the beams of thy 
struggles, O Onuphrius our venerable father.  
Made steadfast by the might of the Spirit, thou didst humble all the might of the 
enemy; and as a crowned victor hastened unto Christ.  
Following in the footsteps of the preeminent Peter, the rock of faith, O venerable 
one, thou didst take his name, and wast richly enriched with faith.  
Thou didst struggle in divine feats, O father, keeping the faith; and the crown of 
good works was added unto thee.  
Theotokion: The Lord dwelt within thy womb and deified all human nature, O 
pure one; and He hath drawn to Him a multitude of the venerable by sanctity.  
Troparion of the venerable fathers, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Kontakion of the venerable Peter, in Tone II:  
Having withdrawn thyself from human companionship, * out of divine desire and 
love for thy Lord, * O Peter, thou didst dwell in caves of stone and deep ravines, * 
receiving from Him a crown. ** Pray thou unceasingly, that we be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable Onuphrius, in Tone Ill:  
Illumined by the radiance of the most holy Spirit, * O divinely wise one, * thou 
didst forsake all the tumults of life; * and upon reaching the desert, O venerable 
father, * thou didst gladden God the Creator, * Who is over all things. * Wherefore, 
Christ, the great Bestower of gifts, doth glorify thee, O blessed one.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE GALATIANS §213 (5:22-6:2)  
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, §43 (MAT. 11:27-30) 
The Lord said to His disciples: All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and 
no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save 
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Come unto me, all ye that 
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn 
of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls, for my 
yoke is easy, and my burden is light.  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
 
 
