--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 16th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HIEROMARTYR TICHON OF AMATHUS  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you ...”: 
Possessed of a life equal to that of the angels, * by spurning pleasures * thou didst 
show thyself to be a vessel of God; * wherefore, O wise Tichon, as is meet * He 
ordained thee for the people * as a divine hierarch, * and showed thee to be a pillar 
and ground of the Faith, * O divinely inspired one, ** pasturing thy flock by the 
waters of Orthodoxy, O sacred one.  
Full of divine understanding, * thou wast revealed to be a most wise shepherd, * 
piously nurturing * the reason-endowed flock * on the grass of true doctrines; * 
wherefore, we honor now thy holy festival, * glorifying the Lord Who hath glorified 
thee. * O all-blessed and divinely wise Tichon, ** pray thou that our souls be saved.  
God, Who ever glorifieth those who glorify Him, * hath glorified thee with 
miracles; * for during thine honored and divine commemoration, * O wise father, * 
ripe grapes are seen * by those who hymn the most glorious wonder. * And partaking 
thereof, * the faithful who glorify thee as is meet ** receive sanctification and profit.  
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
Strange and awesome is the mystery * of thy seedless birthgiving, O pure Virgin, * 
surpassing in its greatness * all human thought. * For the many-eyed cherubim dare 
not gaze upon Him, * and all the ranks of the holy angels fear Him * to Whom thou 
hast given birth in the flesh for us, * yet Who hath not separated Himself from the 
Father’s essence. ** Wherefore we glorify thee Who hast given birth to Him, O Bride 
of God.  
To whom hast thou likened thyself, O wretched soul, * in nowise awakening unto 
repentance? * And wherefore dost thou not fear * the fire which awaiteth the evil? * 
Arise, and summon her who alone is quick to help * and do thou cry aloud: * “O 
Mother of God, * entreat thy Son and our God, that He deliver me ** from the 
snares of the deceiver!”  
O Sovereign Lady, help of all, * send down drops of thy mercy on me * who have 
fallen into the dark abyss * and am ever cruelly engulfed * by the threefold billows of 
life; * grant me thy helping hand, * and grant unto me the portion of the elect and the 
righteous, * in that thou hast given birth to the Abyss of mercy, ** Who is the Lover 
of mankind.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O all-immaculate and pure one, * who hast given birth to the unbearable Fire * 
Who burneth up sins, and bedeweth the faithful: * by thy supplications * consume the 
tinder of my boundless offenses, * and with thy dew cool my soul, * which is 
withering away through the passions, * that with a loud voice I, thy servant, ** may 
magnify thy mercy and power.  
Stavrotheotokion: The ewe-lamb, as she beheld the Lamb * stretched out of His 
own will * upon the Tree of the Cross, * cried out maternally, in pain with her 
weeping: * O my Son, what is this strange sight? * O Longsuffering One, how is it 
that Thou art slain, * Who, as Lord, bestoweth life upon all, * granting resurrection to 
mortals? ** I glorify Thy great condescension, O my God!  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
A desert dweller, an angel in the flesh and a wonder-worker * wast thou revealed 
to be, O our God-bearing father Tichon. * Receiving heavenly gifts through fasting, 
vigils and prayers, * thou healest the infirm and the souls of those who with faith 
have recourse unto thee. * Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! * Glory to 
Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him Who through thee worketh healings 
for all!  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and that of the holy hieromartyr, with 4 Troparia, 
the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Full of visions transcending the mind, O blessed Tichon, and delighting in the 
divine radiance thereof, grant a voice of grace unto those who hymn thee, whereby 
we may be shown forth as worthy to recount thy virtues.  
Choosing the higher path from thy youth, thou didst regard thine ancestral 
inheritance as but dust; and distributing it to the poor, thou didst receive recompense 
an hundredfold, trusting in the words of thy Lord, O blessed one.  
He Who resideth in the highest, finding thy heart to be an abode of the virtues, 
made His habitation within thee and rested in thee; for with the Father He made 
within thee a dwelling-place purified beforehand by the Spirit, as He said.  
Theotokion: God became a man through thy womb, O most pure one, yet 
preserved thee a Virgin still after thy birthgiving; and having deified the nature which 
was contrary to His likeness, He bestowed upon it its primal dignity.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Thou didst consider gold and silver to be like soil to be trampled underfoot, and 
worldly glory to be like dung; for thou didst constantly elevate thy mind toward those 
things which are incorrupt, and having received them, thou madest thine abode 
among them, O divinely wise and noetically rich Tichon.  
That thou mightest obtain the higher life which abideth forever, O sacred martyr 
Tichon, thou didst overcome corrupt life, giving thyself over to labor for all, of thine 
own volition.  
Thou didst stand at the tribunal of the tyrant, confessing Christ the King with 
boldness, undaunted by wounds or death, O wondrous one; and by thy words thou 
didst repel the enemy.  
Theotokion: Thou hast not spurned one clothed in fetid raiments, who hath 
alienated himself from Thee through sin, O Christ; for, having assumed my poverty 
through the Virgin’s womb, Thou hast deified and saved it in Thine abundant 
goodness.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Desiring to receive everlasting life, thou didst truly purify thy soul of the passions, 
O our divinely wise father; wherefore, having received the effulgence of sanctity thou 
dost pour forth gifts of healing upon those who with faith have recourse to thy 
protection, O blessed Tichon.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O Bride of God who alone hast given birth unto the Creator of all, adorning 
mankind by thy birthgiving, deliver me from the snares of the alien one, and set me 
upon the rock of Christ’s will, earnestly entreating Him to Whom thou gavest flesh.  
Stavrotheotokion: O all-immaculate Virgin Mother of God, a sword passed 
through thy most holy soul when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of His 
own will. Cease not to beseech Him, O blessed one, that He grant us forgiveness of 
our transgressions.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Receiving the might of the Spirit, O father, thou wast shown to be invincible and 
tireless; and like a commander, strengthened thy warriors, urging them to advance. 
Wherefore, having founded thy bloodless victory, thou didst receive the crown of 
martyrdom.  
Consecrated to God, O Tichon, and observing His sacred laws, thou didst live, not 
as a hireling shepherd, but as one laying down thy life for the flock. Wherefore, 
having slain the wolves, thou hast nurtured the flock of Christ on life-giving 
pasturage.  
The island of Cyprus doth truly cherish thine honorable memory, joining chorus 
with all the earth, and proclaiming that which is therein through the outpouring of 
miracles, even calling all those who desire to see, and behold, the garden of the most 
glorious offshoot of the vine.  
Theotokion: O Son of the Father, Who hast shone forth timelessly, Light from 
Light, Who in the latter times issued forth from the Virgin’s womb, setting aright 
through Thyself all of Adam, who of old had come under death. Wherefore, truly 
honoring Thy Mother, we, the faithful, proclaim her to be the Theotokos.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Full of true vision, O glorious Tichon, thou didst denounce those who love vain 
wisdom, driving out the delusion of the demons, and all the myths and vile works of 
Cyprus.  
Possessed of a pure life, and performing works which surpass understanding, thou 
didst stand before the divine table of Christ in a most sacred manner. Wherefore, 
through thy supplications, O divinely wise Tichon, thou didst cast down the temples 
of the demons.  
Like Paul, crucified to the world, and crucifying the world to thyself, O God-
bearing and noetically rich Tichon, thou didst not live for the flesh, but for God the 
Spirit. Wherefore, since thou hast obtained those things desired by thee; be mindful 
of us, thy servants.  
Theotokion: O Mother who knewest not wedlock, thou hast been shown to be 
more radiant than the sun. For who in ages past ever heard of a Virgin giving suck? In 
thee who hast given birth to thy Creator, O Virgin Mother, were all things 
accomplished in a divine manner.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Driving the assaults of the demons away from thy flock, and dispelling the 
delusion of the idols of polytheism, O wondrous one, thou didst show thyself to be 
fearsome to the adversary, O divinely eloquent and most wise Tichon.  
God Who was glorified by thee glorified thee, O God-bearing Tichon, giving thee 
to us who bless thee with faith as one awesome in signs and great in wonders.  
Thou didst sanctify thy life, O wise one, living it honorably on earth; and, passing 
over from it to receive that of heaven, thou didst glorify it with miracles, O Tichon, 
true friend of the Master.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou hast given birth to the Fruit of life, the divine 
Garden, for me who of old in the garden of paradise did by nature eat of the fruit of 
mortality. And partaking of Him, I shall no longer be enslaved to death.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Persevering in the struggle of the love of God, O holy one, * from on high thou 
didst receive the power of the Comforter * to cast down the idols of delusion, * to 
save mortals, cast out demons, and to heal sicknessess. ** Wherefore, we honor thee 
as a friend of God, O blessed Tichon.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Chaldean furnace, burning with fire, * was bedewed by the Spirit * 
through the presence of God; * and the children chanted: * O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
As thou wast a divine mouth, thou didst make worthy men from the unworthy, O 
most wondrous Tichon, wherefore, Christ hath truly glorified thee with miracles even 
after thy repose.  
As thou wast desirous of the hope of heaven, O father, thou didst wisely reject all 
passionate attachments to the world. Wherefore, as a prophet, O wise Tichon, thou 
didst proclaim thy repose beforehand.  
Coming together, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us pass over Cyprus 
with mystic visions, and let us behold the most glorious working of the garden, 
through which the world doth embrace pure salvation.  
Theotokion: The Fruit of thy womb, O Virgin Theotokos, poureth forth 
immortality upon those who partake thereof; for, having given birth unto God, thou 
hast released Eve from her debt.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Adorned with the beauties of the virtues, thou didst weave thy most sacred 
vesture, O all-famed Tichon; wherefore, telling of thine end and the manifestation of 
sweet fragrance, thou didst urge those round about thee to glorify the Savior, O 
blessed one, proclaiming: Supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages!  
Ignoring the law of the body, like an incorporeal being thou didst run to where the 
crown of higher knowledge was prepared for thee, O divinely wise one; for it was not 
for flesh and blood that thou didst promise to live, O Tichon. Wherefore, beholding 
the beauties of the kingdom of Christ, thou dost reign with Him throughout all ages.  
Thou wast victorious over all the enemies of Christ, and didst undergo torture 
because of thy conscience, voluntarily sacrificing thyself, O wise Tichon; for before all 
thy tormenters thou didst cry aloud: “Christ is God! Let the memory of those falsely 
called gods perish throughout the ages!”  
Theotokion: O most holy Lady, helper of the world, mighty refuge of the 
sorrowful, sole aid of thy servants who are in need; rescue thine inheritance from 
divers misfortunes and sorrows, that we may cry aloud with faith: Rejoice, O joy and 
salvation of the world!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
O Tichon, accept thou this sacred hymnody offered unto thee from unworthy lips, 
granting in recompense the deliverance from sins through thy supplications to God; 
for thee do all of us who faithfully honor thy memory set forth as our advocate.  
The pure and most holy Spirit anointed thee with the oil of gladness, O most 
glorious one, adorning thee with a multitude of gifts, and deeming thee worthy to 
reign with Him gloriously, O most hallowed Tichon, adornment and boast of priests.  
O thy miracles of grace, O sacred Tichon! The tongue of man cannot recount 
what he hath seen! For the shoot of the vine which before was desiccated hath now, 
at thy ready gesture, most gloriously put forth ripe grapes.  
By thy supplications grant me victory over the passions, I pray, O Tichon, and 
vouchsafe that I who fervently bless thee with love may obtain the love of God and 
the delight of good things, and receive His beauties.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God who hast given birth to salvation for the world, by 
thy supplications save me from the multifarious and nefarious temptations which 
assail me; for upon thee have I, thy servant, faithfully set my hope of salvation.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
A desert dweller, an angel in the flesh and a wonder-worker * wast thou revealed 
to be, O our God-bearing father Tichon. * Receiving heavenly gifts through fasting, 
vigils and prayers, * thou healest the infirm and the souls of those who with faith 
have recourse unto thee. * Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! * Glory to 
Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him Who through thee worketh healings 
for all!  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone III: 
Persevering in the struggle of the love of God, O holy one, * from on high thou 
didst receive the power of the Comforter * to cast down the idols of delusion, * to 
save mortals, cast out demons, and to heal sicknessess. ** Wherefore, we honor thee 
as a friend of God, O blessed Tichon.  
 
