--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 10th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR TIMOTHY,  
BISHOP OF PRUSSIA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Elevated above earthly things * by thine active purifications * like an animate 
cloud, O all-blessed one, * thou didst cast down the perverse serpent * with the 
thunder-claps of thy miracles * and the awesome lightning flashes of thy words, * and 
thou didst receive the grace * to burn up the bowels of the adverse carnal serpents ** 
with the divine covering of the sacred Gifts.  
O holy hierarch Timothy, * boast of the people of Prussia, * universal champion 
and beacon of the world, * adornment of the Church, * sacred sacrifice of faith, * and 
precious and lustrous ornament of the martyrs: * pray thou that those who celebrate * 
thy most honored memory with faith ** may be delivered from corruption and 
misfortunes.  
With thy pangs, O Timothy, * thou didst weave a most comely garment * dyed in 
thy blood, * and ineffably received from on high * a heavenly vesture of incorrupt 
purity * and immutable life. * Wearing this immaterial robe in the highest, * pray thou 
on behalf of all ** who praise thee with piety, O spiritual athlete.  
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
Deliver my lowly soul * from condemnation and grievous transgressions, * O most 
holy Bride of God, * and by thy supplications rescue it from death; * grant that, on 
the day of trial, * it may obtain the justification * which the assemblies of the saints 
have received, * and, before the end, show it forth to be purified ** by the outpouring 
of tears.  
With the showers of the most holy Spirit * bedew thou my mind, * O most pure 
one who hast given birth unto Christ, the Drop of rain, * Who with His compassions 
hath washed away * the immeasurably boundless iniquities of all mankind; * do thou 
dry up the source of my passions, * and ever vouchsafe unto me * a torrent of living 
sustenance ** by thy supplications.  
O Virgin who hast given birth to my Savior, * by thy supplications * grant me 
thorough repentance, * the healing of salvation, * torrents of tears, * remembrance of 
the dread and awesome hour * and the impartial Judge, * that I may escape terrifying 
torment ** and receive divine grace.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
Tens of thousands of times have I promised * to repent of mine offenses, O most 
pure one, * yet the cherished habits of mine evil ways * will not depart from me; * 
wherefore, I cry unto thee * and fall down, praying: * O Sovereign Lady, rescue me 
from such tyranny, * guiding me to things that are higher, ** which are nigh unto 
salvation.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
Possessed of an invincible strength and immutable and unchangeable might, O 
Good One, by thine ineffable power make firm the weakness of my tongue, that it 
might hymn Thee, and through the supplications of Timothy take pity on me.  
With godly might thou didst grow a sacred garden from a sacred root, O Timothy, 
and showing thyself to be a divine adornment of the virtues; for thou didst put forth 
the abundant fruits of suffering and offer them to the Master of all.  
Showing thyself to be adorned in the dye of thy blood with purity of mind and 
splendor of soul, O God-bearing Timothy, thou dost now reign with the Master of 
creation and with faith intercedest on behalf of thy flock.  
Theotokion: O good Theotokos, thou animate and most radiant house of God, joy 
of the world: drive me not far away from thee, but take pity and deliver me from all 
temptations, that I may rejoice within thy protection.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Showing thyself to be a splendid martyr with the martyrs of Christ, O glorious 
one, thou hast been revealed to be among wise priests, an adornment of the 
priesthood.  
Come, ye faithful, O flock of the primate of Prussia, and let us hymn today the 
temple of the Lord, the treasury of wisdom.  
Mingling thy blood with the sweat of the virtues O most wise Timothy, thou didst 
offer it to the Lord as a pure, divine and beautiful drink.  
Theotokion: O Mary Mother of God, pure one who art more exalted than the 
cherubim, Sovereign Lady of all the earth: save me by thy divine entreaties.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
Irrigated with the showers of thy blood, O hieromartyr of the Lord, in the good 
soil of thy heart thou didst produce fruit, the inexhaustible sustenance which thou 
didst receive from God. Wherefore, we entreat thee to deliver from misfortunes those 
who honor thy memory.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion in Tone V: 
Finding thee to be a haven, a bulwark, a refuge, our hope, protection and fervent 
help, we, the faithful, hasten to thee and cry out earnestly, exclaiming with faith: Have 
mercy upon those who place their trust in thee, O Theotokos, and deliver us from 
transgressions.  
Stavrotheotokion: Through the Cross of thy Son, * O thou who art full of the 
grace of God, * hath the deception of idolatry been utterly vanquished, * and the 
might of the demons hath fallen; * wherefore, we, the faithful, ever hymn and bless 
thee as is meet, ** confessing thee to be the true Theotokos.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
Having acquired a life of heavenly Wisdom, wholly resplendent with the 
thundering of the Spirit, thou didst utterly consume the most pernicious serpent, O 
glorious one, strengthened by divine grace.  
Adorned with vision and activity, O Timothy; like a Levite thou didst disembowel 
the serpent, using as a two-edged knife, the covering of the consecrated Bread.  
Having acknowledged Christ, the great High Priest, not with another’s blood, but 
with thine own, O martyr, and brought before the Father as His companion, thou 
didst make sacrifice, offering up thyself.  
Theotokion: The many-eyed hosts who keep unceasing watch are overcome, 
beholding thy purity, O pure Birthgiver of God; for as Sovereign Lady thou dost ever 
anticipate, and watch over, thy servants.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Waging war against the hordes of the iniquitous ones, as with a swift scythe and a 
mighty sword, thou hast been crowned with victory.  
Shown forth as a radiant beacon of the day, thou didst enlighten the queen whose 
face was enveloped in the darkness of evil, O glorious one.  
Beholding the madness of the abominations of the idols, thou didst give thyself 
over to the shedders of blood like a lamb, O blessed one, offering thyself as a 
sacrifice to God.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou pure turtle-dove who dost extend the protection of 
the immaterial wings of thy supplication over thy servants in the world, disdain me 
not.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
The whole world is glad today, rejoicing in thy memory, O blessed one; for with 
rays of miracles thou dost shed light from on high upon the souls of those who hymn 
thee.  
Having now been revealed to be a minister not of an altar on earth, but, entering 
into the chambers of heaven, partaking thereof at the ineffable table, grant unto all of 
us thy food and refreshment.  
Accomplishing thy sacred struggle lawfully and with boldness, O divinely wise 
Timothy, thou didst denounce the mindlessness of the emperor and demolished the 
temples of the idols.  
Theotokion: Thy Son, the Creator of all, Who hath been God since before time 
began, is hymned with angelic voices, O Bride of God. O Sovereign Lady, as thou 
reignest with Him, do thou save me.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
The grace of God rightly crowned thee before thy sufferings as a treasury rich in 
virtues, and, resplendent with the gifts of miracles, making thee radiant in the world. 
(Twice) 
Beholding the threat of the sword and the flame of the fire, O martyr, thou didst 
arm thy mind and soul with faith and with fearless understanding didst preach Christ, 
thy Creator, Fashioner, and Lord.  
Theotokion: Having within thy womb Him Who as God holdeth all things in the 
palm of His hands, O Mother of God, thou dost preserve those who cry aloud: 
Blessed art Thou among women, O most immaculate one.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Strengthened with the power of divine faith, O wise Timothy, thou hast been 
shown forth to us as a new Daniel, destroying the pernicious serpent; and translated 
to the heights, thou ever criest aloud, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
As a sacred servant thou hast entered into the joy of thy Lord; for vastly increasing 
the talant of faith with thy pangs, sufferings and miracles, O glorious one, thou dost 
now cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Driving away the infirmities of all, O most wise one, thou dost perfume their souls 
with thine anointing, doing away with their painful wounds by thy mighty gifts, and 
delivering from evil spirits those who ever cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord!  
Theotokion: Through thy divine birthgiving our nature hath received a glorious 
crown. Wherefore, grant that I may become a victor in battle against the enemy, and 
may be crowned with the splendid crown of thy gifts, that I may cry aloud: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Most glorious miracles have we truly seen in thee, O God-bearing Timothy; for 
the shrine of thy relics poureth forth streams of healing upon us, banishing the pangs 
of infirmities. Wherefore, we glorify thee with honor.  
Joining chorus with the angelic armies, O Timothy, rejoicing with the assemblies 
of the martyrs and chanting with the ranks of the priests, unceasingly entreat the 
Lord, that He save those who praise thee with faith.  
Thou dost hearken to the sounds of hymnody and entreaty, O most honored 
martyr of Christ. Attend thou to desire and love, and lift up thine eyes to Him Who is 
invincible in wrath; and from on high grant thy protection to all who praise thee with 
faith.  
Theotokion: Lift up thy grace, O Pure one, magnify thy supplication, and lead to 
the Lord the ranks of angels, the choirs of apostles and prophets, and all the righteous 
and the martyrs, that we who honor thee may be saved.  
 
 
