--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 14th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY PROPHET ELISHA, AND OF OUR FATHER 
AMONG THE SAINTS METHODIUS, PATRIARCH OF CONSTANTINOPLE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy prophet, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Rejoice, O most wise Elisha, * for, having purified thy mind * of the passions of 
the body, * thou didst receive rays of the Spirit, O glorious one, * which thou didst 
transmit unto all the rest, * and wast revealed to be wholly radiant; * wherefore, thou 
hast made thine abode amid never-waning light. * Pray thou ever on behalf of us ** 
who praise thee.  
Elijah the zealot left thee resplendent * in a twofold measure of grace, * O blessed 
Elisha, * when he was shown to be a truly airborne warrior. * And emulating him, by 
grace * thou didst halt the rushing torrent of the river, * and didst pass over, O 
glorious one, * joyfully adorning thyself ** and magnifying Christ.  
Of old, the prayer of the Shulamite woman’s faith * entrusted her child unto thee, 
* and thou didst raise him up from the dead, * as a divine prophet marvelous in 
sanctity; * and again, through salt thou didst manifestly transform * undrinkable water 
into potable. * Thou workest countless miracles * through the grace of the all-
accomplishing Spirit, * wherefore, we hymn thee, O blessed one.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in the same melody: 
O divinely wise father Methodius, * like a lion, by the roaring of thy most wise 
teachings * thou didst terrify the sly fox * John the Grammarian, * for he could not 
endure thy denunciation, * and the wicked wretch, was felled by a blow * from thy 
noetic sword; * wherefore, as a champion of the Orthodox people, ** thou didst not 
leave the flock of Christ to perish.  
O Methodius, thou art the confirmation of Orthodoxy, * the shepherd of the 
Church, * adornment of monks, * a river full to overflowing * with the waters of the 
Spirit, * a cup pouring forth a drink of surpassing sweetness, * a beacon illumining 
the ends of the world, * a two-edged sword honed to sharpness by grace, ** which 
cutteth down hordes of the ungodly.  
O glorious Methodius, thou art a model of confession, * the foundation of holy 
hierarchs, * an instrument inspired by God, * playing the melody of doctrine, full of 
piety, * a dwelling-place of wisdom, and an abyss of love, * an ever-flowing stream of 
mercy, * like a bowl pouring forth * the drink of compunction, ** a right flourishing 
garden of paradise.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Today the divine coming of the prophets hath shone forth, mystically calling out 
to the souls of those who love the feasts of the Church. He who mounted the chariot 
which traverseth the heavens, the star of the never-waning East, with Elisha, the 
wondrous man, doth broaden the streams of the new Jordan, making clear the 
proclamation of piety, and manifestly portraying by a double image the twofold 
blessing of the harmonious glory of the Old and the New for those who with faith 
celebrate their most festive memorial.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or the Theotokion,  
Or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee * nailed to the Tree of the Cross. O Jesus, * she 
that kneweth not wedlock said weeping: * “O sweet Child, why hast Thou abandoned 
me * who alone gave birth to Thee, * O unapproachable Light of the beginningless 
Father? * Hasten Thou, and glorify Thyself, * that those who glorify Thy divine 
sufferings ** may receive divine glory!” 
Aposticha from the Pentecostarion, or from the Octoechos; whereupon we chant the 
following Sticheron, with its Verse, in Tone IV:  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
The Church of God doth clothe itself today in gladness, and rejoiceth, crying 
aloud: “My beauty hath shone forth beyond that of all other cities! For, lo! the 
glorious Methodius, the great treasure of holy hierarchs, hath passed over to the 
heavens! Come, therefore, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, ye assembly of the 
Orthodox, and, forming a choir round about his divine shrine, and receiving streams 
of healing therefrom, pray ye unto Christ God, that He deliver the whole world from 
all heresy!”  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O prophet and herald of Christ, thou hast never departed from the throne of His 
majesty, and, ministering in the highest, thou dost ever intercede for everyone who is 
sick. Wholly glorious, thou dost bless the whole world. Ask thou cleansing for our 
souls.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion; or the Theotokion,  
Or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec.  
Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding our Life suspended upon the Tree, * the all-
immaculate Theotokos cried aloud, * maternally lamenting: ** O my Son and my 
God, save those who with love hymn Thee!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Troparion of the holy prophet, in Tone IV:  
The angel in the flesh, the foundation of the prophets, * the second forerunner of 
the coming of Christ, * the glorious Elijah sent down grace from on high upon Elisha 
* to dispel infirmities and to cleanse lepers. ** Wherefore, he poureth forth healings 
upon those who honor him.  
Glory ..., this Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Methodius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Octoechos, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and two 
canons of the saints, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy prophet, the acrostic whereof is: “With gladness I hymn the grace 
of Elisha”, in Tone V: 
Irmos: Unto God the Savior * Who made His people pass dryshod through the 
sea, * but drowned Pharaoh with all his host, * unto Him alone let us sing: * 
For He hath been glorified. 
Hymns chanted unto God from the beginning, wherewith the Hymned One is 
hymned, resplendent in the praises of the prophets, do I sing, hymning Him Who 
hath glorified them, in that He is glorious.  
Abandoning the plough, the prophet acquired his rank with spiritual radiance, 
receiving the fleece from the hand of the prophet, for he hath been glorified.  
As from the beginning Thou didst know Elisha’s disposition toward a higher 
calling, O Christ, Thou didst illumine him with the grace of prophecy, O almighty 
Savior, for Thou hast been glorified.  
Theotokion: O most pure Mother of God, unceasingly entreat God, Who became 
incarnate of thee yet did not separate Himself from the bosom of the Father, that He 
may save from all misfortunes those whom He created.  
Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: O Thou Who smote Egypt and drowned the tyrant Pharaoh in the sea, 
* Thou didst save from slavery * the people who like Moses chanted a hymn of 
victory, * for He hath been glorified.  
Enslaving thy body amid fasting, O venerable one, thou didst anoint thy soul with 
divine ascents, pouring forth the inexhaustible sustenance of the kingdom on high.  
Armed with the noetic sword of the Spirit, and arrayed in faith as in a breast-plate, 
thou didst manfully fell hordes of heretics, O all-blessed father Methodius.  
Thy divine mouth was an ever-flowing river for the Church, truly drowning the 
heretical, O venerable Methodius, but giving drink unto the parched faithful.  
Theotokion: With hymns let us honor the most pure Mary, the animate tabernacle, 
the ark and table, the mountain from whence the Lord of all was cut without the aid 
of the hands of men.  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, * do Thou make steadfast mine 
understanding, * that I may hymn and glorify ** Thy saving Ascension. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Putting away earthly attachments, thou didst serve the Spirit Who breatheth fire, 
conversing with ministers pleasing unto God. 
In the Spirit thou didst receive the gifts of thy teacher twofold, not having 
compromised his ascent by slothfulness.  
Having stood before Elijah with lamentation and having rent thy garment, thou 
didst part the streams of the Jordan with his mantle.  
Theotokion: O pure Bride of God, unceasingly beseech Him Who issued forth 
from thy womb, that He deliver those who hymn thee from the deception of the 
devil.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Having established the thunder * and fashioned the wind: * do Thou 
make me steadfast O Lord, * that I may hymn Thee in truth and do Thy will; * 
for there is none holy like unto Thee, O our God.  
Thy tongue was a shower-laden cloud, O Methodius; for it watereth the hearts of 
the pious with discourse, and ever choketh the tares of the ungodly.  
Directing the discourse of faith, thou didst undergo the testing of wounds, O 
father, and wast condemned to imprisonment in a dark dungeon; wherefore, in 
gladness thou hast passed over into never-waning light.  
Thou didst hymn the sufferings of the martyrs and didst share in their joy which 
cannot be taken away, O father Methodius, having suffered exceedingly through 
never-ending tribulations and wounds.  
Theotokion: Announcing “Rejoice!” to the Virgin, Gabriel declared: “The Holy 
Spirit shall come upon thee, O Virgin, and thou shalt conceive the Lord and Savior in 
thy womb.”  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”: 
Thou didst struggle on earth like an incorporeal being, * O Methodius, * and hast 
inherited the heavens, * as one who explained the veneration of icons to the ends of 
the earth; * for subjected all the more to labors and pangs, * thou didst not cease to 
boldly denounce ** those who cast aside the icons of Christ.  
Ikos: Grant me forgiveness of sins, that I may fittingly hymn thy struggles, O most 
glorious Methodius; for thou wast cast into a deep pit, that thou mightest release 
souls buried in the abyss, into the radiance of divine effulgence, manifestly teaching 
the whole world to bow down before the divine and truly ineffable image of Christ, 
and denouncing those who cast aside the icons of Christ.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy prophet, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb ...”: 
With divine foresight the great Elijah took thee as his disciple, O wise Elisha, and 
showed thee forth as a prophet shining with the Spirit. Wherefore, celebrating thine 
all-holy memorial today with right honorable wisdom, we honor thee with him, O 
glorious one.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
Having shone forth like a radiant sun, O father Methodius, by thy doctrines thou 
dost illumine the whole world, driving away the darkness of heresy.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion in Tone IV:  
Stretching forth thy most pure hands, O Virgin Mother, protect those who set 
their hope on thee and cry out to thy Son: O Christ, grant Thou Thy mercies unto all!  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding thy Son lifted up upon the Tree, O most pure one, 
with thy maternal womb wounded with pain, thou didst piteously cry aloud: “Woe is 
me! How is it that Thou hast set, O my timeless Light?”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: I have heard, O Lord, * of Thine arising from the tomb, * and have 
glorified * Thine invincible power.  
As Thou didst with the waters of old, so do thou now heal my barren mind by 
grace, through the supplications of Elisha.  
Thou wast divinely enriched by speaking of heavenly things, and by means of a 
bear thou didst set at naught the misbehavior of the children.  
Thou wast shown to be adorned with virginity, O glorious one, shining like a 
beacon from afar upon those sitting in the darkness of delusion.  
The tongue which is moved by the Spirit cannot keep silent concerning thy 
wondrous corrections in this life, O Elisha  
Theotokion: We, the faithful, truly glorify thee, O unwedded Theotokos, and we 
flee to thy haven.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord and I am afraid. * Having 
understood Thy works, * I am in awe of Thee O Lord, * for the earth is full of 
Thy praise.  
Having moistened thy lips with the noetic chalice of wisdom, O venerable father, 
thou hast poured forth rivers of doctrines upon us who piously celebrate thy 
memorial.  
O venerable and holy hierarch Methodius, thou wast shown to be a most desirable 
preacher, sweet of discourse, simple of demeanor, and abundantly rich in the gifts of 
the Spirit.  
With the noetic spear of godly discourse, O Methodius, thou didst cause the 
audacity of ungodliness to cease, striking it down amid the abomination of heresy.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O noetic portal, from whence the King of heaven issued 
forth with an ineffable voice, preserving thee immaculate, leaving thee sealed as thou 
wast before.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE V  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: Waking at dawn, * we cry unto Thee, O Lord: * Save us, for Thou art 
our God; * we know none other besides Thee.  
The stillness and meekness of thy soul hath shown thee to be a prophet, O 
divinely inspired Elisha, because of thy faith.  
The divine action of thy discourses doth illumine me with spiritual words, O all-
blessed Elisha.  
As thou standest before the Lord as one living, O Prophet Elisha, sin hath been 
reckoned as slain.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, cease thou never to pray to Him Whom thou didst 
bear, that He save the souls of us who hymn thee, O most pure one.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Shine upon me, O Lord, * the light of Thy commandments, * for my 
soul riseth early to Thee and hymneth Thee: * For Thou art our God, * and 
unto Thee do I flee, O King of peace. 
Illumined by the light of the threefold Sun, O glorious one, thou didst piously 
dispel the gloomy darkness of heresy, and wast a star, illumining the faithful with 
splendors.  
Thy tongue hath been shown to be like the sharp stylus of a quickly-writing scribe, 
O Methodius, truly engraving the divine law of grace upon the tablets of men’s 
hearts.  
Wearing like pearls, streams of tears, while standing at all-night vigils, O venerable 
one, thou didst thereby dry up torrents of sin; and reveal thyself to be a pure 
receptacle of the divine Spirit.  
Theotokion: By thy supplications thou dost deliver from every evil circumstance 
those who have recourse unto thy protection, O Mary Theotokos; for thou art an 
intercessor for those who honor thee, and their hope before God.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: The abyss hath encompassed me, * the sea monster hath become my 
grave; * but I cried unto Thee, * the Lover of mankind, ** and Thy right hand 
saved me, O Lord.  
Once neither rain nor the spirit of the air filled the torrents, O prophet, but the 
wind of grace filled thy discourse with the action of the Spirit.  
As once thou didst fill a little vessel full to overflowing with oil for the woman, O 
Prophet Elisha, so pray thou, that divine mercy may be poured forth upon me.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Animated by faith, through thy supplication, O prophet, the honorable woman 
received release from barrenness in her old age, bearing goodly offspring.  
Theotokion: As is meet, O glorious Mary, thou boast of the Orthodox, we glorify 
thee as the unburnt bush, the mountain, the animate ladder, the portal of heaven.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The tempest of evil thoughts, hath overwhelmed me, * dragging me 
down into the abyss of my numberless sins; * but, going before me, O good 
Helmsman, * govern me as Thou didst the Prophet, * and save me.  
Emulating the industrious bee, thou didst gather honey from the Scriptures as 
from flowers, laying it up in thy heart as in a honey-comb, and pouring forth upon all 
the river of thy doctrines.  
Thy tongue, full of spiritual discourse, set at naught the sacrilege of the 
blasphemers, O most wise one, preaching the veneration of the incarnation of Christ 
and the image of His flesh.  
Having first praised the Lord as an elder upon the judgment-seat, thou wast later 
raised up upon a hierarchal cathedra, shepherding the chosen people in a god-pleasing 
manner, O father.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady Theotokos, all creation doth acknowledge thee as 
the only Mother of our God, for thou alone didst ineffably contain God within thy 
womb without being consumed by the divine fire.  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Thou wast shown to be a prophet of God, * receiving a twofold measure of grace, 
* which truly befitted thee, O blessed Elisha; * for thou wast the companion of 
Elijah, and with him ** dost unceasingly entreat Christ God on behalf of us all.  
Ikos: With melodious songs we all hymn the wise Elisha who shone forth in the 
law of the Lord; for he was wholly filled with twofold forms of miracles, pouring 
forth streams of healings upon us. For he watereth the souls of the faithful and saveth 
them from misfortunes, as of old he saved the barren people, by sweetening the 
waters with salt, manifestly proclaiming the grace of baptism. Pay thou unceasingly on 
behalf of us all.  
ODE VII 
 Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: The children were saved * in the burning furnace, * chanting: Blessed 
art Thou * O God of our fathers. 
Filled with higher wisdom, O Elisha, thou didst cry aloud: Blessed is the God of 
our fathers!  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
As the servant of Life, O prophet, to the dead child’s mother thou didst 
straightway show him forth as living.  
Thou didst once feed the despairing children of the prophets, rendering their 
destructive food harmless.  
Theotokion: Blessed is the God of our fathers Who was born of the Virgin and 
made her the Theotokos.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
With the dew of divine love thou didst extinguish the burning furnace of the 
passions, O most glorious one; and having been tried by perils like gold in a crucible, 
thou dost shine like the sun.  
In the midst of tribulations and persecutions thy heart was unyielding, O 
Methodius; and thou now shinest forth with heavenly beams from thy fiery mouth 
wherefore, we praise thee.  
Like an invincible tower thou didst remain unmoved by the assaults of perils, 
humbling the foundation of falsehood, O most blessed and holy hierarch Methodius, 
by the power of thy words.  
Theotokion: Thou, the most wondrous bridal-chamber, alone hast given birth 
unto God Who hath united Himself to mankind, and thou didst remain a virgin, O 
Mary Bride of God, thou Virgin who knewest not wedlock.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: Unto Him Who bedewed the furnace * preserving the children amid 
the burning flame, * do ye children hymn, ye priests bless, * and ye people 
supremely exalt, throughout all ages!  
The prophet who at his command wrought purification do the children hymn, the 
hierarchs bless and the people supremely exalt throughout the ages.  
Cleansed of dross, and held fast by desire, thou didst noetically behold the mind of 
the Immaterial One; wherefore, leaping up, thou didst cry aloud: Supremely exalt 
Christ throughout all ages!  
Through grace thou didst behold things to come, and didst perceive the most 
precious Cross depicted in the tree, O prophet taught by God; wherefore, rejoicing, 
thou didst cry: Supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
The multitude of chariots of those who surrounded thee didst thou truly bring to a 
halt through darkness, denouncing their mindlessness and crying aloud: Supremely 
exalt Christ throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: The angels glorify thy birthgiving, O pure Bride of God, and with 
them we all chant: Ye children hymn, ye priests bless, and ye people supremely exalt, 
throughout all ages!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The earth and all that is therein, * the seas and all wellsprings, * the 
heaven of heavens, light and darkness, * frost and heat, ye sons of men, and ye 
priests, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages. 
Thou didst cast down the arrogance of the heretics who were truly wicked, and 
didst raise up with thyself the horn of the faithful of the Church, O father Methodius, 
rendering honor to the icon of Christ. Wherefore, we hymn and honor thee with love.  
Christ the Sun hath shown thee to be a most brilliant star in the firmament of the 
Church, O most wise father, and with the effulgence of thy precious doctrines thou 
hast illumined the ends of the earth throughout all ages.  
Like thunder did thy discourse smite the earth, O Methodius, and binding the 
minion of Manes, thou didst send him forth into everlasting darkness like the serpent, 
the father of lies.  
Theotokion: Thou, Who alone art the Only-begotten on high and here below as 
well: wast begotten on high of the Father without mother, and below of Thy Mother 
without father, and abasing Thyself, within her thou didst take on the form of my 
alien nature which had been humbled by sin.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: O thou who art God’s Mother transcending mind and word, * who 
ineffably in time hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * thee do we the 
faithful * magnify with one accord.  
Lifting up a pruning staff of iron, the prophet taught that human nature would be 
uplifted by the Cross.  
Revealing the all-honorable character of the prophet, the Prince of life showed 
forth the resurrection of the body, raising up the dead man whose flesh was utterly 
bereft of breath.  
In divine rest, O wondrous one, thou dost now entreat Christ, that those who ever 
bless thee may receive blessedness.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O Theotokos, Mother of Christ God! Him do thou beseech, 
that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who hymn thee with faith.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: For the Mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His 
name; * and His mercy is upon them that fear Him * unto generation and 
generation. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
O Methodius, thou art the adornment of holy hierarchs, the ornament of monks, a 
model for all the faithful, the shepherd of the Church and the foundation of the 
Orthodox.  
Having acquired the zeal of Elijah, thou didst fill with shame the iniquitous priests 
who refused to venerate the image of the incarnation of the Lord, O wise Methodius.  
Dancing with the angels before the face of the Redeemer, and delighting in His 
glory, by thy supplications deliver us from all manner of temptations, O Methodius.  
Theotokion: We hymn thy birth giving, and we glorify Him Who was born of thee 
as both God and man, O pure Virgin Mother. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He 
have mercy upon us.  
Exapostilarion of the holy prophet:  
Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars ...”:  
Thou didst receive from God twice the grace of Elijah, O divinely blessed Elisha, 
and thou givest twofold healing, to both souls and bodies, unto those who with faith 
ask it of thee.  
Glory ..., Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “As the disciples watched ...”:  
Come, ye faithful, let us hymn today the divine memory of the holy hierarch 
Methodius, who was cast into a subterranean pit, that he may deliver souls buried by 
the evil one in the darkness of ungodliness.  
Both now ..., From the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion:  
O all-hymned Virgin Theotokos who hath ineffable given birth to God, earnestly 
entreat thy Son on behalf of us, thy servants, that He take pity and save those who 
praise thee with love.  
Aposticha Stichera from the Octoechos, and Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
A star of piety hath shone forth from the west of the visible sun; for Methodius, 
great among hierarchs, having cut through the darkness of the heretics, hath come to 
rest in the true East, Christ our God the Sun of righteousness; and, making his abode 
there with the incorporeal choirs, standing before the throne of the Trinity as one 
holy, as a martyr, as a hierarch, as a patriarch in deed and appearance, he asketh great 
mercy for us who with faith celebrate his sacred memory.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion; or Theotokion,  
Or this Stavrotheotokion: Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
“Mindful of Thy seedless conception and ineffable nativity, I marvel exceedingly at 
how Thou hast been well-pleased to die as a malefactor, O my Son!” cried aloud the 
most pure one.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
 
Troparion of the holy prophet, in Tone IV:  
The angel in the flesh, the foundation of the prophets, * the second forerunner of 
the coming of Christ, * the glorious Elijah sent down grace from on high upon Elisha 
* to dispel infirmities and to cleanse lepers. ** Wherefore, he poureth forth healings 
upon those who honor him.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Methodius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Thou didst struggle on earth like an incorporeal being, * O Methodius, * and hast 
inherited the heavens, * as one who explained the veneration of icons to the ends of 
the earth; * for subjected all the more to labors and pangs, * thou didst not cease to 
boldly denounce ** those who cast aside the icons of Christ.  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone II:  
Thou wast shown to be a prophet of God, * receiving a twofold measure of grace, 
* which truly befitted thee, O blessed Elisha; * for thou wast the companion of 
Elijah, and with him ** dost unceasingly entreat Christ God on behalf of us all.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Thou art a priest forever, * after the order of 
Melchisedek.  
Verse: The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make 
Thine enemies the footstool of Thy feet.  
 
GENERAL EPISTLE OF JAMES, § 57 (JAM. 5: 10-20)  
Brethren: Take the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an 
example of suffering affliction, and of patience. Behold, we count them happy which 
endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that 
the Lord is very pitiful, and of under mercy. But above all things, my brethren, swear 
not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath: but let your 
yea be yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation. Is any among you 
afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing psalms. Is any sick among you? let 
him call for the elders of the Church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with 
oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord 

--- PAGE 13 ---
shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Confess 
your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The 
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much. Elijah was a man subject to 
like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained 
not on the earth by the space of three years and six months. And he prayed again, and 
the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. Brethren, if any of you do 
err from the truth, and one convert him; let him know, that he who converteth the 
sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a 
multitude of sins.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Moses and Aaron among His priests, and Samuel is among 
them that call upon His name.  
Verse: A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man, and gladness for the 
upright of heart.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 14 (LK. 4: 22-3O)  
At that time, the multitude wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out 
of the mouth of Jesus, and they said: “Is not this Joseph’s son?” And He said unto 
them: “Ye will surely say unto Me this proverb, “Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever 
we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in Thy country.” And He said, 
“Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country. But I tell you of a 
truth: many widows were in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up 
three years and six months, when great famine wan throughout all the land; but unto 
none of them was Elijah sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that 
was a widow. And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and 
none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.” And all they in the 
synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and 
thrust Him out of the city, and led Him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city 
was built, that they might cast him down headlong. But He passing through the midst 
of them went His way.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
