--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 13th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR AQUILINA & THE HOLY HIERARCH 
TRIPHYLLIUS, BISHOP OF LEUCOSIA IN CYPRUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Knowing thee to be an incorrupt bride * adorned by the Holy Spirit, * we celebrate 
thy holy memory, * O passion-bearing martyr. * We piously bow down * before thy 
relics and holy shrine, * and ever draw forth healing for our passions, * honoring thee 
with faith, ** O all-praised Aquilina.  
To thy Bridegroom, O most honored one, * thou didst offer as a gift * the 
dismemberment of thy limbs. * Wherefore, having deemed thee worthy * of the most 
radiant bridal chambers, * the Transcendent One doth illumine thee with the light of 
divine glory. * Before Him dost thou stand, rejoicing, * O Aquilina, do thou earnestly 
entreat Him ** on behalf of us who with faith glorify thy suffering.  
Held fast, O all-praised one, * by the desire of thy Creator, * thou didst depict His 
sufferings with thine own flesh, * enduring each threefold wave of pain. * And now 
thou livest in the heavens, * wearing an imperishable crown * and glory immune to 
pain, * and beholding what the ranks of angels see, ** O divinely inspired Aquilina.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O glorious father Triphyllius, * excellently enlightened with many tears, * thou 
didst take wing to the first Cause of the good, * and wast shown to be a pillar of light, 
* illumining with thy words and miracles * all who with divinely dutiful thought * ever 
approach thee. * Wherefore, we honor thee ** and call thee blessed.  
O sacred father Triphyllius, * honorably adorned like a second Aaron * with the 
plumage of vestments, * thou now beholdest the Holy of holies * being within the 
second veil. * O thine honored radiance * which surpasseth the mind! * O divine 
adornment of holy hierarchs! ** Thou hast partaken thereof.  
Possessed of a merciful soul, of pure thought, * of a straightforward heart, * an 
undefiled faith, an unfeigned love * and the dignity of hierarchal rank, O father, * 
thou art enrolled with honor * in the choirs of the fathers. * Wherefore, we all honor 
thee * with sacred hymns ** and piously praise and call thee blessed.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
Rejoice, enlightenment of souls, * forgiveness of the sinful, * correction of the 
negligent! * Rejoice, consolation and joy, * helper of the sorrowful. * Rejoice, O good 
one, * healing of our ailing souls! * Rejoice, mediatress, our reconciliation with God, 
** O pure one, who art more holy than all the seraphim!  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician and healer of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 
 Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Aquilina, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Triphyllius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia; and two with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy martyr, the composition of Joseph, the acrostic whereof is: 
“Accept this hymnody, O Aquilina who doest good”, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified! 
Thou dost most gloriously truly stand in the heavens before Christ, thy 
Bridegroom. Wherefore, by thy supplications, O honored one, do thou glorify those 
on earth who piously glorify thee, and with thee make them partakers of glory who 
chant: For gloriously hath He been glorified!  
The grace of the Spirit, which dwelt within thee, made thy soul pure, O glorious 
one, and thou wast all the more comely in the wounding of thy body. Wherefore, O 
all-famed one, the Bridegroom betrothed to Himself thee who art utterly pure and 
incorrupt.  
When of old the winter of deception cruelly lay upon the ends of the earth, thou, 
the divinely wise, right wondrous and glorious Aquilina, attained unto the spring-time 
of life and didst lay hold of the trophy of victory, as a true martyr of the Lord 
Almighty, filled with the Spirit.  
Theotokion: He Who is equal in being with the beginningless Father entered into 
thy womb, becoming a man, and saved us who are weighed down by evil and 
enslaved to the deception of the enemy, O Mary, Bride of God. Wherefore, with faith 
and love we call thee blessed.  
Canon of the holy hierarch, in Tone II 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
With faith let us all offer praise unto God, Who adorned His favored one with all 
manner of virtues and raised him up as a second Moses.  
Having ascended the mountain of the virtues, O father Triphyllius, thou didst 
receive the divine law, and with the tablets of thy thought revealed the beauty of thy 
soul.  
Thou wast shown to be a noetic ally emitting a sweet fragrance, O venerable one; 
for thou didst put forth healing for all mortals, O father, manifesting thyself as a 
divinely inspired dressing for the faithful.  
Theotokion: Thou art the well-spring of life, O pure Virgin Mary, who hast given 
birth unto the Lord and Author of creation, the Life of all, bedewing those who 
glorify thee with faith.  
ODE III 
 Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
By grace thou didst weave a robe of light, O glorious martyr Aquilina, dying it with 
thy blood in a sacred manner.  
Thou wast manifestly wounded with divine love, O most honored one; wherefore, 
thou didst steadfastly endure cruel wounding and pangs. 
  

--- PAGE 4 ---
The Lord and Redeemer wholly sanctified thee, O honored Aquilina, Who loved 
Him with all thy might and soul.  
Theotokion: O pure one, we know thee to be the unwedded Bride and pure 
habitation of Jesus, who art more holy than the cherubim.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Like the sun, thy memory hath shone forth radiantly upon the world, O holy 
hierarch, shedding light upon the hearts of us who observe it faithfully with grace.  
A garden of the divine Spirit, which put forth divine grapes, from which thou hast 
noetically pressed out the wine of faith for us, the faithful.  
Taking up the sword of divine grace, thou didst cut down the rage of Belial, and 
showning thyself to us as a victor in Christ, O sacred one. 
Theotokion: Neither the tongue of mortals, nor the mind of the incorporeal ones, 
can speak of thy birthgiving; for thou hast given birth to the Creator in a manner 
beyond nature and understanding, O Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”:  
Receiving the purity of virginity through the excellency of thy life, O Triphyllius, * 
thou wast the first hierarch of Leucosia * and wast revealed to be its evangelizer and 
instructor in the knowledge of God. * Wherefore, with joy we cry out to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O adornment of hierarchs!  
Sessional Hymn of the martyr, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Illumined with the divine light of the virtues, thou wast adorned with the wreath 
of a spiritual spiritual athlete, O most glorious and honored one; and, comely in 
beauty, thou wast truly betrothed to the Master of all by thy faith, O thou who art 
undefiled and incorrupt. Wherefore, thou hast been deemed worthy of the heavenly 
bridal chambers, having contended well and vanquished the evil one, O divinely wise 
Aquilina. Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with 
love honor thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...” 
Possessed of the zeal of faith, O most blessed one, by which thou didst put forth 
ripe fruit, for thou didst put to shame the legions of the enemy and slay the devil, O 
Triphyllius. Entreat Christ God, O venerable father, that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, or this Theotokion in Tone III:  
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only most pure Virgin Mother, 
* who hast surpassed the angels in purity. * With the divine waters of thy 
supplications cleanse me, * who more than all others am dust and defiled * by carnal 
transgressions, O pure one, ** and grant me great mercy. 
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
In the weakness of thy body thou didst cast down the prideful serpent, doing 
battle splendidly and setting at naught the rage of the tyrants.  
In the splendor of thy martyrdom and the divine beauty of thy virginity, O 
Aquilina, thou wast an excellent bride for the Master.  
The torrents of thy blood quenched the fire of polytheism, and the streams of thy 
miracles washed away the infirmities of all mankind.  
Theotokion: By the slumber of despondency, O Maiden, the sleep of sin hath 
crept over me; but rouse me to repentance by thy vigilant supplication.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
Thou wast truly revealed to be a most pure fruit, O most blessed hierarch, 
wherefore the divine Spirit made His abode within thee.  
Illumined by the divine Spirit, thou didst direct thy mind to things above, and 
struggle mightily against deception, O father.  
Thou didst shepherd thy reason-endowed lambs like sheep, O most blessed one, 
leading them to Christ by thy words.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, we, the faithful, have ever acquired thee as an 
invincible rampart and mighty hope amid dangers.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
When thou wast assailed by falsehood as by a raging sea, O martyr Aquilina, thou 
wast revealed to be guided by the grace of Christ. 
Looking to the victor’s wreaths, O martyr, thou didst steadfastly endure the 
dismemberment of thy limbs and a violent death.  
Astonishing thine adversaries, thou wast radiantly adorned with thy comely beauty 
and majesty of soul.  
Theotokion: All who have been delivered from the ancestral condemnation by thy 
birthgiving cry out to thee: Rejoice, O divinely joyous and all-hymned one!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Arrayed mightily with divine grace, O wise and glorious one, thou didst cast down 
the power of the enemy and, as an initiate of the mysteries of God, received a crown 
from Him as is meet.  
Lifting up the eyes of thy soul to heaven, O glorious father, thou didst plumb the 
depths of divine doctrines, revealing the radiance of the Trinity to mankind.  
Putting on the armor of God in council, O sacred one, thou didst put to shame 
the arrogance of the enemy, and having crushed his head with divine doctrines, thou 
rejoicest eternally.  
Theotokion: The Son, Who was seedlessly born from thee in the flesh, O 
Birthgiver of God, have we, the faithful, recognized as true God and a man by nature. 
Wherefore, we glorify thee.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thou O Lord, didst place Jonah alone within the sea monster. * Do 
Thou save me, * who am ensnared in the nets of the enemy, * as thou didst 
save him from corruption. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Desiring to follow the glorious sufferings of Christ, with manly wisdom thou didst 
endure beatings and the rending of thy holy body, O virgin.  
Having endured all manner of pangs, thou didst scorn the pain of the fire. 
Wherefore, O Aquilina, thou dost alleviate all our pain by thy supplications.  
Looking down from above, the choir of the angels was amazed at thine endurance, 
O glorious virgin, and at how in the flesh thou didst vanquish the incorporeal foe by 
grace.  
Theotokion: That mankind might become divine, God showed Himself to be a 
man, O Virgin, born ineffably from thy womb. And that which He was, He remained 
without change.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Like Enoch thou wast translated in spirit from earthly things to the heavenly, O 
blessed one; and as is meet thou didst receive incorruption.  
Leucosia has thee as its confirmation, O father, its pastor and instructor in the 
mysteries of grace, like a radiant sun illumining the world with miracles.  
By thy supplications, O father, thou unshakable foundation of the Church, make 
firm the temple of my soul, which is shaken by all the wiles of the enemy.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, who art greater and more holy than the 
heavenly powers: in a manner transcending nature thou hast contained the infinite 
Word within thy womb.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Having utterly purified thy soul with the beauties of thy virginity * and attained the 
heights by martyrdom, O most honored Aquilina, * wounded with the love of Christ 
Thy Bridegroom, * thou standest before Him with the angels in gladness. ** With 
them cease thou never to pray on behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Suffering, thou didst disdain the body, O divinely wise Aquilina, looking instead to 
the rewards of heaven, light, glory, godly beauty and divine gladness.  
Possessing a body undefiled and a heart united to the Lord, O godly wise and pure 
one, thou didst stand before the tribunal, denouncing the ignorant tyrant.  
Thou didst exchange the corrupt world for the incorrupt life of heaven, transitory 
food for everlasting, and a mortal betrothed for the immortal Bridegroom, O virgin.  
Triadicon: With hymns do we honor the single divine Monarchy, the most glorious 
Trinity of Hypostases, which is simple in nature; and we cry out: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God, forever!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The wise children did not adore the golden idol, * but went themselves 
into the flame and defied the pagan gods. * They prayed in the midst of the 
flame, * and an Angel bedewed them saying: * ‘The prayer of your lips hath 
been heard’. 
Rationally and in abstinence, thou didst refuse to worship the idol of the passions 
and the furnace could not consume the dew of thy body, O father, for filled with the 
Holy Spirit, thou didst cry aloud with boldness: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our 
fathers!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thou wast shown to be the first-ordained and mighty pastor of Leucosia, O wise 
one, and didst lead to thy Master a great harvest of people. Wherefore, with faith we 
beseech thee: in thine intercessions to God, pray thou for thy flock, that we may be 
delivered from all corruption.  
The living well-spring of thy tears hath astonished all, O wise and most glorious 
Triphyllius; for ever enriched by the streams of healings, we hymn the grace of thy 
relics and say: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou steadfast refuge, awesome intercessor and 
invincible rampart of those who are beset with afflictions, and who are tempest-
tossed by tribulations: by thine entreaties to thy Son save thy servants from all 
manner of temptations.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * ‘Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord’. 
Illumined with the radiance of purity and arrayed in the stains of thy blood as in an 
embroidered vesture, O virgin Aquilina, thou dost stand before Christ our God.  
Thou didst offer thyself to Christ our God as a pure sacrifice, a most radiant 
offering and an incense of sweet savor, O divinely wise Aquilina.  
Thy holy body, which lieth in the tomb, O most glorious Aquilina, healeth the 
divers ailments of all, and dispelleth the harm of the demons.  
Theotokion: In a manner beyond all telling thou didst give birth to the 
incorruptible Word Who hath delivered us from all corruption; wherefore, O Virgin, 
we all glorify thee.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Thou didst open the path of salvation to all in Leucosia, being the first to occupy 
the cathedra of its Church, O wise and glorious hierarch, receiving it from the divine 
effulgence as was meet.  
Unceasingly entreat Christ our Benefactor, O sacred one, that He may deliver 
those who have recourse to thy shrine from misfortunes and the temptations of the 
enemy.  
The choirs of the angels were amazed, the multitudes of the demons were seized 
with great trembling, and every created being was stricken with awe by thy fasting, O 
wise one: wherefore the human race honoreth thee as is meet.  
Theotokion: Forget not the cry of those who pray to thee, O awesome intercessor, 
but by thy supplications rescue us from all pain and every threat, for thy maternal 
entreaty persuadeth God.  
ODE IX 
 Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
With steadfast intent, the virgin was crucified for the Savior Who had been nailed 
to the Cross, whereby she trampled upon the head of the serpent.  
Comely is thy beauty, O most noetically rich Aquilina, and great the nobility of thy 
soul, which hath now been manifest in a godly fashion.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
United with the choirs of the incorporeal ones and the assemblies of the martyrs, 
O all-famed one, entreat God on behalf of us all.  
Thy most glorious memory, O martyr Aquilina, doth summon all joyfully to hymn 
thy glorious pangs and sufferings.  
Theotokion: We cry to thee with the cry of the angel, O most pure one: Rejoice, O 
salvation of all mankind, and the divine crowning of the glorious martyrs!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Lifting up the eye of thy soul to the heights of heaven, thou didst recognize the 
effulgence of the Trinity, O wise one, and, illumining mortal men, in a godly manner 
thou hast enriched all with divine illumination. Wherefore as is meet, we magnify thee 
in hymns.  
To the inhabitants of Leucosia thou wast shown to be a noetic beacon, O wise 
one, passing through the outlying lands, adorning them in a godly manner with the 
knowledge of Christ, as with sacred rays of inspiration, straightway delivering the 
world from deception.  
Having assembled now, we the faithful entreat thee, O father: unceasingly pray to 
Christ, that He deliver us from famine, barbarian devastation and all misfortunes, in 
that He is mighty, that we may magnify thee in hymns as is meet.  
Theotokion: What words of mortals can speak of the unutterable birthgiving of 
thine ineffable Offspring? For God was born a Babe, and thou wast the handmaid 
who bore the Son Who was born, O Mother and Theotokos. Wherefore, we hymn 
thee and thy birthgiving.  
 
AT LITURGY 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Aquilina, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Triphyllius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Receiving the purity of virginity through the excellency of thy life, O Triphyllius, * 
thou wast the first hierarch of Leucosia * and wast revealed to be its evangelizer and 
instructor in the knowledge of God. * Wherefore, with joy we cry out to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O adornment of hierarchs!  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II: 
Having utterly purified thy soul with the beauties of thy virginity * and attained the 
heights by martyrdom, O most honored Aquilina, * wounded with the love of Christ 
Thy Bridegroom, * thou standest before Him with the angels in gladness. ** With 
them cease thou never to pray on behalf of us all.  
