--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 18th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR LEONTIUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you ...”: 
What shall we call thee, O glorious one? * Offering of Hellas, * in that thou didst 
hail therefrom? * Cleansing of Phoenicia, in that thou wast martyred there? * Lamp, 
for thou didst shine forth in the darkness? * Valiant one, in that thou wast not 
vanquished by those who beat thee? * Far-reaching is thy fame, * O most blessed 
Leontius! ** Pray thou, that our souls be saved.  
What shall we name thee, O passion-bearer? * Soldier of Christ, * in that thou wast 
a destroyer of the enemy? * Ruler of the passions, in that thou wast a spiritual athlete 
of piety? * Feeder of the hungry, in that thou didst love the poor? * righteous one, in 
that thou wast a zealot of heavenly wisdom? * Divers were thy sufferings * and most 
splendid thy contest. ** Pray thou, that our souls be saved.  
Who doth not marvel at thee, O Leontius? * For, receiving a well-spring of 
incorruption * as a dweller in paradise, * thou pourest forth rivers of benefaction 
upon the faithful, * without fee dost offer abundant gifts * to all those who thirst, * 
and dost gladden those who partake * of the waters of goodness. ** Pray thou, that 
our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone I:  
O all-famed spiritual athlete Leontius, neither fire, nor wounding, nor the sword 
were able to separate thee from the love of Christ; but, suffering manfully in the 
midst of the tormenters, thou didst abolish the offerings made to idols, O divinely 
wise crown-bearer, and now dost dance in the heavens. Earnestly pray thou for our 
souls.  
Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Standing before the Cross of thy Son and God, * and beholding 
His long-suffering, O pure Mother, * thou didst say, weeping: * “Woe is me, O my 
Child most sweet! * How is it that Thou dost suffer unjustly, O Word of God, ** that 
Thou mightest save mankind?”  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Let heaven be glad and resplendent today, and let us earthly faithful rejoice in the 
memory of the martyr Leontius; for this day which hath arrived is crowned, not with 
irrational sacrifices, but with the sacrifice of praise, as with spiritual flowers. For, 
standing with us, adorned, and offering the un-bloody service to the Bestower of 
crowns, he doth radiantly offer up entreaty, that those who faithfully keep his 
memory may attain unto the courts of paradise.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of mankind, 
crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What is this, O my 
Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou 
hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** I 
marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Leontius O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyr, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord my God, * for Thou hast led Thy people out of 
the bondage of Egypt, * and hast drowned in the waters * the chariots and the 
might of Pharaoh. 
Thy virtue is not subject to the laws of praise, O Leontius, favorite of Christ; for 
He is thy boast and riches which cannot be taken away.  
Desiring an unsullied soul of supra-natural qualities, and having adorned thy body 
with virginity, thou didst splendidly set forth on the path of the Most High.  
Wielding might against falsehood, O venerable and glorious Leontius, thou didst 
ever praise the honor of martyrdom to Him Whom thou didst desire. 
Theotokion: To thee do we all hasten, as to a steadfast champion, O Theotokos, 
moving thee to supplication, that thy flock may be delivered from every evil 
circumstance.  
ODE III  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
Having acquired a right beautiful character, wisdom and grace from God, O 
Leontius, thou wast revealed to be a true spiritual athlete and a chosen martyr.  
“Lay down your life for the living God,” thou didst say to thy peers, O Leontius, 
“and as soldiers serve ye the King Who abideth eternally!”  
Thy honeyed and God-loving tongue poured forth words of piety and brought 
down the blasphemers, the minions of impiety.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O Mother who knewest not wedlock, who contained God 
the Word within thy womb and hast given birth to Him in the flesh, both God and 
man.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Having taken up the Cross as a weapon, thou didst go off to do battle with 
invisible foes, suffering valiantly. Wherefore, having destroyed their power, thou hast 
received the grace of miracles, O most glorious martyr Leontius, praying that we be 
saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV:  
O pure, all-immaculate one who knewest not a man, who alone hast given birth 
within time to the timeless Son and Word of God, with the holy and honored 
patriarchs, the martyrs, prophets and the venerable, entreat Him, that He grant us 
cleansing and great mercy.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Stavrotheotokion: When Thy most pure Mother beheld Thee uplifted upon the 
Cross, O Word of God she exclaimed, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and 
strange wonder, O my Son? How is it that Thou, the Life of all, dost taste of death 
desiring to bring life to the dead, in that Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, * and the earth is full of Thy 
glory, O Christ; * wherefore, we cry out with faith: * Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
He who was beset by the wrath of the demons mercilessly wounded thee, who art 
swathed in the love of God, O martyred spiritual athlete Leontius.  
Boldly didst thou urge toward the truth him who wished to overtake and lay hold 
of thee, considering him to be a blessed one of promise, O martyred spiritual athlete 
Leontius.  
He Who, for thy sake, was nailed to the Tree in the flesh, seeing thee bound to a 
tree for His sake, filled thee with strength and grace.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O all-hymned Theotokos, thou who art more exalted than 
the ranks of the cherubim and in the flesh didst bear God, seated, upon thine arm.  
ODE V  
Having acquired us the chosen people by Thy blood, O Lord, * do Thou grant 
us peace, * preserving Thy flock in oneness of mind.  
Led in like a sheep ready for the slaughter, O most glorious Leontius, of thine own 
will thou didst stand up for Christ before the tyrant’s tribunal.  
He who was guilty of falsehood sought to humble the strength of thy soul, 
disparaging the crucified Lord as a human malefactor.  
“May the gods perish, who manifestly did not create the heaven and the earth, for 
the Crucified One is the Fashioner of all!”, thou didst say, O martyr.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O pure and most pure one who knewest not wedlock, O 
holy Mary, Bride of God, for Thou hast given birth unto God, Who hath rendered 
our race heavenly.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
Though peaceable to those who have recourse to thee with faith, and possessed of 
discourse seasoned with divine salt, O Leontius, thou wast shown to be cruel to the 
enemies of Christ.  
Rejoicing, Thy faithful servant Leontius gave himself over as a witness of Thy 
kingdom, O Christ, and Thine enemies were unable to bear the truth.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Like wild beasts the iniquitous ones burned with rage and fell upon the martyr, as 
though he were their prey, pitilessly rending asunder the invincible one.  
Theotokion: We who hymn thy most holy birthgiving have no other helper than 
thee, O most pure Sovereign Lady. Wherefore, we pray thee: render thy Son 
reconciled with thy servants.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Thou didst confound the wicked plots of the tyrants, * denouncing the ungodly 
religion of the Greeks, * and didst shine forth the knowledge of God upon all 
mankind * in thy doctrines of piety, O divinely wise martyr. ** Wherefore, with love 
we honor thy memory, O most wise Leontius.  
Ikos: I call upon the Lord, the Mediator between God and men, Who assumed the 
lowliness of us mortals from the pure Theotokos who kneweth not wedlock, and was 
crucified, raising mankind up from corruption, that I may now praise the wise 
Leontius, and recognize his splendid and beautiful sufferings, which he finished well, 
replete with courage, faith and love. Wherefore, with love we honor the wise 
Leontius.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
Like the captive youths, with steadfast understanding the invincible Leontius 
trampled underfoot falsehood, and the flame of his tortures, chanting to Thee: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Unmindful of the flesh by virtue of thine indifference to suffering, as an invincible 
martyr thou didst mightily endure wounding for Christ, chanting to thy Creator: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Steadfastly prevailing over the corrupt union of nature through wisdom and love 
for Christ, thou didst prefer life-bearing death, O Leontius, chanting: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theologizing concerning the one Essence in three Hypostases - the Word, the 
Spirit and the Father, - the unbowed and invincible martyr cried out: O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Her who, without seed, supra-naturally received in her womb the 
immutable God Who, in His loving-kindness, mingled with mankind, let us piously 
hymn as Mother of God throughout the ages.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: He Who was nailed to the Cross in the flesh, * hath shown it to be a 
weapon for our salvation, * O ye children, supremely exalt Christ our God 
throughout the ages.  
The martyr endured the wounding of his flesh and won a great victory over the 
incorporeal foe, chanting: Supremely exalt Christ our God throughout the ages!  
Amid the spines of thorns thou didst radiantly stretch forth thy mind toward the 
Master, O martyr, crying out with love: Supremely exalt Christ our God throughout 
the ages!  
Christ, Whom thou didst glorify with the wounds of thy flesh, is thy victory; and 
thou didst cry out: O ye children, Supremely exalt Christ our God throughout the 
ages!  
Theotokion: All the generations of mankind most gloriously call thee blessed, O 
pure Mother of God, for through thee we have been lifted up to the heavens, O 
Virgin Mother.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Thy birthgiving was revealed to be free from corruption: * God issued 
forth from thy womb, * and appeared on earth bearing flesh, * and dwelt 
among mankind. * Wherefore, O Theotokos, we all magnify thee.  
Thou didst show thyself to be a servant of the Trinity, O Leontius, ministering 
blamelessly to Him before Whom every knee doth bend in heaven and on earth, and 
in the nethermost regions. And, chanting, we magnify Him as is meet.  
Desiring to look upon the glory of the Lord immaterially, thy face uncovered, thou 
didst divest thyself of power and authority, preaching the one Godhead in three 
Hypostases.  
Thou wast glad in thy confession, and, as is meet, the Savior hath confessed thee 
before the Father. Him do thou entreat, O spiritual spiritual athlete, that all who 
magnify thy memory with faith may be saved.  
Theotokion: Thou art more exalted than the ranks on high, O Virgin Theotokos, 
for thou alone didst know the indwelling of the Most High, O blessed one. 
Wherefore, we all declare thee to be the Theotokos.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”:  
Tried like gold by fire and torments, thou wast shown to be a worthy gift for God 
Most High, a most glorious spiritual athlete. Pray thou now on our behalf.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
With thy mighty protection preserve us, thy servants, unharmed by the assaults of 
the enemy, O pure one; for thee alone have we acquired as a refuge in needs.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT LITURGY  
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Leontius O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
Thou didst confound the wicked plots of the tyrants, * denouncing the ungodly 
religion of the Greeks, * and didst shine forth the knowledge of God upon all 
mankind * in thy doctrines of piety, O divinely wise martyr. ** Wherefore, with love 
we honor thy memory, O most wise Leontius.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplications unto Thee.  
 
ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, §29 (12: 1·11)  
In those days, Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the 
church. And he killed James the brother of John with the sword. And because he saw 
it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also. (Then were the days of 
unleavened bread.) And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and 
delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after Easter to 
bring him forth to the people. Peter therefore was kept in prison: but prayer was 
made without ceasing of the church unto God for him. And when Herod would have 
brought him forth, the same night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound 
with two chains: and the keepers before the door kept the prison. And, behold, the 
angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison: and he smote 
Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell off 
from his hands. And the angel said unto him, Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals. 
And so he did. And he saith unto him, Cast thy garment about thee, and follow me. 
And he went out, and followed him; and wist not that it was true which was done by 
the angel; but thought he saw a vision. When they were past the first and the second 
ward, they came unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the city; which opened to them 
of his own accord: and they went out, and passed on through one street; and 
forthwith the angel departed from him. And when Peter was come to himself, he 
said, Now I know of a surety, that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me 
out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like 
a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God 
they shall blossom forth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, §52 (15:17-16:2)  
The Lord said to His disciples: These things I command you, that ye love one 
another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye 
were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, 
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember 
the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have 
persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will 
keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for my name’s sake, 
because they know not him that sent me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, 
they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin. He that hateth me 
hateth my Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other 
man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both me and 
my Father. But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in 
their law, They hated me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, whom I 
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from 
the Father, he shall testify of me: and ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been 
with me from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not 
be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that 
whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
 
