--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 16th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER TIKHON,  
WONDERWORKER OF KALUGA  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”:  
Thou didst put aside all earthly things, and, setting thy mind on heavenly things, 
desired to follow after Christ alone, O our venerable father Tikhon. Wherefore, 
seeking to live in stillness, thou didst yearn for the wilderness; and struggling therein, 
didst attain to an angelic life. Therefore, as thou hast received from God the grace to 
heal divers ailments, O venerable one, entreat Him, that our souls find mercy. (Twice)  
Thou didst set aside the tumults of the life of this world, O venerable one, and, 
arming thyself with fasting and prayer, didst endure many temptations, laying the 
foundations of the virtues; and didst thereby reach the heights of dispassion, and with 
humility didst bring the exalted state of thy mind unto God. And having received 
from Him the grace to heal divers ailments, O our blessed and venerable father 
Tikhon, pray to Him on behalf of our souls. (Twice)  
Thou didst forsake thy homeland and all things, and, receiving the monastic habit 
in thine utter humility, thou didst make thy dwelling in the wilderness, wherein thou 
didst build a temple unto the divine Transfiguration and didst assemble a multitude of 
disciples, struggling in godly manner by fasting and abstinence; wherefore, God hath 
bestowed upon thee the gift of healing divers ailments. Unto Him do thou pray, O 
our venerable father Tikhon, that our souls be saved.  
The city of Kaluga, saved by God, is filled with divine joy and spiritual gladness on 
the radiant day of thy commemoration, O father Tikhon; and we, thy spiritual 
children, assembling with joy, celebrate with splendor, sending up divine glory unto 
God Who hath glorified thee. Unto Him do thou pray, O our venerable father, that 
He save our souls.  
Thou hast been revealed unto us, O our venerable father Tikhon, as a great 
beacon enlightening the land of Russia, with the beams of thine excellent miracles. 
For, lo! thou dost impart healings in abundance unto those who approach thy healing 
tomb with faith and celebrate with love. Entreat Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of offenses and great mercy to our souls.  
O divinely blessed and venerable father Tikhon, for thy strict life thou hast been 
deemed worthy to receive the divinely bestowed gift of gracious cures as the reward 
of thy labors. For, lo! those who approach thy healing tomb with faith receive healing. 
Wherefore, as thou hast boldness before the Lord, beseech Him to send down 
oneness of mind upon the Churches, health and steadfastness in the Faith to our 
hierarchs, and great mercy to our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Come, O ye faithful of the Russian Orthodox Church, and standing round about 
the most precious shrine of our holy father Tikhon today, let us piously praise him, 
and, chanting joyfully, with love let us offer unto him the chanting of psalms, and, 
splendidly singing most festive hymns, let us say thus: Rejoice, most radiant beacon of 
the company of monastics! Rejoice, healer of the sick! Rejoice, fervent helper! 
Rejoice, confirmation and power of those who honor thee with faith! Rejoice, boast 
and defense of the city of Kaluga! O Tikhon our father, entreat Christ God on behalf 
of our nation. Grant it victory over its enemies. And leave us not orphaned, but abide 
with us, thy children, and pray for us to the Lord, that He save our souls.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years oflife are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; those who seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace; but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple; and these Stichera of the saint, in Tone II: 
Come, O flock beloved of God, O company of monastics, and with the ranks of 
the Christian multitude who love the feasts of the Church, the people of the city of 
Kaluga beloved of God, let us praise the lover of Christ today, the dweller in the 
wilderness, the all-wise guide of monks, the boast of ascetics; and let us offer hymns 
of praise unto him, saying: Rejoice, thou who art full of divine zeal! Rejoice, for, 
struggling here in ascetic labors, thou didst manfully vanquish the enemy! Rejoice, for 
this God hath given thee the grace of healings! Him do thou entreat, O our venerable 
father Tikhon, that He save our souls.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thou didst enter the calm and tranquil harbor of stillness, where thou didst abide 
in silence with God alone; and thou didst lead an angelic life, adorning thyself well 
with ascetic labors, whereby thou didst gain the sight of the eternal light of Christ 
God. Him do thou unceasingly entreat, that from all evils He deliver us who celebrate 
thy most honored dormition, and that He save our souls.  
Having forsaken all earthly things, thou didst furnish thy mind with wings to soar 
aloft unto the things of heaven; and living all the days of thy life in tears and sighing, 
thou didst desire to behold noetic beauty. Wherefore, thou didst pass through each of 
the virtues and hast attained unto the heavenly abodes, where shineth the never-
waning light of Christ our God. Unto Him do thou unceasingly pray, O our venerable 
father Tikhon, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
Rejoice and be glad in the Lord, O ye assembly of the pious, having the venerable 
father Tikhon as a beacon who enlightened the whole land of Russia with his most 
radiant life, and whom God hath glorified with miracles: for, lo! He granteth 
abundant healings unto all who approach him with faith. Wherefore, standing round 
about his most precious shrine, let us pray to him, saying: O most blessed Tikhon our 
father, unceasingly entreat Christ God, that He grant to our land victory and triumph 
over its enemies, and peace and great mercy to our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Thou art the temple and portal, * the palace and throne of the King, * O most 
honored Virgin, * through whom Christ the Lord, my Redeemer, * Who is the Sun of 
righteousness, * hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in darkness, * deigning 
to enlighten those * whom He hath fashioned in His image by His own hand. * 
Wherefore, O all-hymned one, * as thou hast acquired a mother’s boldness before 
Him, ** entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be saved. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
O our venerable father Tikhon, from thy youth thou didst follow Christ, and, 
forsaking thy homeland, thou didst take up thine abode in the wilderness, where, 
rejecting all worldly understandings, thou didst please God with ascetic labors, 
making thy flesh subject to thy spirit. Wherefore, thou hast been deemed worthy to 
stand before the throne of the Master in the heavens. Him do thou beseech, O 
blessed one, on behalf of those who honor thy most precious memory with faith.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
O venerable father Tikhon, having left a faraway land thou didst attain unto the 
wilderness, which thou didst water with the streams of thy tears, and therein didst 
grow the fruits of righteousness. And assembling a multitude of disciples, and 
struggling with them in a God-pleasing manner, thou wast illumined by the Holy 
Spirit, receiving from God the grace of healings. Him do thou entreat, that He save 
and enlighten our souls.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
O our venerable father Tikhon, eagerly taking the yoke of Christ upon thy 
shoulder, in thine utter humility thou didst reach the summit of the virtues; and, 
foreseeing thy departure unto God, and having taught the disciples thou hadst 
assembled to care for their souls, thou didst pass over to the mansions of heaven. 
And even after thy departure thou pourest forth many healings from thy tomb upon 
those who approach it with faith and celebrate thy memory with love. Wherefore, 
beseech Christ God, that He grant us peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Be glad and rejoice, O holy wilderness beloved of God, who nurtured the right 
wondrous Tikhon our father, by whose life hath been hallowed the place wherein he 
served the Lord in this life with faith! For, lo! even after his repose he poureth forth 
abundant cures upon all who approach his healing tomb with faith and say: O most 
blessed Tikhon our father, unceasingly pray to Christ God, that He grant that our 
hierarchs may prevail over all heresies and schisms, and that peace and great mercy 
may be bestowed upon all Orthodox Christians.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, O most 
pure one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign 
Lady, ** the intercession, protection and salvation for our souls! 
At the blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
O Tikhon our venerable father, * thou wast shown to be a most radiant beacon in 
the midst of the Russian land; * for, having made thine abode in the wilderness * and 
led a strict way of life therein, * thou didst live like an incorporeal being, * for which 
cause God hath enriched thee with the gift of miracles. * Wherefore, hastening to the 
shrine of thy relics, * we say with compunction: ** O venerable father, entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved.  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
O Tikhon our venerable father, * thou wast shown to be a most radiant beacon in 
the midst of the Russian land; * for, having made thine abode in the wilderness * and 
led a strict way of life therein, * thou didst live like an incorporeal being, * for which 
cause God hath enriched thee with the gift of miracles. * Wherefore, hastening to the 
shrine of thy relics, * we say with compunction: ** O venerable father, entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII:  
O our venerable father Tikhon, adorning thy life with great abstinence, thou didst 
show thy disciples the path of patience and humility of mind, which leadeth to life 
eternal; and thyself following the teaching of the Gospel, thou didst lay waste to thy 
flesh by the strictness of thy life. Wherefore, dwelling now in the heavens and 
standing before the Godhead in three Hypostases, O blessed one, entreat Christ God, 
that He grant forgiveness of offenses unto those who with love honor thy holy 
memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Let us hymn the heavenly gate and ark, * the all-holy mountain, the cloud of light, 
the heavenly ladder, * the spiritual Paradise, the redemption of Eve, * the great 
treasure of the world; * because salvation for the world and forgiveness of ancient 
offences were wrought in her. * Therefore we cry unto her: * Intercede with thine 
own Son and God to grant forgiveness of offences ** to those who devoutly worship 
thy most holy Offspring. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymn, in Tone IV:  
Unable to bear the violence of the world, thou didst withdraw into the wilderness; 
and piously laboring for Christ therein, through abstinence thou didst cause carnal 
understanding to wither away, and didst gain the rule over the passions of the body. 
Wherefore, standing now before the throne of the Lord, O most honored Tikhon, 
ask great mercy for all who with faith approach thy healing tomb. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O only pure Virgin Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, O only intercessor and 
protection of the faithful: from misfortunes, sorrows and afflictions deliver all who 
place their trust in thee, O Maiden, and by thy divine entreaties save thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We bless thee, O venerable father Tikhon, 
and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the 
angels.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII:  
In the wilderness thou didst make thine abode, O all-blessed one, and, leading a 
strict way of life therein, thou didst live like an incorporeal being, gloriously 
assembling a choir of monastics. Wherefore, O our God-bearing father Tikhon, 
entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of offenses unto those who with love 
honor thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 43  
The Lord said to His disciples: All things are delivered unto Me of my Father: and 
no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save 
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that 
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn 
of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For 
My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
Come, ye assemblies of the Orthodox, and with splendor let us celebrate the 
memory of our venerable father Tikhon, the boast of ascetics, the adornment of the 

--- PAGE 8 ---
wilderness, the teacher of piety who was illumined with the light of grace, the 
distributor of divine treasures, the physician of the ailing; and, praying now, let us say: 
O all-blessed father, cease thou never to entreat Christ God on behalf of those who 
honor thee, that He grant us peace and great mercy.  
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, 
including the Irmos; and that of the venerable one, with 8 Troparia, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Relying wholly upon almighty God, O divinely wise one, through desire and love 
thou didst furnish thy mind with wings to fly unto Him, that, abiding with Christ, 
thou mightest inherit eternal life.  
Strengthened by trust in our supremely good God, O most blessed Tikhon, by 
fasting and prayer thou didst strive towards the good things which are to come.  
Wondrous was thy life and the humility which thou didst acquire from thy youth, 
O all-blessed one; wherefore, having cut thyself off from the world, thou didst 
become a right skillful monk in whom the virtues flourished.  
Theotokion: The Word of God, incarnate through thy most pure blood, O most 
pure Virgin, hath made clear to all His great and divine love; for He hath united 
human nature to the choir of the angels, and lifted it up unto those who dwell in 
heaven.  
Katavasia: I will open my mouth ... 
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Through fasting and prayer thou hast acquired great boldness before God, O 
venerable Tikhon. Him do thou beseech, that He be merciful even unto us.  
Spurning transitory things here below, the things above, which are exalted, didst 
thou love, setting thy God-loving soul afire with divine zeal; and having done the will 
of the Most High, thou hast received the good things of heaven.  
Desiring to enjoy the sweet things which are ever abiding, O venerable one, thou 
didst subsist on plants grown by thyself in the wilderness; and having thus reached 
the end of the struggle of thy life, thou dost now delight in everlasting good things.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, grant thine aid unto me, thy servant, give me 
understanding, and guide me to the path of salvation O Virgin. Deliver me from 
misfortunes and tribulations, for thou hast given birth to the Redemption of all.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Considering the greatly tumultuous world and ephemeral vanity to be as dust, thou 
didst please God, acquiring the angelic life; wherefore, we pray, from the corrupting 
passions deliver us who ever honor thy memory in hymns, O blessed Tikhon our 
father.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Like a vine which hath not been cultivated, O Virgin, thou didst produce the most 
comely Grape, Who poureth forth upon us the wine of salvation which gladdeneth 
the souls and bodies of all. Wherefore, blessing thee as the cause of good things, we 
ever cry out to thee with the angel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
With torrents of tears thou didst irrigate the wilderness, O blessed one, sowing 
therein the seed of thy labors; wherefore, in joy thou didst reap fruit an hundredfold, 
crying aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Mindful of the final day of this life, O venerable Tikhon, thou didst prepare thyself 
for thy departure at every hour, adorning thy soul with good works, awaiting the 
arrival of thy Master.  
O Tikhon our father, never cease to pray for thy holy monastery and hermitage, 
which thou didst cultivate with much labor, asking that they be delivered from evil 
circumstances and all manner of tribulation, that we may all unceasingly hymn thee as 
a gracious father.  
Theotokion: Christ the Lord, the King of all, loving thee as a divinely chosen 
Maiden, a scion of royal lineage, O Theotokos, wholly dwelt within thee, showing 
thee to be more exalted than the cherubim and the seraphim.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
Like a right flourishing tree planted by streams of water, O venerable father 
Tikhon, thou hast put forth the virtues as though they were many branches, receiving 
under thy shade those who desire salvation.  
Thou wast a fervent advocate in this life, O our blessed father Tikhon, imparting 
abundant health unto all by thy mediations; wherefore, we now rely on thy 
supplication even more, asking that through thee we may receive mercy and the 
remission of sins.  
By voluntary poverty thou didst acquire the kingdom of heaven; wherefore, thou 
pourest forth in abundance the gifts of spiritual healings upon all who with faith 
venerate thy most honored memory, O Tikhon our venerable father.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: The noetic Sun shone forth from thee O Theotokos, extending the 
brilliant rays of His divinity; wherefore with unceasing hymns, we all magnify thee O 
Sovereign Lady.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Thy precious body poureth forth great healing upon those who approach thy 
salutary tomb with faith, O Tikhon our father.  
By thine unceasing prayers unto God, O Tikhon our father, thou didst attain to 
the mansions of heaven, where the ineffable Light and the delight of the venerable 
are, with whom thou standest before the God of all, O father Tikhon.  
Thou didst consider night to be like day, O blessed one, for thou gavest no rest to 
thy body, nor sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, until thou didst reach 
the resting-place of heaven.  
Theotokion: By thy supplications tear apart the record of my transgressions, and 
grant me release from the grief and sufferings which beset me, O Sovereign Lady.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Forsaking thy homeland, O venerable one, thou didst make thine abode in the 
wilderness, * where thou didst show thy manner of life to be strict; * and amazing 
many by thy virtues, * thou didst receive from Christ the gift of miracles. * 
Wherefore, remember us who honor thy memory, that we may cry out to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O venerable Tikhon our father!  
Ikos: Loving the divine commandments of Christ, O Tikhon our venerable father, 
and hating the delights of this world, thou didst leave thy homeland and eagerly 
hasten to the wilderness; and thou wast a beacon therein, enlightening those parts 
with the effulgence of the Spirit. Wherefore, approaching thy healing tomb with 
fervor, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Tikhon our venerable father!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In Babylon, the pious youths did not worship the golden image, * but, 
bedewed in the midst of the fiery furnace, * they chanted a hymn, saying: * O 
supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst struggle manfully in the wilderness and, receiving the effulgence of the 
Spirit, wast caught up to the heights of heaven, O venerable father Tikhon, where 
thou art now glorified with the angels.  
In the wilderness thou didst curb thy tongue with silence, O Tikhon our father, 
leading an untroubled life like an angel in the flesh.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Truly thou hast been deemed worthy of a good life, O venerable father Tikhon, 
obtaining it through purity and asceticism; and now thou standest before God with 
the ranks of the incorporeal beings.  
Theotokion: The mind of man is at a loss as to how to understand the ineffable 
depths of thy birthgiving, O pure one; for, abasing Himself in His tender compassion, 
God hath made me wholly new by His incarnation.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thou didst water the ground of thy heart with torrents of tears, O Tikhon our 
venerable father, and, standing immovably in prayer, thou didst glorify the Creator of 
all.  
By thy watchful vigils and frequent sighs, O blessed father Tikhon, the grace of the 
Holy Spirit grew within thee revealing thee as glorious.  
By the sufferings of asceticism and thy valiant struggles, O most blessed father 
Tikhon, thou didst cause the divine grain to grow, wherewith thou dost feed those 
who piously honor thy memory.  
Theotokion: O most good Sovereign Lady who hast given birth in the flesh to the 
supremely good God, purify my heart, which hath been tormented by the passions, 
that I may glorify thee with faith and love.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
In the depths of thy tears thou didst drown the serpent, the author of evil, O 
venerable father Tikhon, and as an excellent victor thou hast ascended to the heavens, 
where with the choirs of the angels thou dost unceasingly glorify the God of all.  
Thou wast possessed of a guileless life, adorned with the sweat of suffering, O all-
praised and venerable father Tikhon; wherefore, thy spirit was filled with divine joy.  
Arrayed as with a royal crown, the city of Kaluga boasteth in thee O our venerable 
father Tikhon; having thy relics within its environs as a goodly guardian given it by 
the Lord.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned Virgin who hast given birth unto God in the flesh, 
show forth those who glorify thee as ones who share in the divine light, and by thy 
supplications deliver us from the fire of Gehenna and from all the harm of the 
enemy.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one: 
Thou didst endure the gloom of night and didst bear the burden of the burning 
heat of day; wherefore thou hast received everlasting delight, O blessed Tikhon, 
favorite of Christ; pray thou that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
After God it is in thee that we place our trust, O most holy Virgin Theotokos; and 
we pray to thee: By thine entreaties to thy Son and our God, preserve us utterly 
unharmed.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Strengthened by divine power, thou didst hew down the passions of the senses 
with the axes of abstinence, living a blameless life in the wilderness, O most glorious 
one; wherefore, God hath enriched thee with the gift of miracles. Him do thou 
entreat, that our souls be saved.  
Thou hast been shown to be a pure vessel pouring forth a stream of healings, O 
adornment of fasters, the strengthening of monastics, and the boast and confirmation 
of the city of Kaluga, O Tikhon our venerable father.  
O venerable father Tikhon, having diligently exercised thyself in virtue from child-
hood, thou didst become an instrument of the Holy Spirit; and receiving the ability to 
work miracles from Him, thou art now illumined with divine light. Enlighten also our 
hearts and minds, and pray that our souls may be saved.  
Thy radiant and God-pleasing life hath truly been shown to be like light on earth, 
O blessed Tikhon our father; wherefore, thou hast forsaken all things visible, and hast 
been deemed worthy to behold the Unapproachable One. Him do thou beseech, O 
venerable one, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
In the wilderness, piously leading a life which was adorned with the virtues, thou 
wast crowned with fasting and prayer as with a divine crown; and now standest 
before the throne of the Master, joining chorus with the armies of the angels. 
Wherefore, we honor thee in hymns, O Tikhon our venerable father; pray thou that 
our souls may be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: * Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the venerable one.  
Through fasting and prayer thou hast acquired great boldness before God, O 
venerable Tikhon. Him do thou beseech, that He be merciful even unto us. (Twice) 
Spurning transitory things here below, the things above, which are exalted, didst 
thou love, setting thy God-loving soul afire with divine zeal; and having done the will 
of the Most High, thou hast received the good things of heaven.  
Desiring to enjoy the sweet things which are ever abiding, O venerable one, thou 
didst subsist on plants grown by thyself in the wilderness; and having thus reached 
the end of the struggle of thy life, thou dost now delight in everlasting good things.  
Thy precious body poureth forth great healing upon those who approach thy 
salutary tomb with faith, O Tikhon our father.  
By thine unceasing prayers unto God, O Tikhon our father, thou didst attain to 
the mansions of heaven, where the ineffable Light and the delight of the venerable 
are, with whom thou standest before the God of all, O father Tikhon.  
Thou didst consider night to be like day, O blessed one, for thou gavest no rest to 
thy body, nor sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, until thou didst reach 
the resting-place of heaven.  
Theotokion: By thy supplications tear apart the record of my transgressions, and 
grant me release from the grief and sufferings which beset me, O Sovereign Lady.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
O Tikhon our venerable father, * thou wast shown to be a most radiant beacon in 
the midst of the Russian land; * for, having made thine abode in the wilderness * and 
led a strict way of life therein, * thou didst live like an incorporeal being, * for which 
cause God hath enriched thee with the gift of miracles. * Wherefore, hastening to the 
shrine of thy relics, * we say with compunction: ** O venerable father, entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Forsaking thy homeland, O venerable one, thou didst make thine abode in the 
wilderness, * where thou didst show thy manner of life to be strict; * and amazing 
many by thy virtues, * thou didst receive from Christ the gift of miracles. * 
Wherefore, remember us who honor thy memory, that we may cry out to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O venerable Tikhon our father!  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, § 213 (GAL. 5: 22-6: 2) 
Brethren, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who 
are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the 
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 10 (MT. 4: 25-5: 12)  
At that time there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, and 
from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond Jordan. And 
seeing the multitudes, He went up into a mountain: and when He was set, His 
disciples came unto Him: and He opened His mouth, and taught them, saying: 
“Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those 
who mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit 
the earth. Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be 
filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in 
heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the 
children of God. Blessed are they who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for 
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and 
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for My sake. 
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted 
they the prophets who were before you.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
