--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 27th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER SAMPSON THE HOSPITABLE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Having made thine abode in the wilderness * like Elijah of old, * O all-famed 
father Sampson, * with the burnings of abstinence * thou didst cause the assaults of 
the flesh to wither up, * purifying thy mind with unceasing prostrations before God. * 
And now pray thou, that He grant our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
O divinely wise father Sampson, * adorned with dispassion * thou wast numbered 
among the desert-dwellers, * thou didst make thine abode in a monastery of the 
venerable, * wherein was the never-waning light, * as also the tree of life. * And now, 
pray thou, that God grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
O divinely inspired father Sampson, * thou wast a lamp * enlightening all the earth 
with the beams of thy miracles, * dispelling the darkness * of soul-destroying 
infirmities * and driving away the gloom of the demons. * And now, pray thou, that 
God grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Woe is me! What shall I do? * For I have defiled My mind, soul and body * with 
transgressions! * What shall I do? * How shall I escape the unbearable flame * and the 
unbreakable and everlasting bonds? * Yet, before the end * grant me forgiveness, ** 
O all-immaculate one!  
Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody: 
Stavrotheotokion: The Sovereign Lady, the unblemished ewe-lamb, * beholding 
her Lamb upon the Cross, * bereft of form and comeliness, * lamenting, said: “Woe 
is me! * Whither hath Thy comeliness gone, O most Sweet One? * Where is Thy 
splendor? Where is the brilliant grace of Thine image, ** O my Son most beloved?”  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
In thy patience, O venerable father, thou didst acquire thy reward, * having 
endured in prayer without ceasing, and loved the poor and provided for them. * 
Beseech Christ God, O merciful and blessed Sampson, ** that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “With faith I hymn thee, O 
Sampson, with divine words”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Standing crowned before the throne of the Master, O most blessed one, send light 
down upon me who strive to praise with hymns thy most radiant solemnity.  
Desiring the one thing which leadeth thee to life, thou didst pass beyond the 
beauties of this world and acquired a transcendent inheritance. Wherefore, 
assembling, we honor thee, O Sampson.  
When thou didst submit to the law of God, rejoicing, O right wondrous one, thou 
didst reach the summit of virtue, being merciful to all. Wherefore, we now call thee 
blessed.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, without ceasing we bless and glorify thee as the 
mighty help of all the defeated, who in a manner beyond all telling art the bearer of 
God.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Let us praise the sacred Sampson; for, emulating the compassion of God, he was 
merciful to the needy; providing clothing to all the naked.  
Having led a godly life in a holy and pious manner, thou hast been numbered 
among the saints and thereby attained unto the mansions of the venerable, deemed 
worthy of ineffable illumination.  
Blessed art thou, and well will it be with thee, who didst keep the divine laws of 
our Lord and God, O father. Him do thou beseech, that thy flock be saved.  
Theotokion: Drive away the darkness of my mind and soul, O pure one, and grant 
that I may live to see the promised day, observing the precepts of salvation.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly ...”:  
Shining forth in spirit like a brilliant beacon, O all-blessed Sampson, thou dost illu-
mine us with honor in thy habitation; hence, O father, thou dost dispense the healing 
given thee by God to those with divers ailments. Wherefore, by thine entreaties 
deliver us from the passions.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
exceedingly glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
Stavrotheotokion: O all-immaculate Virgin Mother of God, a sword passed 
through thy most holy soul when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of His 
own will. Cease not to beseech Him, O blessed one, that He grant us forgiveness of 
our transgressions.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
Like a star thou dost illumine the hearts of all of us who rightly call thee blessed.  
Putting slumber away from thine eyes, thou didst keep vigil constantly and didst 
lull to sleep the pleasures of the body.  
Thou wast generous to the poor for the sake of Christ, and, rejoicing, hast 
received a heavenly inheritance, O venerable one.  
Theotokion: We hymn and bless thee, O Sovereign Lady, as the splendid palace of 
the Word.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
The most pure Light which abode within thee, O father, made thee wholly 
luminous, enlightening the faithful with the splendid effulgence of thy virtues.  
By thy mercy thou wast a source of wealth for the poor, and didst manifestly rise 
up as a physician for those in sickness, removing their ailments with healing.  
Thou didst reveal thyself to be a truly pure temple of the most holy and honored 
Spirit, cleansing away the filth of the passions, O God-bearing father; wherefore, we 
praise thee.  
Theotokion: With faith and godly voices do we hymn thee, O most holy and pure 
one, as the beauty of Jacob, who hast given birth for us to God in the flesh, before 
Whom all things tremble.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Loving almsgiving, O glorious Sampson, thou wast enriched with heavenly 
treasures, opening thy compassion unto the poor with perfect intent.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thou didst erect a hallowed building to the glory of our God; and, hastening 
thereto, the faithful are cleansed of their many ailments, O most blessed one.  
Thou didst live thy life purely, and make thine abode with the venerable in a holy 
manner. Pray for us who honor thee with faith, O divinely inspired one.  
Theotokion: By divine grace wast thou the pure palace, the splendid chamber and 
the lofty heaven of God the King of all, O all-immaculate one.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “As first-fruits ...”: 
Rejoicing with psalms and hymns, O divinely wise and venerable Sampson, * and 
hastening to thy divine shrine, as to that of an excellent physician * and a right 
acceptable intercessor, we glorify Christ ** Who hath bestowed upon thee such grace 
of healing.  
Ikos: Let us praise the venerable Sampson, who blamelessly completed a meek, 
guileless life at an advanced age, and who gloriously received the sure and ineffable 
grace of miracles: the feeder of the hungry, the helper of those in need, and the great 
champion who raised up a divine temple of healing for the infirm.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Possessed of the mighty strength of Christ amid dangers, O most blessed and 
venerable one, thou didst pass through the tempest of life without capsizing, reaching 
the calm haven, and chanting: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Moved by great wisdom and spiritual love, thou didst erect a great building, O 
father; and ever having recourse thereto, all receive healing, crying aloud and saying: 
O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thou wast shown to be a radiant beacon of the virtues, luminous with divine light, 
O Sampson, enlightening the ends of the whole world. Wherefore, assembling, with 
faith we call thee blessed, chanting: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: The fleece once prefigured thy pure womb, which received the 
heavenly Rain which bedeweth all who are held fast by the thirst of sin, O all-hymned 
one. Blessed art thou who hast given birth unto God in the flesh!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Moving thy tongue to the hymns of God, O father Sampson, thou didst enslave 
the passions of the flesh to thy soul by abstinence and reveal thyself to be a true 
servant of Christ and an heir to the heavenly city.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thy pure mind, adorned with divine splendors, was shown to be most luminous, 
and the abode of pure and divine effulgence, O all-blessed one; wherefore, we honor 
thee, O Sampson, throughout the ages.  
Possessed of a sanctified life, O all-blessed Sampson, thou wast manifestly and 
most gloriously glorified, passing over to God; for, lo! thy memory and righteousness 
shall abide throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: Still the cruel tempest of my passions, O pure and blessed Virgin, and 
do battle against all the incorporeal enemies who pitilessly assail my lowliness, that I 
may hymn thee with faith.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Behold, thy memory hath shone forth upon all like the sun, O father, illumining 
with radiance those who glorify thee as a minister of Christ, an heir of His kingdom 
and a companion of all the venerable.  
In that thy life is luminous, thy glory great and the tomb where thine honored 
body lay is rich, O wise one, it poureth forth health upon those who have recourse to 
it with faith and, ever ask thy help.  
Cease thou never to visit us with the most glorious healing which thou didst 
acquire by thy pangs, O father, but intercede for us unceasingly in thy tender 
compassion, and alleviate the pain and labor of our souls, we pray.  
Shining forth the rays of the sun upon those who honor thee, O blessed father, 
illumine the senses of our soul, and make us worthy partakers of the divine effulgence 
by thy supplications, we pray thee.  
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be the luminous cloud of the Sun of righteousness, 
O pure one, we cry out to thee with faith: Rejoice, O Virgin who knewest not 
wedlock, thou glory of the apostles, crown of the glorious martyrs, and salvation of 
the faithful!  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”:  
In a god-pleasing manner thou didst distribute thy wealth to the poor and didst 
offer thyself wholly to the Lord, O Sampson. Him do thou entreat, that He deliver us 
from all the passions.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
By thy mighty protection, O pure one, preserve all thy servants unharmed by the 
assaults of the enemy; for thee alone have we acquired as a refuge in times of need.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY  
At the beatitudes, 4 Troparia from the Oktoechos, and 4 Troparia from ODE III 
of the venerable one: 
Let us praise the sacred Sampson; for, emulating the compassion of God, he was 
merciful to the needy; providing clothing to all the naked.  
Having led a godly life in a holy and pious manner, thou hast been numbered 
among the saints and thereby attained unto the mansions of the venerable, deemed 
worthy of ineffable illumination.  
Blessed art thou, and well will it be with thee, who didst keep the divine laws of 
our Lord and God, O father. Him do thou beseech, that thy flock be saved.  
Theotokion: Drive away the darkness of my mind and soul, O pure one, and grant 
that I may live to see the promised day, observing the precepts of salvation.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
In thy patience, O venerable father, thou didst acquire thy reward, * having 
endured in prayer without ceasing, and loved the poor and provided for them. * 
Beseech Christ God, O merciful and blessed Sampson, ** that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Rejoicing with psalms and hymns, O divinely wise and venerable Sampson, * and 
hastening to thy divine shrine, as to that of an excellent physician * and a right 
acceptable intercessor, we glorify Christ ** Who hath bestowed upon thee such grace 
of healing.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto God for all that He hath rendered unto me?  
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, § 213 (GAL. 5: 22-6: 2)  
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, Meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that 
are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the 
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking 
one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye 
which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, 
lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of 
Christ. 
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 67 (LK. 12: 32-40) 
The Lord said: Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give 
you the kingdom. Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax 
not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither 
moth corrupteth. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. Let your 
loins be girded about, and your lights burning; And ye yourselves like unto men that 
wait for their lord, when he will return from the wedding; that when he cometh and 
knocketh, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom 
the lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird 
himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. 
And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find them 
so, blessed are those servants. And this know, that if the goodman of the house had 
known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have 
suffered his house to be broken through. Be ye therefore ready also: for the Son of 
man cometh at an hour when ye think not. 
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
