--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER DAVID OF THESSALONICA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O all-blessed father David, * having eminently illumined thy mind with abstinence, 
* thou didst take wing * to the First Cause of good things * and wast shown to be a 
pillar of light, * with godly understanding * ever illumining with thy words and deeds 
* all who have recourse to thee. ** Wherefore, we honor and bless thee.  
Like a right melodious bird * thou didst establish thy shelter * in the branches of a 
tree, O father, * frozen by the cold * and burned by the heat; * whereby thou didst 
receive golden wings * of dispassion and perfection, * and hast made thine abode in 
the heights of heaven, ** ever praying for us who praise thee.  
Having utterly consumed the pleasures of the flesh * with the divine ember of 
dispassion, * thou didst remain unconsumed, O venerable one, * holding burning 
embers in thy hand * before the face of the emperor, * who was amazed at thy 
radiance. * Wherefore, great favor hath been given thee by God, * Who through 
grace hath made thee a great intercessor, ** O blessed one.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O venerable father, word of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; 
wherefore, thou hast obtained the reward of thy labors in the heavens, having 
destroyed legions of the demons, and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life 
thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, beg thou 
peace for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
“Pondering Thy seedless conception, * Thine ineffable birth, * I marvel greatly. * 
How was it Thy good pleasure to die * as a malefactor, O my Son?” * the most pure 
one exclaimed weeping.  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
We, the multitudes of monks, honor thee as our guide, O David our father; for by 
thy steps we have truly learned to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, laboring for 
Christ, denounced the power of the enemy, O converser with the angels and 
companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them entreat the Lord, that our 
souls find mercy.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Stavrotheotokion in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
The unblemished heifer, beholding her Bullock * willingly nailed upon the Tree, * 
cried out aloud, lamenting piteously: * “Woe is me, O my most beloved Child! * How 
hath the ungrateful assembly * of the Jews rewarded Thee, * desiring to leave me 
childless * and bereft of Thee, ** O my most beloved Child?”  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable David.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “With divine words I hymn thy 
life, O blessed one”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone V:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath 
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they 
chanted a song of victory. 
Assembling, with hymns we honor thy radiant and divine memory, O most blessed 
David, through the divine Spirit recognizing thee as an heir of the light and the day, 
O venerable one.  
Having mortified thy members on the earth, O father, thou didst have Christ our 
Life dwelling in thy heart, Who destroyed the power of the devil, the one who 
brought death upon mankind.  
Submitting to the laws of the Master, O venerable one, thou didst take thy cross 
upon thy shoulder and, following after His steps, didst cast down the humble the 
arrogance of the deceiver.  
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be adorned with the beauty of the virtues, O 
Ever-virgin, having given birth to the comely Christ Who hath adorned mankind with 
the comely beauties of the Divinity.  
ODE III  
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing * and 
suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * who alone art good * 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Having caused the comeliness of thy body to wither away through abstinence, O 
father, namesake of the prophet, thou didst receive rays of the divine Spirit, and 
thereby emitted splendid beams of dispassion and the gifts of healing.  
Following the life of the saints, O most noetically rich venerable father, thou wast 
wholly sanctified by divine deeds, mystically sanctifying those who celebrate thy holy 
festival with faith, O all-blessed and God-bearing father.  
Having lulled to sleep the pleasures of the body by prayers, vigils and ascetic 
struggles, O venerable father thou didst repose, falling asleep truly in peace. 
Wherefore, those who honor thee with love have acquired thee as an ever-vigilant 
protector.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to be more honorable than the angels, O 
Virgin, having given birth to their Creator. Wherefore, I entreat thee, O pure one: 
Sanctify my mind and illumine my heart, dispelling the cloud of the passions.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Subduing the passions of the flesh by abstinence, O wise and blessed father, thou 
wast revealed to be an angel with a body; and like a melodious bird thou didst 
establish thy shelter in the branches of a tree, furnishing thy mind with wings. 
Wherefore, enriched by the activity of miracles, thou didst pass on to the Lord Whom 
thou didst desire from childhood. O most glorious David, entreat Christ God, that 
He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who honor thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, * we have been overcome by the 
storms of our uncountable sins, * and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, * we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. * Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee * to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O most pure one, * 
unto Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, * that those who worthily 
hymn thee ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying, O 
Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the salvation 
of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed Ones. 
Heeding the Spirit’s words of life, and forsaking the salty sea of life, with thy tear-
drops thou didst dry up the torrents of the passions.  
Full of understanding and grace, O father David, in stillness thou didst seek the 
Benefactor of all and didst receive His radiance.  
Having shown forth the splendor of thy life by overcoming its essential needs, O 
venerable one, by the cooperation of the Spirit thou didst deliver mortals from 
destructive needs.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned Sovereign Lady, we hymn thee who ineffably gavest 
birth to God, incomparably transcending the choirs of the angels in beauty.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise 
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O Christ, 
* in that Thou alone art compassionate!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Lifting thine eyes and thoughts to Him Who was lifted up upon the Cross, O 
father, in the branches of thy tree didst thou persist, burned by the heat of day and 
frozen by the cold of night.  
Thou wast shown to be wholly like lightning in appearance, O all-blessed one, 
bearing fire in thy hands and censing the sovereign with incense.  
O all-blessed and venerable one, thou dost now behold the beauty of God not in 
indistinct images, nor with illusions, but directly face to face.  
Thou wast shown to be a most comely grape of the divine vine, O venerable 
David, pouring forth the wine of compunction for those made foolish by the 
drunkenness of the passions.  
Theotokion: O Birthgiver of God, direct my life and the movements of my mind 
to fulfill the will of God, Who hath ineffably come to us through thee.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its soul-
destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou art 
compassionate. 
Thou wast shown to be a temple of the divine Spirit, O venerable David, having 
confined thyself to a little perch, winning abundant space through confinement.  
Thou didst incline thy soul to the laws of the Master, O father, and didst become 
full of light, and a recipient of the gifts of the Spirit.  
Thy life hath been shown to the ends of the earth as truly adorned with miracles, 
O God-bearing father. Wherefore, we praise thee with faith.  
Theotokion: In a manner transcending nature thou didst weave flesh of thy pure 
blood for Him Who fashioned mankind, O Theotokos. Wherefore as is meet, we 
hymn thee.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of the angels ...”: 
An ever-blossoming garden, bearing the fruits of the virtues, * thou didst appear in 
the tree of a grove, like a right melodious harp, * and receiving the Lord, the Tree of 
life, in thy heart all the more, * and cultivating it like a garden, O divinely wise one, * 
thou hast thereby nurtured us with grace. ** Pray thou ever on our behalf, O all-
blessed David.  
Ikos: The everlasting flame kindleth the furnace of my pleasures, O venerable 
David; but by thy prayers extinguish it, as if by thy copiously flowing tears, and light 
within me the ember of love for my Creator, O blessed one, as once thou didst bear a 
sacrificial ember in thy hand, astonishing the emperor, that I may hymn thee, O light-
bearing and all-blessed David.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, * and 
bedewed the Youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed art Thou! 
Thou didst fix thyself firmly in the branches of the tree, O venerable one, ever 
watering it with the outpourings of thy tears, and chanting continually: O God, 
Blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst extend all thy desire to God, O God-bearer, and didst make thy whole 
heart a receptacle of divine gifts, chanting: O God, Blessed art Thou!  
When the emperor beheld thee shining with light and holding a burning ember in 
thy hand, he marveled and fell at thy feet.  
Theotokion: The curse of mankind was abolished by thy birthgiving, O thou who 
alone art all-blessed; wherefore, we glorify thee throughout the ages as full of grace, O 
Theotokos.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace chanted a 
hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Thou wast shown to be the dawning of understanding for those amid the darkness 
of life, O blessed one, shining forth the light of knowledge upon all who honor thee 
with love and supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages.  
Thou wast upright, humble and meek, faithfully emulating David thy namesake; 
wherefore, with him O father, thou hast inherited the land of the meek throughout all 
ages.  
Thou wast shown to be a divinely radiant pillar of monastics, O blessed David, 
and another prophet of God, foretelling the coming divine manifestations of the 
Spirit of God.  
Theotokion: Thee, the beauty of Jacob, whom God loved and whom He chose, O 
Virgin, do we all hymn as the only blessed one, throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and man; * and 
Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed. 
Assembling today, O ye faithful, let us all celebrate the sacred festival of the 
sanctified father, who shone forth in abstinence and wholly dedicating himself to 
God through a life of perfection.  
Like a tree thou wast planted by waters, O venerable one, bearing fruit, through 
streams of spiritual virtues; and establishing thy nest amid the branches of a tree like 
an eagle, O father, furnishing thy mind with wings to fly up to the heavens.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Prophetically knowing the time of thy departure, O David, thou didst foretell it to 
the people when thou wast sent to avert the sovereign’s great displeasure against 
them, O wise one.  
Today thy holy memory doth sanctify us who keep it faithfully, O venerable 
David; for thou didst lead a holy life, ever rejoicing with the saints, O holy one.  
Theotokion: Ezekiel foresaw thee as a splendid portal through which Christ our 
true God passed. Him do thou earnestly entreat, O pure one, that He open unto me 
the portal of repentance, I pray.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Thou didst avoid the gladness of the world as though it were filth, and, causing thy 
flesh to wither away through fasting, thou didst renew the strength of thy soul, O 
venerable and glorious one, and enriched now with heavenly glory, cease thou never 
to entreat the Lord on our behalf.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, saved by thee we confess thee to be the true 
Theotokos; for thou didst ineffably give birth unto the Lord, Who by His Cross hath 
destroyed death and drawn to Himself the assemblies of the venerable, with whom 
we praise thee, O Virgin.  
Aposticha Stichera from the Oktoechos, and Glory ..., in Tone V:  
O venerable father, thou gavest neither sleep to thine eyes nor slumber to thine 
eyelids, until thou didst free thy soul and body from the passions and prepare thyself 
as a habitation for the Spirit; for Christ, coming with His Father, made His abode 
within thee, revealing thee to be a favorite of the consubstantial Trinity. O David our 
father, thou great herald: pray that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
When thou didst behold hanging upon the Tree, * the planted Cluster of grapes * 
Whom, like a vine, thou didst bring forth, * with His divine side pierced by a spear, * 
thou didst exclaim crying aloud O most pure one: * “What is this, O my Son and 
God? * How is it that Thou Who dost heal all infirmities and sufferings, * hath 
undergone suffering, * though Thou art dispassionate according to Thy divine nature? 
* How have the thankless people thus rewarded Thee for Thy benefactions, O 
Benefactor?” * By His sufferings pray thou * that I may ever be free from sufferings, 
** that I may glorify thee.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable David.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
An ever-blossoming garden, bearing the fruits of the virtues, * thou didst appear in 
the tree of a grove, like a right melodious harp, * and receiving the Lord, the Tree of 
life, in thy heart all the more, * and cultivating it like a garden, O divinely wise one, * 
thou hast thereby nurtured us with grace. ** Pray thou ever on our behalf, O all-
blessed David.  
 
