--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 20th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR METHODIUS,  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Thy commemoration hath splendidly come, * O holy hierarch Methodius, * 
bringing unto us * the art of salvation. * Wherefore, we hymn thee thereon, * 
confessing the radiant struggles and battles * whereby thou didst best * the greatly-
skilled evil one ** and, rejoicing, didst weave a wreath of victory.  
By thy words thou hast enlightened the fullness of the Church, * O divinely 
revealed Methodius; * by thy sufferings and radiance * thou hast driven away the 
gloom of polytheism * and hast now passed over * to the never-waning light, O 
hieromartyr. * Wherefore, made luminous by piety, * we celebrate today ** thy most 
festive and luminous solemnity.  
With blood didst thou dye thy sacred vesture, * O God-bearing Methodius; * and 
therewith thou didst make thine abode * in the holy of holies, rejoicing, O blessed 
one; * thou dost radiantly behold * the divine effulgence of the Trinity, * instructed 
most manifestly by Him * Who is past understanding and comprehension, ** and 
fearing Him, O most excellent and noetically rich hierarch.  
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
Rejoice, O beam of solar brilliance, throne of the never-setting Sun, * who shone 
forth the true Sun! * Rejoice, mind radiant with divine splendors, * flash of lightning 
* illumining the ends of the earth, * true luster of gold, * most comely and most 
immaculate one, * who hast shone forth upon the faithful ** the Light never-waning.  
Take away the defilement of my passion plagued heart, * O all-praised Theotokos; 
* all the wounds and corruption thereof, * which come from sin, * do thou wash 
away, O pure one; * and steady the wavering of my mind, * that I, thy wretched and 
unprofitable servant, * may magnify thy power ** and great assistance.  
O all-immaculate Virgin Mother, * transform the weakness and impotence of my 
soul * into might and power, * that with fear and love * I may do and observe the 
statutes of Christ, * and may escape the unbearable fire * and receive through thee * 
the inheritance of heaven and unsurpassed life, ** ever rejoicing.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
O Lady, take pity on me * who am bowed down beneath the assaults of the 
demons * and cast into the pit of destruction, * and establish me upon the rock of 
the virtues; * and dispelling the attacks of the enemy, * grant that I may keep the 
commandments * of thy Son and our God, * that I may receive forgiveness ** on the 
day of judgment.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody:  
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of mankind, 
crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What is this, O my 
Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou 
hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** I 
marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone II: 
Thy blood mystically crieth out to God from the earth, * like that of Abel, * O 
divinely wise and holy hierarch Methodius, * who manifestly preached that God 
became a man. * Wherefore, thou hast put the deception of Origin to shame * and 
hast passed over to the heavenly bridal chamber. ** Entreat Christ God, that He save 
our souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: At thy command O Lord, * the nature of the waters that beforehand 
flowed freely was transformed * and became like the earth; * whereby Israel 
having traversed them dryshod * chanted unto Thee a hymn of victory. 
O sacred initiate of the mysteries of God, teach me the quick paths which bring 
me to God, showing me the passageway across, that I may obtain never-ending life 
through thy supplications, O glorious one.  
Thou didst shine forth brilliantly in the Church of Christ, O godly one, 
resplendent with a twofold grace. Wherefore, with twofold crowns hath Christ 
crowned thee in a sacred manner.  
Adorned with the crown of martyrdom and the anointing of the priesthood, O 
blessed one, thou didst shine forth in both. Wherefore, thou hast received a divine 
inheritance.  
Thou didst exercise the sacred ministry, O glorious one, as an unblemished 
sacrificial victim, sacred to the Lord, living and animate. Wherefore, thou wast 
accepted upon the heavenly altar, O Methodius.  
Theotokion: For us, O pure Virgin Mother, didst thou give birth unto Christ the 
Savior, the Redeemer and Liberator of the human race. Wherefore, knowing thee to 
be manifestly the mediatress of eternal life, we glorify thee.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord and Savior, * Who in the beginning established the heavens * 
by Thine all-powerful Word, * and by the divine and all-accomplishing Spirit * 
hath granted them all their strength, * do Thou establish me on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy confession. 
Seeing the burning heresy of Origen, as an excellent shepherd thou didst quickly 
burn up with divine fire all the darkness thereof, kindling the brilliant radiance of thy 
wisdom, O thou who art pleasing unto God.  
Having skillfully acquired honorable virginity and the comeliness of purity, O 
glorious one, in thy wisdom and the grace of thy words thou hast showed forth all 
their beauty and everlasting splendor, O divinely wise one.  
The lightning-flashes of thy words, the trumpet-blast of thine intellect, and the 
harmonious proclamation of thy doctrine have gone forth into all the earth, O 
venerable and most blessed one, summoning all the faithful to share in the delights of 
heaven.  
Nurtured by the most mighty sustenance of thy spiritual outpourings, O most wise 
one, they delight in the true sustenance thereof, which abideth, flowing continually 
without passing away, and causing those who partake of it to grow.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: With the divine Gabriel we ever cry unto thee, O blessed Virgin: 
Rejoice! For thou didst become the cause of joy and true gladness for us, giving birth 
in the flesh unto the Redeemer and Savior of all.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Thou didst make of thy heart a most comely altar, O hierarch, offering the un-
bloody sacrifices unto God, and, having suffered mightily, wast slain, offering thyself 
as a sacrifice unto Him Who was slaughtered for our sake. Him do thou earnestly 
ever entreat, that He save all those who hymn thee with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Who can describe the multitude of mine impure thoughts and the tempests of my 
wicked notions, O all-immaculate one? Who can recount the assaults of mine 
incorporeal foes and their malice? Yet by thine entreaties grant me deliverance from 
them all, O good one.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Having never left the bosom of the Father, * Thou didst descend to 
earth O Christ God, * I have heard of the mystery of Thy dispensation, * and I 
have glorified Thee, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Dying in martyrdom, thou didst hasten to the summit of the virtues, receiving the 
munificent reward of thy sacred ministry, O most blessed one.  
Possessing a hierarch’s throne and having acquired a sacred life, O most honored 
one, thou didst proclaim and teach thy flock the Orthodox Faith.  
The spiritually profitable sweetness of thy doctrines doth issue forth like a well-
spring, bringing gladness to those who partake thereof, and delighting the senses of 
our spirit.  
Theotokion: O Christ God, Who didst not leave the bosom of the Father when 
Thou wast incarnate of the Virgin: preserve the flock of Thy dispensation, which 
doth worship Thee in a divine manner.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Having risen at dawn out of the night, * I entreat Thee O Lord my 
God: * grant me the forgiveness of my sins, * and guide my steps to the light * 
of thy commandments, I pray Thee.  
Before thy repose thou wast invested with a life-bearing mortality, O father, and, 
cut down by the sword of thy martyrdom, thou wast translated to an abundant and 
higher life.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
O most glorious initiate of ineffable mysteries, who dost take part in the choirs on 
high: save those who honor thee with love, dispelling the assaults of cruel 
temptations by thy supplications.  
Possessed of boldness before the Master, Whose suffering thou didst also 
zealously emulate in thy struggles, O wise father, do thou ask divine peace and 
tranquility for the faithful.  
At first thou didst serve as minister to the Lamb of God Who taketh away the sins 
of the world; and afterwards slain, thou didst offer thyself to Him as a rational and 
living sacrifice, O father Methodius.  
Theotokion: I pray thee, O pure Theotokos, who art a habitation of the never-
waning Light and a temple of the divine effulgence: by thy light illumine my darkened 
soul.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Sailing in the tempest of the cares of life, * together with the ship I 
have been submerged by sins, * and cast to the soul-corrupting beast, * 
wherefore like Jonah I cry to Thee, O Christ: * Lead me up from the deadly 
abyss.. 
Thou gavest no slumber to thine eyelids nor any sleep to thine eyes, O most 
blessed one, until thou didst free thyself of all the passions and make of thyself a 
temple to house the brilliant lightning of the Spirit.  
Uniting thyself wholly to the divine effulgence of God, O divinely wise 
Methodius, thou didst become a model of the godly priesthood and wast shown to 
be a mediator before God for the faithful of the whole Church.  
The splendid revelation of things that are, joined to thy brilliant life, O divinely 
eloquent one, showed thee to be a beacon for the world, dispelling the prating of the 
heretics and the darkness of ungodliness.  
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be the queen of all, O Mother of God, with the 
angel Gabriel we cry out to thee a hymnody of gladness, for thou hast given birth 
unto God Who brought all things out of non-existence.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Thou wast a priest of the mysteries of the Holy Trinity, * a proclaimer of the 
commandments of God, * passing all understanding, * and the confirmation of the 
Orthodox, * O Methodius thou didst denounce the thoughts the heretics * for the 
sake of Orthodoxy, * shown by thy blood to be a hieromartyr. * Standing before 
Christ with the angels, ** entreat Him that we be saved.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Cast into the fiery furnace, * the venerable children transformed the fire 
into dew, * crying aloud thus in hymnody: * Blessed art Thou O Lord, the God 
of our fathers!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sanctified and radiantly resplendent in thy blood with the martyrs for the truth, O 
divinely wise one, thou chantest unceasingly with them to the Master: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Made steadfast by faith, thou didst quench the flame of idolatry with the streams 
of thy holy blood, O martyr, crying out thus: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our 
fathers!  
Taught by the transcendent vision of God, thou didst most wisely illumine thy 
mind, crying out, O father, with those who chant with faith: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God of our fathers! 
Theotokion: All creation glorifieth thy birthgiving with hymnody, O Virgin, and, 
knowing God and worshiping Him with adoration, it crieth aloud: Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord God of our fathers!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The King of glory, who is alone without beginning, * Before Whom all 
the powers of heaven stand in awe * and the hosts of angels tremble: * O ye 
priests praise, and ye people * supremely exalt Him throughout the ages. 
As he beheld Thee, Who art invisible, the divinely wise one endured wounding by 
the tormenters and was invested with a crown, chanting: O ye priests praise, and ye 
people, supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Radiantly desiring the eternal kingdom of Christ, O holy hierarch, thou didst cry 
out to Christ Who granted it to thee by the right path:  
Ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! O God-bearer, Christ hath 
given thee a twofold reward for thy labors, which transcendeth all thought, as thou 
dost piously hymn His kingdom throughout the ages.  
We know thee to be an abyss of doctrines, a tablet of the precepts of God, a 
treasure of lofty vision and a throne of sensibilities, piously hymning Christ the King 
throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: As a servant, O most pure one, with faith I approach thee who didst 
conceive the Master of all: save now from persecution and tribulations, those who 
piously hymn God Who was incarnate of thee, O Birthgiver of God.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: O Mother of God and Virgin, * thou hast given birth and yet remained 
a virgin, * not in accordance with nature, * but by the condescension of God; * 
wherefore, we ever magnify thee, * who alone wast deemed worthy * of the 
wonders of God.  
Ever entreat Christ, O divinely blessed father, that He cause the wiles of the 
heresies which are directed against us to cease; and that He drive the present gloom 
thereof from our midst, for, as a mighty hierarch, thou art our intercessor.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thou wast translated from earth to the heavenly life, receiving honor for thy 
ministry and suffering, where, partaking of life incorruptible, thou hast been deemed 
worthy to be with Christ for eternity.  
Thou didst take the fruit of the tree of life, of immortal life, O most blessed one, 
acquiring the Creator of mankind. And richly delighting in His joy, pray thou on 
behalf of those who hymn thee.  
Straining thy whole mind to the virtuous life, thou wast deemed worthy of the 
vision of Christ amidst the beauty of gladness, as a hieromartyr and a preacher and 
champion of piety.  
Theotokion: O joyous and all-hymned Theotokos, we call thee the ark of the new 
law and the divinely inscribed tablet, whereon the Word of God was written, 
becoming a man to save the world from deception.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone II: 
Thy blood mystically crieth out to God from the earth, * like that of Abel, * O 
divinely wise and holy hierarch Methodius, * who manifestly preached that God 
became a man. * Wherefore, thou hast put the deception of Origin to shame * and 
hast passed over to the heavenly bridal chamber. ** Entreat Christ God, that He save 
our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Thou wast a priest of the mysteries of the Holy Trinity, * a proclaimer of the 
commandments of God, * passing all understanding, * and the confirmation of the 
Orthodox, * O Methodius thou didst denounce the thoughts the heretics * for the 
sake of Orthodoxy, * shown by thy blood to be a hieromartyr. * Standing before 
Christ with the angels, ** entreat Him that we be saved.  
 
 
