--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 24th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
COMMEMORATION OF THE NATIVITY OF THE HONORABLE & GLORIOUS 
PROPHET & FORERUNNER JOHN THE BAPTIST  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy forerunner, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
Thou wast born of a barren womb, * O glorious forerunner of the coming of 
Christ, * who hast loosed the barrenness of our hearts, * giving utterance to our souls 
* and fruitfulness in faith and truth. * Thou art manifestly known to be * the far-
famed voice of the Word, * the clarion-voiced herald of repentance, * the divine 
mediator between the old and the new covenants. * His nativity do we in gladness ** 
celebrate with love. (Twice)  
Now the fatted calf of abstinence * is born of the barren one, * pointing out to us 
* the Lamb Who was born * of the Virgin Maiden, * taking away the sins of the 
world. * He hath manifestly shone forth * as a turtledove who loveth the wilderness. 
* heralding the divine springtime; * and at the sound of his voice the cruel winter of 
ungodliness hath ceased, * and John, the true friend of the Bridegroom, * hath 
splendidly arrived, ** praying that our souls be saved.  
O thou who wast born in accordance with the promise of God, * when thy father 
was praying in the temple * and the most wondrous and great archangel * announced 
thy nativity, * then, as it is written, * Gabriel sentenced the priest, * who would not 
believe and protested, * that he be mute and deaf * until thy birth. * But when thou, 
O blessed forerunner, * wast born of thy father, * thou didst free his tongue, ** and 
prayest on behalf of us all.  
Glory ..., Idiomelon, in Tone VIII:  
Sweet fragrance is meet for John; the beauty of hymns is fitting for the Baptist; for 
the warrior of the King, the forerunner of grace, proclaimed the beginning of our 
salvation, leaping up in his mother’s womb and crying out in the wilderness, 
announcing the Lamb and entreating the Savior on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
need and grief.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy forerunner, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Thou didst cause thy tongue, * to shine forth with splendor, * crying out, O 
Zacharias: * “This child will be a prophet of God ** and the forerunner of the divine 
Word!”  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, * for He hath visited and wrought 
deliverance for His people.  
From thy mother’s womb, O John, * thou wast shown to be * sanctified for God; 
* for no one greater than thee ** hath ever arisen among mortals.  
Verse: And thou, O child, * shalt be called the prophet of the Most High.  
Thou didst loose the muteness of thy father, * O most blessed one, * as thou didst 
likewise open * the lock of thy mother’s barrenness, ** being born through divine 
grace.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Behold Elizabeth, who saith to the Virgin Mary: “Wherefore hast thou come to 
me, O Mother of my Lord? Thou bearest the King, I the servant; thou the Law-giver, 
I the upholder of the law; thou the Word, I the voice which announceth the kingdom 
of heaven!”  
Troparion of the holy forerunner, in Tone IV: 
O prophet and forerunner of the coming of Christ, * we who honor thee with love 
* are at a loss how to worthily praise thee; * for by thy glorious and honored nativity * 
thou didst loose the barrenness of her who gave birth to thee * and the muteness of 
thy father, ** and proclaimed to the world the incarnation of the Son of God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy forerunner, in Tone IV: 
By John the Monk: When John was born, he loosed the muteness of Zacharias, for 
it was not fitting for the father to be silent when the voice of the Word arrived. But 
since, when the priest had not believed in the beginning, his tongue was bound, so, 
when John appeared, he set his father free. To him was announced and born the 
voice of the Word, the forerunner of the Light, praying for our souls. (Twice) 
Today the voice of the Word looseth the voice of his father, which was restrained 
because of his unbelief, and showeth forth fruitfulness to the Church, loosing the 
bonds of his mother’s barrenness. The lamp of the Light cometh forth; the splendor 
of the Sun of righteousness announceth His coming, for the edification of all and the 
salvation of our souls.  
By Anatolius: When the Word of God wished to be born of the Virgin, His angel, 
the highest of the prophets and greatest born of women, issued forth from elderly 
loins; for it was meet that he be the most glorious beginning of things divine: an 
offspring produced past the age of fertility, a conception accomplished without seed. 
O Thou Who workest miracles for our salvation, glory be to Thee!  
By Andrew of Crete: Today the great forerunner, the greatest of all the prophets, 
hath appeared, issuing forth from the barren womb of Elizabeth, and there is none 
like unto him, nor hath any other such arisen; for the most luminous Light followed 
the lamp of the forerunner, the Word followed the voice, the Bridegroom followed 
the bridal attendant, who maketh ready an excellent people for the Lord, cleansing 
them beforehand with water in the Spirit. He is the offspring of Zacharias, the good 
child of the wilderness, the preacher of repentance, the cleanser of sins, who an-
nounceth to those in Hades the resurrection of the dead, and prayeth for our souls.  
Thou wast shown to be a prophet and forerunner from thy mother’s womb, O 
John, baptizer of Christ, leaping up and rejoicing within her belly when thou didst 
behold the Queen, bearing the Timeless One Who was begotten of the Father 
without mother, coming to her handmaid and to thee, who shone forth from a barren 
woman and an elderly man according to God’s promise.  
O most glorious wonder! He who did not believe the word of the angel, who said 
that Elizabeth would conceive and bear a son, saying: “How can such a one give 
birth? For I am stricken with age, and her womb is withered up”, and was 
condemned to muteness for his unbelief, today beholdeth the promise fulfilled. His 
silence is broken, and he entereth into gladness, crying: “Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
God of Israel, for Thou hast visited and wrought deliverance for Thy people, granting 
the world great mercy!”  

--- PAGE 4 ---
O all-famed John, apostle to the whole world, glad tiding of Gabriel, offspring of 
the barren woman, good child of the wilderness and true friend of Christ the 
Bridegroom: beseech Him, that He have mercy upon our souls.  
Glory ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VI:  
Today the lamp of the Light, like a radiant star, doth precede the coming of the 
Word of God. Today the tongue of Zacharias is loosed, which the angel had 
commanded to keep silent. For it was thus fitting for the father to hold his tongue in 
silence for him who issued forth from the barren womb and with great boldness pro-
claimed the deliverance of all the world.  
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Elizabeth conceived the forerunner of grace, and the Virgin conceived the Lord of 
glory. Both mothers kissed each other, and the babe leapt up, for within her womb 
the servant praised the Master. And the mother of the forerunner marveled and cried 
aloud: “Whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? May 
He Who hath great mercy save a despairing people!”  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS  
And God said to Abraham, Sarai thy wife-her name shall not be called Sarai; Sarah 
shall be her name. And I will bless her and give thee a son of her, and I will bless him, 
and he shall become nations, and kings of nations shall be of him. And Abraham fell 
upon his face, and spake in his mind, saying: “Shall there be a child to one who is a 
hundred years old, and shall Sarah, who is ninety years old, beareth” And God said to 
Abraham: “Yea, behold, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his 
name Isaac; and I will establish my covenant with him, for an everlasting covenant.” 
And Abraham and Sarah were old, advanced in days. And Sarah laughed within 
herself, saying: “The thing hath not yet happened to me, even until now, and my lord 
is old.” And the Lord God said to Abraham: “Why is it that Sarah hath laughed in 
herself, saying: ‘Shall I then indeed bear? But I am grown old.’ Shall anything be 
impossible with the Lord?” And the Lord God visited Sarah, as He said, and the Lord 
did to Sarah, as He spake. And Abraham circumcised his son on the eighth day, as the 
Lord God commanded him. And Abraham was a hundred years old when Isaac his 
son was born to him. And Sarah said: “The Lord hath made laughter for me, for 
whosoever shall hear shall rejoice with me.” And she said: “Who shall say to 
Abraham that Sarah suckles a child? For I have borne a child in mine old age.” And 
the child grew and was weaned, and Abraham made a great feast the day his son Isaac 
was weaned.  
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF JUDGES  
In those days, there was a man of the tribe of Dan, and his name was Manoah, and 
his wife was barren and bore not. And an angel of the Lord appeared to the woman, 
and said to her: “Behold, thou art barren; yet thou shalt conceive in thy womb and 
bear a son. But now be very cautious, and drink no wine nor strong drink, and eat no 
unclean thing. For, lo! thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bear a son. And there 
shall come no razor upon his head, and the child shall be consecrated to God from 
birth. And the woman went, and spake to her husband, saying: “A man of God came 
to me, and his appearance was as of an angel of God, exceeding bright. And he said: 
‘Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bear a son. And now, drink no wine 
nor strong drink, and eat no unclean thing; for the child shall be consecrated to God 
from his birth even unto the day of his death.’” And Manoah prayed to God, and 
said: “O Lord, let the man of God, whom Thou didst send to me, come to us again, 
and enlighten us as to what we should do when the child is born.” And the angel of 
the Lord came to Manoah and said: “Of all things concerning which I spoke to the 
woman, she shall beware. She shall eat of nothing that cometh of the vine yielding 
wine, and let her not drink wine or strong liquor.” And Manoah said to the angel of 
the Lord: “What is thy name, that when what thou hast said will come to pass, we 
may glorify thee?” And the angel of the Lord said to him: “Wherefore dost thou thus 
ask after my name, whereas it is awesome?” And the angel of the Lord appeared no 
more to Manoah and to his wife.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith God. Speak, ye 
priests, to the heart of Jerusalem; comfort her, for her humiliation is accomplished, 
her sin is put away: for she hath received from the Lord’s hand double the amount of 
her sins. The voice of one is heard crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the 
Lord, make straight the paths of our God. O thou who bringest good tidings to Sion, 
go thou up upon the high mountain; lift up thy voice with strength, O thou who 
bringest glad tidings to Jerusalem. Lift it up; fear not I, the Lord God, I will hearken 
to the poor of Israel, and will not forsake them. But I will open rivers on the 
mountains, and fountains in the midst of the plain; I will make the desert into a 
meadow, and a thirsty land springs of water. Let heaven rejoice from above, and let 
the clouds rain down righteousness; let the earth bring forth and blossom with mercy, 
and let righteousness shine forth likewise. Utter aloud a voice of joy, and it shall be 
heard; proclaim it even unto the ends of the earth. Say ye that the Lord hath delivered 
His servant Jacob. And if they shall thirst, He shall lead them through the desert; He 
shall bring forth water for them out of the rock. Be glad, thou barren woman who 
bearest not; break forth and cry, O thou who dost not travail: for more are the 
children of the desolate than of her who hath a husband.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone I:  
Ye mountains, put forth sweetness! Ye hills, leap up like lambs! For the forerunner 
of the Lord, who loosed the muteness of his father at his birth, hath been born of 
Elizabeth, desiring to make his abode with us. Wherefore, we cry aloud to him: O 
thou who baptized Christ, entreat Him, that our souls be saved!  
O voice who art a sign from God, candle-stand of the Light, forerunner of the 
Lord, thou to whom witness is borne by Christ, thou foremost of the prophets: make 
supplication on behalf of the world, and be thou especially mindful of thy flock, that 
it be saved unharmed.  
Thou wast a preacher of the Word and Lamb of God, O prophet and forerunner 
John, foretelling things to come, and prophesying unto the ends of the earth: Behold, 
the Lamb of God Who taketh away the sins of the world, and shall grant great mercy 
unto all!  
Glory ..., the composition of Andrew of Crete, in Tone V:  
Today Elizabeth giveth birth to the ultimate prophet, the first of the apostles, the 
earthly angel and heavenly man, the voice of the Word, the soldier and forerunner of 
Christ, who leapt up beforehand as a sign of the promise, and before his birth 
proclaimed the Sun of righteousness. And she rejoiceth. Zacharias is astonished in his 
old age, putting aside his silence like a bond imposed upon him; and as the father of 
the voice he doth manifestly prophesy: “For thou, O child, shalt be called the prophet 
of the Most High and shalt go forth to prepare the way for Him.” Wherefore, O 
angel, prophet, apostle, warrior, forerunner, baptizer, preacher and instructor of 
repentance: as the voice of the Light and Word, pray thou unceasingly for us who 
keep thy memory with faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Thou art the temple and portal, * the palace and throne of the King, * O most 
honored Virgin, * through whom Christ the Lord, my Redeemer, * Who is the Sun of 
righteousness, * hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in darkness, * deigning 
to enlighten those * whom He hath fashioned in His image by His own hand. * 
Wherefore, O all-hymned one, * as thou hast acquired a mother’s boldness before 
Him, ** entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be saved. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy forerunner, in Tone II: 
With psalms, hymns and spiritual songs let us praise the glorious John, the prophet 
of prophets, offspring of Elizabeth, greatest of all born of women, citizen of the 
desert; and let us cry out to him: O baptizer and forerunner of the Savior, as thou 
hast boldness before Him because of thine honored nativity, entreat Christ, that He 
grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Verse: Blessed is the Lord God of Israel, * for He hath visited and wrought 
deliverance for His people.  
John the forerunner hath come: the voice of the grace of the Word, the herald of 
the Sun, who was born on this day of a barren and childless woman, according to 
God’s promise. Rejoice, O ye people! He is come to prepare for us the way of 
salvation. Leaping up, he paid homage, while yet in his mother’s womb, to the Lamb 
Who taketh away the sins of the world and doth grant us great mercy.  
Verse: And thou, O child, * shalt be called the prophet of the Most High.  
He who was sanctified from his mother’s womb and was the fulfillment of the 
prophecy, is born today of a barren woman, manifestly proclaiming the coming of the 
Lord, saying: Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand!  
Glory ..., the composition of the nun Cassia, in Tone VIII: 
Today hath been fulfilled the saying of Isaiah the prophet concerning the birth of 
the greatest of the prophets; for he said: “Behold, I shall send mine angel before thy 
face, who shall make ready thy path before thee.” This warrior of the King of heaven, 
running ahead, truly made the paths straight for our God, being a man by nature, but 
an angel in his life: for, having utterly preserved his purity and chastity, he possessed 
them by nature; and avoiding that which is unnatural, he struggled supra-naturally. 
Emulating him in his virtues, O ye faithful, let us all pray, that he make entreaty for 
our souls to be saved.  
Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
Behold Elizabeth, who said to the Virgin Mary: “Whence is this to me, O Mother 
of my Lord? Thou bearest the King, I the warrior; thou the Law-giver, I the upholder 
of the law; thou the Word, I the voice which proclaimeth the kingdom of heaven!”  
After the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the holy forerunner, in Tone IV: 
O prophet and forerunner of the coming of Christ, * we who honor thee with love 
* are at a loss how to worthily praise thee; * for by thy glorious and honored nativity * 
thou didst loose the barrenness of her who gave birth to thee * and the muteness of 
thy father, ** and proclaimed to the world the incarnation of the Son of God. (Twice)  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once)  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy forerunner, in Tone IV: 
O prophet and forerunner of the coming of Christ, * we who honor thee with love 
* are at a loss how to worthily praise thee; * for by thy glorious and honored nativity * 
thou didst loose the barrenness of her who gave birth to thee * and the muteness of 
thy father, ** and proclaimed to the world the incarnation of the Son of God. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Now the fruit of Zacharias, the adornment of the desert, the foundation of the 
prophets, hath sprung forth, bringing gladness noetically to the thoughts of the 
faithful; wherefore, the forerunner of Christ hath appeared, the true witness of His 
coming. With spiritual songs let us together cry out to the Baptist: O prophet and 
preacher of the truth, pray thou that we be saved! (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
As he contemplated that which was beyond nature * Joseph was struck with 
wonder O Theotokos, at thy conception without seed. * He contemplated the 
mysterious dew upon the fleece, * the bush un-burnt by fire, * Aaron’s rod which 
budded. * Thus thy Betrothed and guardian bore witness and cried unto the priests 
saying: * A Virgin beareth a child, ** and after child-birth remaineth yet a virgin. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
O all-praised John, thou wast truly and most gloriously born as the herald of the 
coming of Christ, the chief of the prophets; and, as the voice of the Word, thou didst 
cry out: “Repent! The kingdom of heaven is at hand!” Wherefore, having prepared 
the way of the Lord, thou wast shown to the ends of the earth as the forerunner of 
grace. O baptizer and apostle, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of 
transgressions unto those who celebrate thy holy memory with love. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O most holy Virgin, Mother of Christ, heal thou the cruel passions of my soul, I 
pray, and grant me forgiveness of my transgressions, which I have foolishly 
committed, defiling both soul and body, wretch that I am. Woe is me! What shall I do 
at that hour when the angels will separate my soul from my passion-plagued body? 
Then be thou my helper and most fervent intercessor, for I, thy servant, have thee as 
my hope.  
After the Polyeleos, this magnification: We magnify thee, O John, forerunner of 
the Savior, and we honor thy most glorious birth from a barren woman.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for He hath visited and wrought 
deliverance for His people.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded ...”: 
Let the father rejoice. Be glad, O mother, for today thou hast given birth on earth 
unto a prophet, the forerunner summoned by God by the promise. The barren 
woman nurtureth the Baptist as a babe, and Zacharias rejoiceth, saying to the infant: 
“My tongue hath been loosed by thine advent on earth, O candle-stand of the Light! 
A miracle truly most glorious!” (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
We ever thank thee, O pure Theotokos who art full of grace, and we magnify and 
bow down before thee, hymning thy birthgiving and crying out without ceasing: Save 
us, O almighty Virgin, in that thou art good, and rescue us from the dread sentence of 
the demons at the hour of trial, that we, thy servants, may not be put to shame.  
Then the Songs of Ascent, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: And thou, O child, * shalt be called the prophet of 
the Most High.  
Verse: Blessed is the Lord God of Israel, for He hath visited and wrought 
deliverance for His people.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 3 (LK. 1: 24-25, 57-68, 76, 80)  
And after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived, and hid herself five months, 
saying, Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me, to 
take away my reproach among men. Now Elisabeth’s full time came that she should 
be delivered; and she brought forth a son. And her neighbors and her cousins heard 
how the Lord had showed great mercy upon her; and they rejoiced with her. And it 
came to pass, that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child; and they called 
him Zechariah, after the name of his father. And his mother answered and said, Not 
so; but he shall be called John. And they said unto her: There is none of thy kindred 
that are called by this name. And they made signs to his father, how he would have 
him called. And he asked for a writing tablet, and wrote, saying, His name is John. 
And they marveled all. And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue 
loosed, and he spake, and praised God. And fear came on all that dwelt round about 
them; and all these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Judea. And all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts, saying: What manner 
of child shall this be? And the hand of the Lord was with him. And his father 
Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit, and prophesied, saying: Blessed be the Lord 
God of Israel; for He hath visited and redeemed His people. And thou, child, shalt be 
called the prophet of the Highest. And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and 
was in the deserts till the day of his showing unto Israel.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone II: 
He who was sanctified from his mother’s womb and was the fulfillment of the 
prophecy, is born today of a barren woman, manifestly proclaiming the coming of the 
Lord, saying: “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand!”  
ODE I  
Canon I, of John the Monk, with 8 Troparia, including its Irmos, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
The offspring of the barren woman manifestly proclaimeth the birthgiving of the 
Virgin, preceding the Sun like a magnificent dawn. And he now shineth forth the light 
of piety and grace upon the whole universe.  
“Truly art thou called the prophet of the Most High; for thou goest before the 
face of Christ, to prepare the way for the Creator!” Zacharias cried out to thee, his 
son, borne up by the most Holy Spirit, O all-famed John.  
Hearing the words of Gabriel’s divine news, Zacharias showed himself to be 
intractable, and was stricken with muteness; but he is suddenly loosed therefrom, for 
John the Forerunner, the voice of the Word, hath been born.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate Theotokos, thou godly city of the King of all, 
habitation well-pleasing unto God, precious treasure: preserve thine inheritance, 
which ever praiseth thee and honoreth thy birthgiving with faith.  
Another Canon, of Andrew, with 6 Troparia, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Let us chant unto God our Redeemer, * Who of old guided Israel * 
fleeing from the slavery of Pharaoh, * and fed them in the wilderness, * for He 
hath been glorified.  
The silence of the father is a symbol of the mysteries of the Scriptures of the law; 
for when grace arrived Moses fell silent. For it was fitting that all fall silent in the 
presence of the treasure of wisdom which had been revealed.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
While the priest was censing in the temple, an angel from on high stood before 
him and cried aloud: “I am come unto thee bearing news of a strange birthgiving, O 
elder! For thou shalt receive from the barren woman the baptizer of Christ as your 
offspring.”  
“Wherefore dost thou marvel, O elder? Why standest thou, refusing to believe the 
one who telleth thee these things? For he is an angel, even if he is in the semblance of 
a man, be thou therefore mute until the time of the birth of the voice of the Word!”  
He who made the silence of Zacharias a symbol of the written law hath thereby 
shown me to be a preacher of repentance who cry out: He giveth unto the barren 
woman a son who is the voice who crieth.  
O the most glorious pronouncements of the Forerunner of Christ! He who, even 
before he was wrapped in swaddling bands, recognized Him who hath loosed our 
bonds and sanctified the nations, is born today of Elizabeth and looseth the voice of 
his father.  
Theotokion: Thou art the habitation of God and the noetic ladder by which God 
hath descended and, taking our form, hath led our nature up to the heavens. Thee do 
we all praise as the mediatress of our salvation.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth ... 
ODE III  
Canon I  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
The birthgiving of the Master is accomplished through the Virgin, while that of 
His beloved servant is through an elderly and barren mother; wherefore, splendidly 
hath he proceeded the Wonder of wonders.  
The elderly and barren woman kisseth the Virgin Mother, truly recognizing her 
birthgiving, for the bond of her barrenness hath been loosed by the will of God.  
Theotokion: O thou who hast given birth unto God incarnate without having 
known wedlock, make me steadfast who am beset by the assaults of the passions; for 
I have none other helper than thee, O most pure one.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Having established the thunder * and fashioned the wind: * do Thou 
make me steadfast O Lord, * that I may hymn Thee in truth and do Thy will; * 
for none is as holy as Thou, O our God.  
Elizabeth, who before was barren, prefigured Thy Church of the nations, O 
Christ, and, giving birth most gloriously, she hath revealed as most fertile that which 
once was seen to be barren.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Making straight the ways of the Lord and preparing His path, O prophet and 
herald of Christ, thou didst show mankind the fruits of repentance, teaching them the 
way of life.  
Dancing today, Elizabeth holdeth thee in her elderly arms, O Forerunner, and 
crieth out, uttering the praise: None is as holy as Thou, O Lord our God!  
Theotokion: O most holy Theotokos, thou didst loose the grief of our first 
parents, giving birth to the Creator of life and Redeemer for us. Him do thou 
earnestly entreat, that thy flock be saved.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded ...”: 
The Forerunner, the voice of the Word, upon his birth splendidly loosed the voice 
of Zacharias, and he hath shown unto all the barrenness of the law, crying out: 
Repent, ye who are on earth, for, lo! Jesus cometh and hath appeared, desiring to 
deliver all from the primal curse, illumining them with baptism! Truly this is a most 
glorious wonder!  
 
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Like the radiant sun, the son of Zacharias hath shone forth upon us through the 
womb of Elizabeth, and loosed the muteness of his father, crying out to all men with 
great boldness: “Make straight the way of the Lord! For He freeth and saveth those 
who have recourse unto Him.” Entreat Him Whom didst thou preach, O John, that 
our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
exceedingly glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
ODE IV 
 Canon I  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
A mystery hath preceded ineffable mysteries, proclaiming release from suffering by 
a renewed nature, through its correction and deification, O Christ.  
Isaiah prophesied that when the Son would become flesh, the Father would say: 
“Behold, I send before Thy face an earthly angel, the equal of the angels, who crieth 
out: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!”  

--- PAGE 13 ---
I have been born to serve the Master as a servant; for, lo! for this reason I have 
come, to announce His coming, that the barren and elderly woman, putting forth 
fruit, may believe beforehand the birthgiving of the Virgin.  
Theotokion: The womb of the holy Theotokos, in whom it was Thy good pleasure 
to make Thine abode as in a fragrant dwelling, O supremely divine Word of the 
Father, was neither corrupted, nor suffered pain; for she gaveth birth to Emmanuel: 
God and man.  
Canon II  
Irmos: I have heard of Thy glorious Dispensation, * O Christ our God: * how 
Thou wast born of the Virgin, * that Thou mightest deliver from error * those 
who cry aloud to Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord. 
Repentance was made accessible through thy nativity, O Forerunner and herald; 
for thou alone didst preach, crying aloud: Repent ye! The kingdom of heaven is at 
hand!  
Virginity is established and chastity doth triumph; the desert rejoiceth, and the 
world holdeth festival in thy nativity, O Forerunner!  
Elizabeth rejoiceth and Zacharias speaketh once again. Both, therefore, become 
young in their old age and are rendered luminous through John the voice of the 
Word.  
Theotokion: Of old, the lawgiver saw thee as the bush unconsumed by the fire, 
and Daniel envisioned thee as a holy mountain, O Sovereign Lady who alone art 
Mother and Virgin.  
ODE V  
Canon I  
Irmos: Now I shall arise said God prophetically, * now I shall be glorified, now 
I shall be exalted, * elevating fallen human nature, * which I received from the 
Virgin, * to the noetic light of My divinity.  
The earth hath given rise to the true herald, the voice who preacheth to all, with 
the tongue of the Spirit, the Son of the Virgin, righteousness from heaven which hath 
come down to us in a bodily substance.  
The Lord hath appointed thee the true luminary of Christ, enlightening all, 
clothing only those who are His enemies in shame, as in a garment, and forthrightly 
proclaiming the Word and Son of God.  
All creation rejoiceth in thy nativity in a godly manner; for thou wast shown to be 
an earthly angel and a heavenly man, O Forerunner, proclaiming the God of heaven 
Who assumed flesh for our sake.  
Theotokion: He Who is begotten of the Father hath been born of thee and is ever 
with thee: the ever-existing and indivisible Word, the only-begotten Son, Who, in the 
latter days, became incarnate of the Virgin and the Holy Spirit.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: Shine upon me, O Lord, * the light of Thy commandments, * for my 
soul riseth early to Thee and hymneth Thee: * For Thou art our God, * and 
unto Thee do I flee, O King of peace. 
O Sun of righteousness, Thou hast prepared a star, Thy baptizer John, who today 
is born according to Thy promise and hath loosed the voice of his father.  
Utter thou no words of protest, O sacred elder; for Gabriel, the foremost among 
the archangels, telleth thee the mysteries of God, telling all of His descent unto us.  
Be not unbelieving, O elder; for God hath promised that thou shalt beget a son in 
thine old age, in whose birth many shall rejoice, for he shall come with the power of 
Elijah.  
O prophet, herald and forerunner, offspring of the barren woman, preacher of 
repentance, lamb of the wilderness, and lampstand of the Light: pray thou for all with 
faith who honor thee.  
Theotokion: We hymn thee, O Sovereign Lady, Mother of the Creator of all, as the 
impassable portal, the bush unconsumed, and the unquarried mountain from whom 
was cut the Stone Who is He Who assumed flesh from thee.  
ODE VI 
 Canon I  
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 
While yet in thy mother’s womb, as a prophet thou didst recognize the Word of 
God, and, deified by the unapproachable light, thou didst utter theology in that dark 
chamber, employing her tongue.  
As the voice of one crying unceasingly, O Baptist, cease thou never to entreat the 
Redeemer of the world, that He loose the spiritual barrenness of those who hymn thy 
nativity.  
Theotokion: Thy womb, O pure Theotokos, was revealed to be the dwelling-place 
of the unapproachable Godhead, upon Whom the heavenly ranks cannot gaze 
without fear.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The tempest of evil thoughts, hath overwhelmed me, * dragging me 
down into the abyss of my numberless sins; * but, going before me, O good 
Helmsman, * govern me as Thou didst the Prophet, * and save me.  
Today John is born: the citizen of the desert, the preacher of repentance, the true 
witness of grace, the forerunner of the Word, the star which shineth before the Light.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Today, the axe which hath been forged, hath portended the hewing of barren 
souls, and planting the fruits of the virtues, hath surely come forth in thy nativity, O 
forerunner.  
Jordan hath rejoiced most gloriously and leapeth up, learning that John is born of 
the barren one’s womb; wherefore the sea danceth with leaping waters.  
Coming forth, the candle-stand of the Light preached the coming of the Savior, 
the Lamb of God, Who hath shone forth light upon the earth, offered spiritually for 
all nature.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Birthgiver of God, who hast given birth to the 
Abyss of mercy: drowning the abyss of my passions in the depths of thy compassions, 
grant me a torrent of tears from my soul.  
Kontakion of the holy forerunner, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Today she who before was barren * giveth birth unto the forerunner of Christ, * 
he is the fulfillment of all prophecy; * for, laying his hand in the Jordan upon Him * 
Whom the prophets foretold, * he hath been shown to be the prophet, herald and 
forerunner ** of the Word of God.  
Ikos: Let us now praise the forerunner of the Lord, to whom Elizabeth gaveth 
birth for the priest, by means of her barren womb, though not seedlessly; for Christ 
alone passed through an inviolate dwelling without seed. The barren woman gaveth 
birth unto John, but did not beget him without the aid of her husband; but the pure 
virgin gaveth birth to Jesus through the overshadowing of the Father and the Spirit of 
God. The prophet, herald and forerunner was revealed through the barren woman to 
the Seedless One.  
ODE VII  
Canon I  
Irmos: The three youths in Babylon, * regarded the tyrant’s command as 
foolishness, * and cried aloud in the midst of the flame: * Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God of our fathers!  
Before, all of human nature was in darkness, O forerunner; but thou wast shown 
to be the dawn, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Thy nativity through the barren woman hath healed all afflicted nature, O 
forerunner, teaching it to chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Thou wast born of a barren woman, O forerunner, for, since the law is barren, 
grace hath truly come, chanting unto Christ: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our 
fathers!  
Theotokion: O blessed Virgin, pray for us who beseech thee; for on thee do we set 
our hope, and to thee do we cry aloud: O Sovereign Lady, disdain not thy servants!  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Falling mute for a time, Zacharias made plain his silence by writing; and, provided 
again with speech through thy nativity, O forerunner, he most gloriously announced 
the grace of the Spirit.  
The most honored Elizabeth, that barren and childless woman, is like unto the 
Church: which before was bedimmed with sacrifices and ordure now boasteth in 
beauty and birthgiving.  
Today the spiritual axe, whereby all the uprisings of the passions are hewn down, 
is honed by the nativity of the forerunner; and the fruits of repentance mystically 
flourish.  
We honor thee, O John, as the mediator between the old and the new testaments, 
the one who maketh straight the paths of Christ Who cleanseth the threshing-floor of 
transgression with the winnowing-fan of the Spirit.  
We all hymn the glorious John who issued forth from the barren woman, the 
forerunner and preacher of repentance, who hastened like a star before the Sun, 
Christ our God.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, cease thou never to pray on behalf of all unto 
Him Who, without seed, made His abode within thy womb, Who, in His ineffable 
and utter humility, was born and beggared Himself for our sake.  
ODE VIII  
Canon I  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
Moses the lawgiver was a servant, but Jesus is the God of the new covenant; and 
now the forerunner hymneth both, as mediator between them, saying: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord!  
A turtle-dove hath issued forth from the womb of the barren one! Like a divinely 
planted grove she hath offered the forerunner of Christ unto the Church, chanting: 
All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
O God-bearing people, holy nation, liken yourselves unto the turtle-dove of Christ 
and, abiding in chastity, chant ye with voices flowing with honey: All ye works of the 
Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
Triadicon: Illumined with the threefold Light, let us worship the one uncreated 
Godhead, ceaselessly crying aloud in an Orthodox manner: All ye works of the Lord, 
bless ye the Lord!  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: In wisdom hast Thou fashioned all things, O Master, * Thou didst 
establish the earth firmly upon the fathomless depths of the waters, * in 
accordance with Thy knowledge, * wherefore we hymn Thee chanting: * 
Unceasingly bless ye the Lord all ye works of the Lord. 
Before thy birth, before thine own swaddling-clothes, O forerunner, thou didst 
recognize Christ, the Bestower of life, Whom thou didst worship, pointing Him out 
by leaping, and naming Him thy Lord, by borrowing thy mother’s tongue, and singing 
unto Christ our God.  
The ends of the earth celebrate the forefeast today; the angels and the souls of the 
righteous rejoice; the quick and the dead are gladdened by the birth of John, receiving 
through him the preaching of the Savior and Lord of all.  
Today the Jordan, likening itself to John, hath leapt up most gloriously in its fluid 
torrents, listening to him whose life is like unto that of the angels, who was born of a 
barren and elderly woman, who maketh straight the ways and paths of the Lord and 
hath baptized the world.  
Today Zacharias noted on a slate the name of the prophet and forerunner which 
was designated by God, and in his silence he declared: Let him be called John who is 
born to me in mine old age! This marvelous designation befitteth one who was 
begotten according to God’s promise.  
Theotokion: Thy people, O Virgin, have thee as a mighty consolation, a hope 
unashamed, an unassailable rampart and divine intercession, and, saved, they glorify 
and cry out to thee earnestly: Bless the Lord unceasingly, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Canon I  
Irmos: The ineffable hidden mystery of God hath been revealed in thee, * O 
most pure Virgin; * for in His tender compassion * God become incarnate of 
thee. * Wherefore, we magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Lo! the voice of the forerunner falleth upon barren and empty hearts, crying: 
Prepare ye now the way of Christ, for He shall come in glory, and, submitting 
ourselves, we magnify Him!  
As of old, O forerunner, thou didst through the Holy Spirit manifestly preach the 
Son, Who is the Lamb of God Who taketh away the sins of the world, ask thou 
forgiveness of sins for thy flock.  
Triadicon: Chanting in an Orthodox manner, O ye faithful, let us glorify the 
threefold Unity, the consubstantial Trinity, Who illumineth us divinely and filleth our 
souls with the splendors of the never-waning light.  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Theotokion: O thou who hast dominion over all creatures, grant the trophy of 
victory to thy people and set the feet of Orthodox hierarchs upon all heresies and 
schisms, that we may magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Canon II  
Irmos: For the Mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His 
name; * and His mercy is upon them that fear Him * unto generation and 
generation. 
Behold, in thee, O priest, hath God wrought a great and most glorious sign; for 
thou hast begotten a son, the forerunner, in thine old age and in the mortality of thy 
flesh.  
Let barren women hearken and chant unto God! For, lo! Elizabeth crieth out: I 
give birth unto a son of mine old age and in the mortality of my flesh!  
Be glad and rejoice now in God, O Zacharias! For, lo! Elizabeth nourisheth the 
son of her old age at her breast and in the mortality of her flesh giveth birth to the 
forerunner.  
Glory to Him Who hath giveth fruit to the barren woman in her old age and hath 
bestowed upon the aged prophet a son, the divine forerunner, who prepareth for 
Him a perfected people.  
Theotokion: He Who was begotten in the bosom of the Father without passion 
and corruption, having made His abode within thee, in His loving-kindness hath led 
us to the Father and the divine Spirit.  
Exapostilarion of the holy forerunner:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Today the joyous birth of the forerunner looseth the grief of his father’s muteness 
and the barrenness of her who bore him. And he declareth the present joy and 
gladness. Wherefore, all creation doth celebrate it with splendor. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody: 
The prophets preached, the apostles taught, and with godly wisdom the martyrs 
openly confessed thy Son to be the God of all, O most pure one. With them we 
glorify thee, delivered by thee from the ancient sentence.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy forerunner, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! * From a mother advanced in age * hath John, the 
proclaimer of God the Word * hastened to issue forth today, * and by his nativity * 
he most clearly revealeth the bound tongue to speak. * O Thine ineffable 
dispensation, O Master, * whereby, O Christ, ** save Thou our souls, in that Thou 
alone art merciful.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
O most glorious wonder! * The prophet who is the greatest * among those born of 
women * looseth the condemnation of his mother’s barrenness, * coming with the 
spirit and power of Elijah * to make straight the way of the Lord. * O Thine ineffable 
tender compassion, O Master, * whereby, O Christ, ** save Thou our souls, in that 
Thou alone art merciful.  
O most glorious wonder! * He Who preached to men the condescension of Christ 
* with his voice doth indicate Him Who transcendeth all, * and with power divine * 
looseth the barrenness of her who gave him birth * and the tongue of Zacharias. * O 
Thy great wonders, O Master! * Thereby, O Christ, ** do Thou save those who 
honor Thy great forerunner.  
O most glorious wonder! * the prophet and forerunner * is shown to be the 
greatest born of women, * and the most sublime prophet * and herald of the coming 
of Christ, * leaping up in his mother’s womb. * O Thine exceeding great gifts, O 
Lover of mankind! * Thereby, O Christ, ** save Thou our souls, in that Thou art 
almighty.  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VI:  
The forerunner, the star of stars, John who longeth for God, is born on earth 
today from a barren womb, and he revealeth the radiance of Christ, the Orient from 
on high, for the straight passage of the faithful.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: * Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
Great Doxology, litanies and dismissal.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the first canon of the holy 
forerunner, and 4 from ODE VI of the second canon.  
The birthgiving of the Master is accomplished through the Virgin, while that of 
His beloved servant is through an elderly and barren mother; wherefore, splendidly 
hath he proceeded the Wonder of wonders. (Twice) 
The elderly and barren woman kisseth the Virgin Mother, truly recognizing her 
birthgiving, for the bond of her barrenness hath been loosed by the will of God. 
(Twice) 
Today John is born: the citizen of the desert, the preacher of repentance, the true 
witness of grace, the forerunner of the Word, the star which shineth before the Light.  
Today, the axe which hath been forged, hath portended the hewing of barren 
souls, and planting the fruits of the virtues, hath surely come forth in thy nativity, O 
forerunner.  
Coming forth, the candle-stand of the Light preached the coming of the Savior, 
the Lamb of God, Who hath shone forth light upon the earth, offered spiritually for 
all nature.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Birthgiver of God, who hast given birth to the 
Abyss of mercy: drowning the abyss of my passions in the depths of thy compassions, 
grant me a torrent of tears from my soul.  
Troparion of the holy forerunner, in Tone IV: 
O prophet and forerunner of the coming of Christ, * we who honor thee with love 
* are at a loss how to worthily praise thee; * for by thy glorious and honored nativity * 
thou didst loose the barrenness of her who gave birth to thee * and the muteness of 
thy father, ** and proclaimed to the world the incarnation of the Son of God.  
Kontakion of the holy forerunner, in Tone III: 
Today she who before was barren * giveth birth unto the forerunner of Christ, * 
he is the fulfillment of all prophecy; * for, laying his hand in the Jordan upon Him * 
Whom the prophets foretold, * he hath been shown to be the prophet, herald and 
forerunner ** of the Word of God.  
NOTE: After the Little Entrance, the Troparion of the temple of Christ, or of 
the Theotokos, if the temple is so dedicated; then the Troparion of the 
forerunner. Then the Kontakion of the temple of Christ; Glory ..., that of the 
forerunner; Both now ..., that of the temple of the Theotokos. If the temple is 
not dedicated to the Theotokos: Both now ..., Kontakion of the temple of 
Christ. But if the temple is not dedicated to Christ, we begin with the Troparion 
of the forerunner; Glory: the Kontakion of the forerunner; Both now ..., O 
protection of Christians. We chant the Prokeimenon, epistle, alleluia, Gospel 
and communion verse of the forerunner alone.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS, § 112 (ROM. 13:11-14: 4)  
Brethren: And that, knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of 
sleep: for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed. The night is far spent, 
the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on 
the armor of light. Let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, 
not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying: but put ye on the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. Him that 
is weak in faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations. For one believeth that he 
may eat all things: another, who is weak, eateth herbs. Let not him that eateth despise 
him that eateth not; and let not him which eateth not judge him that eateth: for God 
hath received him. Who art thou that judgest another man’s servant? to his own 
master he standeth or falleth. Yea, he shall be holden up: for God is able to make him 
stand.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for He hath visited and 
wrought redemption for His people.  
Verse: And thou, O child, shalt be called the prophet of the Most High. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 1 (LK. 1 :5-25,57-68, 76, 80)  
There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain priest named 
Zechariah, of the course of Abijah: and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and 
her name was Elizabeth. And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the 
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless. And they had no child, 
because that Elizabeth was barren; and they both were now well stricken in years. 
And it came to pass that, while he executed the priest’s office before God in the order 
of his course, according to the custom of the priest’s office, his lot was to burn 
incense when he went into the temple of the Lord. And the whole multitude of the 
people were praying without at the time of incense. And there appeared unto him an 
angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense. And when Zechar-
iah saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon him. But the angel said unto him, 
Fear not, Zechariah: for thy prayer is heard; and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a 
son, and thou shalt call his name John. And thou shalt have joy and gladness; and 
many shall rejoice at his birth. For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall 
drink neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even 
from his mother’s womb. And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord 
their God. And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the 
hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to 

--- PAGE 22 ---
make ready a people prepared for the Lord. And Zechariah said unto the angel, 
Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years. 
And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of 
God; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to show thee these glad tidings. And, 
behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak, until the day that these things shall 
be Performed, because thou believest not in my words, which shall be fulfilled in their 
season. And the people waited for Zechariah, and marveled that he tarried so long in 
the temple. And when he came out, he could not speak unto them; and they 
perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple; for he beckoned unto them, and 
remained speechless. And it came to pass; that, as soon as the days of his ministration 
were accomplished, he departed to his own house. And after those days his wife 
Elizabeth conceived, and hid herself five months, saying, Thus hath the Lord dealt 
with me in the days wherein He looked on me, to take away my reproach among 
men. Now Elisabeth’s full time came that she should be delivered; and she brought 
forth a son. And her neighbors and her cousins heard how the Lord had showed 
great mercy upon her; and they rejoiced with her. And it came to pass, that on the 
eighth day they came to circumcise the child; and they called him Zechariah, after the 
name of his father. And his mother answered and said, Not so; but he shall be called 
John. And they said unto her, There is none of thy kindred that is called by this name. 
And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called. And he asked for a 
writing tablet, and wrote, saying, His name is John. And they marveled all. And his 
mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and he spake, and praised 
God. And fear came on all that dwelt round about them; and all these sayings were 
noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judea. And all they that heard them 
laid them up in their hearts, saying, What manner of child shall this be? And the hand 
of the Lord was with him. And his father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit, 
and prophesied, saying: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for He hath visited and 
redeemed His people. And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest. 
And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of 
his showing unto Israel.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
We transfer the epistle and Gospel of the daily cycle to the previous day.  
 
NOTE: When the feast of the nativity of the forerunner coincides with a 
Sunday, the hymns of the resurrection precede those of the saint.  
