--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 28th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF THE TRANSLATION OF THE RELICS OF THE HOLY 
WONDERWORKERS CYRUS & JOHN, THE UNMERCENARY PHYSICIANS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy unmecinaries, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
With hymns let us all honor Cyrus * and with him the great John, * the two 
martyrs * who possessed the radiance of the Trinity, * the foundation of the Faith, * 
the flowers breathing forth * the true fragrance * of the understanding of Christ, ** 
for they pray unceasingly for us to the Lord. (Twice)  
With fasting and radiance of life * thou didst shine forth, * and later thou didst 
adorn thy soul with suffering, * O glorious Cyrus. * Thou didst forsake an earthly 
army, * O wise John, * and didst find the army of heaven. * And, entreating the 
Savior, O blessed ones, ** ye both pray for those who bless your memory. (Twice)  
Ye were shown to be physicians of the infirm, O blessed ones, * and never-waning 
luminaries * of the divine Faith, * uttering confession together * and sharing in the lot 
of the martyrs. * Having truly received crowns from Christ, * O glorious Cyrus and 
wise John, * unceasingly entreat the Savior ** on behalf of those who hymn you with 
faith. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Two martyrs have shone forth upon us today, healing the pangs of our souls: 
Cyrus and John, the wonder-workers. The one, embracing the angelic life and living it 
to the end, united himself to Christ by the blood of martyrdom; and the other, 
shining forth among the military ranks, is now enrolled in the armies of heaven. 
Wherefore, they impart healing to those who with faith celebrate their memory, 
praying for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: ‘I cannot bear O my child, to behold Thee, * Who dost grant 
life and health unto all, * hung upon the Tree; * for of old those who were lulled into 
the sleep of death * by the fruit of the transgression * have been awakened * and 
granted divine and salvific life and health by Thee’, * thus said the Virgin weeping, ** 
whom we magnify. 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Come, ye assembly of the faithful, and with hymns let us crown Cyrus and John 
today: the soldiers of grace and most generous fulfillers of petitions; for in manifold 
ways they have been shown unto all as most splendid physicians. Wherefore, they 
pray for our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb * willingly 
led as a man to the slaughter, * she said, weeping: * “Dost Thou now hasten to leave 
me childless * who gave Thee birth O Christ,? * What is this that Thou hast done, O 
Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine extreme goodness, * which 
is beyond understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of mankind!”  
Troparion of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone V: 
O Christ God Who hast given us the miracles * of Thy holy martyrs as an 
invincible rampart, * through their supplications set at naught the counsels of the 
heathen * and strengthen right believing rulers, * in that Thou alone art good ** and 
the Lover of mankind.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and the following canon of the holy unmercinaries, 
with 6 Troparia, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Unto Him Who overthrew the tyranny of Pharaoh in the sea * and led 
Israel over dry land, * let us chant unto Christ our God, * for He hath been 
glorified throughout the ages. 
O ye faithful, let us chant unto Him Who hath shown forth the honorable Cyrus 
and the martyr John as wonderworkers and physicians in the world, healing the 
sufferings of all by grace, and let us honor the memory of the martyrs.  
Having rejected the things of the present, by shedding their blood the lovers of 
that which is to come followed Him Who truly loveth; wherefore, suffering amid 
wounding, they endured valiantly.  
Having fortified themselves with boldness and made their souls steadfast, taught 
by Christ they manfully struggled with the martyrs and rightly plaited wreaths for 
themselves.  
Theotokion: O Mother of the Truth, save me who am grievously tempest tossed 
by the passions and am often drowning, and guide me to the safety of the calm 
haven, O pure one.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as our God, 
* Whom the whole of creation doth hymn: * There is none more righteous 
than Thee, O Lord. 
Thou didst hone Thy saints with faith, O Christ, forging them with hope, and 
enflaming them with love; and with tridents Thou didst weave for them a three-
stranded wreath.  
Valiantly did ye withstand the ungodly tyrants O invincible martyrs, passing 
unharmed over the snares of deception; for, having been armed by Christ, ye rejoice 
with Him.  
Like divinely erected pillars and firm foundations the martyrs ye were planted 
upon the rock of the ascent of Faith, having drunk the water of immortality from the 
Rock that is the chalice of Christ.  
Theotokion: Thou didst become the dwelling-place of the Spirit, having received 
the Fullness of the Godhead in the Son, and given birth to the Savior, Lord and 
Redeemer of our race.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “O Thou Who wast lifted up ...”:  
Trampling underfoot the pleasures which drag men down, ye were taken up in 
splendor by grace to the divine heights of martyrdom, O spiritual athletes Cyrus and 
John, ye luminaries of all the world. Wherefore, we beseech you: from the darkness of 
sin and afflictions deliver us, entreating Him Who is God over all. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV:  
As one who loveth sin, I beseech thee who hast given birth to the sinless God 
Who taketh away the sins of the world: O most pure one, have compassion on my 
greatly sinful soul and cleanse me of my many sins; for thou art the cleansing, 
salvation and aid of the faithful.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Body, soul and intellect, and all the workings of your heart, did ye sacrifice unto 
Christ with faith; and vanquishing the savagery of the tyrants, ye were rightly 
crowned, O saints.  
Surrendering your bodies to the sword and to fire, ye became sacrifices acceptable 
unto God, and on a mystical altar ye offered yourselves up as an odor of sweet savor.  
The relics of Thy martyrs have shone forth upon the world as an inextinguishable 
radiance, O Benefactor; thereby hath the darkness of ignorance been dispelled and 
the knowledge of God hath been instilled in its place.  
Theotokion: O pure Sovereign Lady, portal of the divine Word from all evils 
protect and preserve those who assemble in thy church and praise thee, the most pure 
one, with hymns.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
The virgins, having acquired the passion-bearers as companions, laid hold of the 
perfect crown of victory, rejoicing.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Illumined by the radiance of divine effulgence, O all-famed martyrs, ye ever en-
lighten the world.  
Emulating the sufferings of the Lord, O invincible passion-bearers, with valiant 
mind ye endured pain.  
Theotokion: Still thou the inconstant tempest of my passions, O thou who hast 
given birth to God the Helmsman and Lord.  
 
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Valiantly arrayed in the breast-plate of the Faith, O martyrs, ye grievously wounded 
the adverse enemy and foe.  
In hymns we glorify the memory of Thy saints, O Christ, and unto Thee our God 
do we offer worship with faith.  
Emulating Thy sufferings, O Christ, the glorious martyrs endured tortures. By 
their supplications, save us all O God.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, we the faithful declare thee to be the ark and temple of 
God, the animate bridal-chamber and portal of heaven.  
Kontakion of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Receiving the gift of miracles from divine grace, O saints, * ye work wonders 
unceasingly, * cutting down all our passions with invisible skill, * O divinely wise 
Cyrus and glorious John; ** for ye are divine physicians.  
Ikos: Offering yourselves to God, O saints, ye endured every trial for His sake, 
dying zealously, O valiant martyrs; and even after your repose ye pour forth divine 
gifts upon all who are in divers infirmities, healing many of afflictions, of whom I am 
the first, wretch that I am. For I ail in body and soul because of cruel wounds, 
wherefore with faith I cry out to you: Heal me, for ye are divine physicians.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: By an angel didst Thou refresh the Children in the furnace * 
transforming the roaring flames to dew. * O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Thy saints Cyrus and John, O Lord, as lovers of the glory of heaven, forsook 
transitory and corruptible glory.  
Giving up their bodies as a reasonable sacrifice and shedding their blood for Thee, 
their God, in worship, O Jesus, Thy passion-bearers were wholly consumed.  
Awesome is the company of the martyrs, for even after their death they drive away 
evil spirits and impart healing to the infirm.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: Immaculately didst thou give birth to the Cause of all, Who in His 
surpassing goodness became a man; wherefore, we bless thee together, O pure one.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Begotten of the Father before time began, * and incarnate of His 
Mother in the latter days, * O ye priests hymn, and Ye people * supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Repelled by idolatrous sacrifices, O valiant martyrs, ye offered yourselves as 
spiritual sacrifices on the altar of heaven.  
Performing mystical services, ye offered up the severing of your members as 
acceptable sacrifices unto Him Whose body and blood are offered up on altar and in 
the chalice.  
Having eluded him who caused our first mother to fall, ye embraced the Torrent 
of sustenance and tasted of the divine Tree, O virgins, having adorned yourselves 
with sufferings.  
Theotokion: The prophecies of the prophets received their divine fulfillment in 
thee, O most holy one, and they impel the whole world to hymn thee as is meet, O 
pure one.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: We magnify thee O Mother of God, * and We glorify thee, O Virgin 
Theotokos, * for thou hast borne Christ the Savior of our souls. 
Cyrus and John, the warriors of Christ and physicians of the ailing, having received 
the grace of miracles from God, heal us all.  
Standing forth, the invincible Cyrus and John utterly dispel the passions of the soul 
by faith and the power of Christ.  
O God our Creator, Whom Cyrus and John professed of old, have pity on all who 
celebrate the memory of their martyrdom.  
Theotokion: Let us all divinely honor the Mother of our God; because for her sake 
we who hymn her have been deemed worthy of heavenly honor.  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”:  
O wonder-working luminaries Cyrus and John, having received from the Lord the 
grace of healings, cure ye the infirmities of our souls and bodies.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Thou wast the cause of the good things given by God to the world, O Theotokos. 
Entreat God, Who is easily reconciled, for the salvation of us all.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
With hymns of proper laudation, O ye faithful, let us magnify Cyrus and John, 
who in spirit were as of one blood and in the flesh were of brotherly mind, praising 
with them the valiant Athanasia and her offspring, Theodote, Eudoxia and 
Theoctiste, the ever-virginal spiritual athletes, who entreat Christ on behalf of our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of mankind, 
crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What is this, O my 
Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou 
hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** I 
marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the holy unmercinaries: 
Thou didst hone Thy saints with faith, O Christ, forging them with hope, and 
enflaming them with love; and with tridents Thou didst weave for them a three-
stranded wreath.  
Valiantly did ye withstand the ungodly tyrants O invincible martyrs, passing 
unharmed over the snares of deception; for, having been armed by Christ, ye rejoice 
with Him.  
Like divinely erected pillars and firm foundations the martyrs ye were planted 
upon the rock of the ascent of Faith, having drunk the water of immortality from the 
Rock that is the chalice of Christ.  
Theotokion: Thou didst become the dwelling-place of the Spirit, having received 
the Fullness of the Godhead in the Son, and given birth to the Savior, Lord and 
Redeemer of our race.  
Troparion of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone V: 
O Christ God Who hast given us the miracles * of Thy holy martyrs as an 
invincible rampart, * through their supplications set at naught the counsels of the 
heathen * and strengthen right believing rulers, * in that Thou alone art good ** and 
the Lover of mankind.  
Kontakion of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone III: 
Receiving the gift of miracles from divine grace, O saints, * ye work wonders 
unceasingly, * cutting down all our passions with invisible skill, * O divinely wise 
Cyrus and glorious John; ** for ye are divine physicians.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §153 (I COR. 12:27-13:8)  
Brethren: Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And God hath set 
some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that 
miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. Are all 
apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles? Have all the 
gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? But covet earnestly the 
best gifts: and yet shew I unto you a more excellent way. Though I speak with the 
tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, 

--- PAGE 9 ---
or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all 
mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove 
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to 
feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it 
profiteth me nothing. Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity 
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her 
own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth 
in the truth; Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all 
things. Charity never faileth.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Behold now, what is so good or so joyous as for brethren 
to dwell together in unity?  
Verse: For there the Lord commanded the blessing, life for evermore.  
 
GOSPEL ACC. TO MATTHEW, §34 FROM THE MIDPOINT (10: 1, 5-8)  
At that time, when Jesus had called unto Him His twelve disciples, He gave them 
power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and 
all manner of disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying: 
“Go not into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter not; 
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying: 
‘The kingdom of heaven is at hand!’ Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, 
cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.”  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
 
