--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 21st DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR JULIAN OF TARSUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Perceiving thee, * O blessed martyr Julian, * as a brilliant sun * illumining the 
fullness of the world * with noetic splendors, * we celebrate thy radiant and divine 
memory, * and bow down * before the shrine of thy relics, ** drawing forth health 
for our souls.  
Beaten, wounded and grievously scourged, * imprisoned in a dungeon, O blessed 
one, * driven from place to place, * caged with wild beasts, * brought unto the abyss * 
and drowned in the sea, * thou didst receive a blessed end, * refusing to deny the 
Master of all, ** O most noetically rich glory of the martyrs.  
Cast up upon dry land * out of the bosom of the sea * by the action of the Spirit, * 
thou wast seen by an honorable woman, * who faithfully took thee up, O martyr 
Julian, * and committed to burial * thine immaculate and much-suffering body, * 
which had vanquished the tyranny of the devil ** through the workings of grace.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Having drawn forth the inexhaustible drink of the immaculate Faith, O blessed 
one, thou didst extinguish the worship of idols, victoriously passing through the 
contest, made luminous with dew, and shining like a never-waning star of Christ, the 
ever-shining Sun; Emitting rays of martyrdom in each city, thou didst receive a 
blessed end in the sea, and didst come before the face of Christ as a crown-bearer. 
Him do thou beseech, O most glorious Julian, that He save those who celebrate thy 
memory with faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: When, of old, the unblemished ewe-lamb and immaculate 
Sovereign Lady, * beheld her Lamb * upon the tree of the Cross, * she exclaimed 
maternally, and marveling cried aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new 
and most strange sight I see? * How hath the thankless synagogue * betrayed Thee to 
the judgment-seat of Pilate * and condemned Thee to death, * Who art the Life of 
all? * Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, ** O Word!”  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, and Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Come, ye who love the martyrs, let us piously glorify the glorious Julian, the 
spiritual athlete of Christ, the compatriot of Paul, who was shown to be his fellow 
mystagogue, and who likewise finished the race; for, entering the water, he crushed 
the head of the serpent with the aquatic beasts, sanctifying the earth with his blood 
and the sea by his passage, passing from things here to the eternal mansions, and 
receiving honor for his struggles from the hand of the Almighty; and he asketh 
cleansing for our souls and great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Standing with the virginal disciple before the Tree * during the 
crucifixion, * the Virgin cried out, weeping: * “Woe is me! * How is it that Thou dost 
suffer, O Christ, ** since Thou art the dispassion of all?”  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Julian O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos; and this canon of the holy martyr, the acrostic 
whereof is: “With hymns I crown the martyr Julian”, the composition of John the 
Monk, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
Let Thy glorious spiritual athlete and his most honored memory be praised with 
sacred hymns, for he hath been glorified with unapproachable glory.  
Waging the contest of martyrdom in the weakness of thy flesh even unto the 
shedding of thy blood, thou didst not fall through stumbling, O warrior of Christ.  
Thou wast adorned with the wounds of martyrdom, shining with luster greater 
than that of gold and precious stones, O holy one.  
Theotokion: O pure Theotokos, we hymn thee who hast given birth to the 
incarnate Word, eternal and supremely divine, in a manner transcending nature.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
“I have not been commanded to worship stones wrought by men’s hands, as 
though they were God!” Julian replied to the insane judge.  
Thou didst stand before the tribunal of the tyrant, O martyr Julian, as though 
standing before Christ, the Judge of the living and the dead.  
“I have not been foolish in confessing God Who alone is hymned in the indivisible 
Trinity!” said Julian.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, grant us help through thy supplications, turning 
back the assaults of grievous circumstances.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
In a flood of waters thou didst receive thy blessed end, O wise one, drowning the 
multifarious serpent therein, and thereby obtaining victory. Wherefore, celebrating 
thy right laudable memory with love, we pray: Entreat Christ on our behalf.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Do thou guide to the path of repentance, * us who have ever wandered away into 
the trackless wastes of evil * and have angered the supremely good Lord, * O blessed 
Mary who knewest not wedlock, ** thou refuge of despairing men and dwelling-place 
of God.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O Christ, 
Thine all-immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the 
Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, wherewith Thou hast 
saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Julian surrendered his body to multifarious wounds without sensing pain, for it 
was preserved by the love of Christ.  
Desiring the purple cloak of heaven, O most glorious Julian, as a favorite of Christ 
thou didst leave thine earthly cloak to the persecutors.  
O most noetically rich martyr, it was not the power of thy body but thine 
invincible desire for the sufferings of Christ which made thee a victor over the 
deception of the demons.  
Theotokion: In that Thou art sinless, O God, grant us cleansing of our ignorant 
deeds and grant peace to the world, through the supplications of her who gave birth 
to Thee.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Emulating the Master in all things, O all-famed one, thou didst stand, condemned, 
before the tribunal of the iniquitous.  
Struggling lawfully, like an innocent lamb thou wast slaughtered for the Master by 
the hands of the iniquitous, O blessed one.  
Thou didst reckon neither family nor earthly rank higher than thy Christianity, O 
glorious martyr.  
Theotokion: O Mary Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, render moot the 
hopes of the enemy, and gladden those who hymn thee.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Thy glorious favorite was not ashamed of Thee Who wast nailed to the Tree, O 
Christ, but cherished Thee as a treasury of glory. 
The divine mysteries of the martyrs of Christ have been revealed by divinely 
eloquent tongues, but they have not spoken vile deceptions.  
O glorious spiritual athlete of Christ, ask healing of all passions and the 
forgiveness of sins for those who hymn thee.  
Theotokion: Be thou our entreaty to our Savior and thine, O most pure one, for 
thou art the boast and help of our race.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “The grave and mortality ...”: 
As is meet, let us all praise Julian today, * the invincible warrior of piety, * the true 
counselor and soldier of the Truth, * and let us cry aloud unto him: ** Entreat Christ 
God on behalf of us all!  
Ikos: Thou didst tread the path of the Lord from childhood, O thrice-blessed one, 
and piously desired to bear witness to Him. Eagerly taking the cross upon thy 
shoulder, O divinely wise Julian, thou didst destroy the grievous delusion of the 
madness of idolatry, demolishing the temples of the enemy, his wiles and snares. 
Wherefore, with faith we hasten to thy protection, O most noetically rich martyr, 
crying aloud: Entreat Christ God on behalf of us all!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Thy praiseworthy and glorious memory, O warrior of Christ, causeth sweet-
smelling myrrh to fall upon those who chant unceasingly: Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
our God, throughout the ages!  
Ineffable glory crowneth those who are assembled to praise thee, O warrior of 
Christ, and who chant unceasingly: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout 
the ages!  
Refusing to obey the edict of the tyrant, thou didst not worship a created thing, O 
invincible one, but didst cry aloud to the living God alone: Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
our God, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: He who dwelt within the most immaculate Virgin annulled the curse 
of Eve, pouring forth a well-spring of blessings upon those who cry: Blessed is the 
Fruit of thy womb, O Sovereign Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The instruments of music sounded out in harmony, * and countless 
multitudes worshipped the image in Dura; * but the three Children, refusing 
to bow in obeisance, * hymn and glorify the Lord throughout all ages. 
The deceiver flattered thee and sought to draw thee into falsehood by torments, O 
Julian, but thou didst cry aloud: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
Mightier than a lion, thou didst set the tyrant at naught during thy tortures, O 
Julian, crying out in gladness: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
The cruelty of the fire could not separate thee, nor the keen edge of the sword cut 
thee off from God the Creator; and thou didst cry out, exclaiming: Hymn the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Chanting as is meet, we, the faithful, cry out “Rejoice!” unto thee who 
hast given birth to the Lord of all, O Mary, who didst remain a virgin even after 
giving birth; and we supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: O ye people, with glory let us honor the pure Theotokos, * who 
received the fire of the Divinity in her womb * yet remained unconsumed, * let 
us magnify her with hymns.  
O warrior of God, thou didst cast down the haughty eye of the incorporeal 
deceiver, having struggled manfully in the flesh, ever magnifying Christ.  
Cast into the depths of the sea, thou didst elude the nest of the serpent, the enemy, 
the author of evil, O wise and blessed one; wherefore, we bless thee with hymns.  
As thou didst struggle well in sufferings for the Master, thou hast been crowned 
with beauty by the right hand of the Master; wherefore, we bless thee as is meet.  
Theotokion: O pure one, in the bush on the mountain Moses beheld thee who 
received the unbearable fire of the Godhead without being consumed. Wherefore, we 
all magnify thee.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyr: Spec. Mel.:  
Like the radiant sun thou dost guide all creation with the beams of miracles, O 
most glorious passion-bearer; wherefore, celebrating thy memory, we ask that we all 
be delivered from misfortunes.  
Theotokion: Amid battles make thine inheritance steadfast, O Word, granting 
victories over barbarians unto kings, through the supplications of the Theotokos, 
whom Thou hast given unto Christians as a helper.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Julian O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II:  
As is meet, let us all praise Julian today, * the invincible warrior of piety, * the true 
counselor and soldier of the Truth, * and let us cry aloud unto him: ** Entreat Christ 
God on behalf of us all!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, § 233 (EPH. 6: 10-17)  
Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 106 (LK. 21: 12-18)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “Beware of men: they shall lay their hands on you, 
and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being 
brought before kings and rulers for My name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a 
testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall 

--- PAGE 8 ---
answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not 
be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, 
and kinfolks, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye 
shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake. But there shall not an hair of your head 
perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
