--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 23rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR AGRIPPINA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Rome putteth thee forward * as a blossoming rose of sweet fragrance, * perfuming 
the thoughts of the faithful * with the scent of the virtues, * ever dispelling the stench 
of the passions by grace, * O much-suffering Agrippina, * adornment of the martyrs, 
* confirmation of the Church, * boast of virgins ** and abyss of miracles.  
Christ our God hath given unto Sicily, * thee, who suffered in Rome, * as riches 
beyond measure; * and having arrived there, O glorious martyr, * thou didst drive 
away evil multitudes of demons * by thine intercession. * Wherefore, we bless thee * 
and celebrate thy suffering today, ** O much-suffering Agrippina.  
Bassa and Paula bore thee on their shoulders * at the command of Him Who up-
holdeth all things, * moving thee from place to place * and making a long journey 
over the deep, * working awesome miracles through divine grace, * O martyr 
Agrippina, * and having come to rest in the place * which God had appointed, ** 
thou didst become a place of rest for the heavy-laden, O all-praised one.  
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
Rejoice, O beam of solar brilliance, throne of the never-setting Sun, * who shone 
forth the true Sun! * Rejoice, mind radiant with divine splendors, * flash of lightning * 
illumining the ends of the earth, * true luster of gold, * most comely and all-
immaculate one, * who hast shone forth upon the faithful ** the Light which waneth 
not.  
Take away the defilement of my passion-plagued heart, * O all-hymned 
Theotokos, * and all the wounds and corruption thereof, * which come from sin, * do 
thou wash away, O pure one; * steady the wavering of my mind, * that I, thy 
wretched and unprofitable servant, * may magnify thy power ** and great assistance.  
O most immaculate Virgin Mother, * transform the weakness and impotence of 
my soul * into might and power, * that with fear and love * I may do and observe the 
statutes of Christ, * and may escape the unbearable fire * and receive through thee * 
the inheritance of heaven and unsurpassed life, ** ever rejoicing.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
Have compassion upon me, O Sovereign-Lady, * who am brought low by the 
assaults of the demons, * and have been cast down into the pit of destruction; * and 
set me firmly upon the rock of the virtues, * subduing the attacks of the enemy. * 
Vouchsafe that I may obey the commandments * of thy Son and our God, * that I 
may receive forgiveness ** on the Day of Judgment.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of mankind, 
crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What is this, O my 
Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou 
hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** I 
marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Agrippina, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
The Canon of the holy martyr, with the acrostic: “I praise Agrippina, the bride of 
Christ”, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
With the effulgence of the grace which illumined thee from on high, drive away 
the gloom of mine ignorance, O martyr Agrippina, and by thy supplications grant me 
the grace to hymn thy wonders.  
In the firmament of the Church of Christ thou hast truly shone forth more 
brightly than the sun, enlightening the ends of the earth with the beams of thy 
struggles and miracles.  
Desiring the immortal Bridegroom, the Bestower of life, thou didst offer Him 
suffering as a gift, and thereby received the heavenly kingdom and an incorruptible 
crown, O glorious martyr.  
Guided by the hand of thy Master, thou didst sail over the turbulent sea of 
ungodliness, O honored one; arriving at the harbor of heavenly radiance, O Agrippina 
blessed of God.  
Theotokion: The Morning-star hath shone forth in the hearts of those who with 
faith honor thee, O most immaculate Mother of God; and Christ, the radiant Day 
Who shone forth from thy womb, hath dawned, O all-hymned one.  
ODE III  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
Beaten with staves, thou didst rejoice, thereby shattering the bones of ungodliness, 
and crying aloud: “Naught shall separate me from Thy love, O Christ!”  
Thou wast stripped of thy garments, O martyr, but denounced the nakedness of 
the enemy; wherefore, Christ hath given unto thee a vesture of incorruption.  
The mouths which iniquitously spake against thee were rightly stopped, O martyr 
of Christ, when thou didst proclaim the mighty works of the Savior.  
In vain did the servant of ungodliness have thy body stretched out upon the 
ground, for thou didst have thy mind stretched forth unto the Master.  
Theotokion: The words piously uttered by Isaiah have been fulfilled, for the Virgin 
hath given birth in the flesh to the Bestower of life and the Savior of our souls.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Those who, being greatly deceived, worshiped stones, weighed down with stones, 
thee who confessed Christ, the invincible Rock; wherefore, when thou didst repose, 

--- PAGE 4 ---
O glorious Agrippina, thou didst emit the radiance of most glorious miracles, 
enlightening the souls of us who praise thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O Bride of God who alone hast given birth unto the Creator of all, adorning 
mankind by thy birthgiving, deliver me from the snares of the alien one, and set me 
upon the rock of Christ’s will, earnestly entreating Him to Whom thou gavest flesh.  
Stavrotheotokion: When Thy most pure Mother beheld Thee uplifted upon the 
Cross, O Word of God she exclaimed, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and 
strange wonder, O my Son? How is it that Thou, the Life of all, dost taste of death 
desiring to bring life to the dead, in that Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
By an angel He Who doeth the will of those who fear Him released thee from 
bonds and imprisonment, O martyr, who destroyed all ungodliness with the bond of 
the love of Christ, thy Bridegroom.  
Having died for the love of Him Who hath slain all the might of death, thou dost 
pour forth the grace of everlasting life healing those slain by the passions, O 
Agrippina, adornment of the martyrs of Christ.  
Having surpassed all carnal love with the love of thy Bridegroom, thou wast 
steadfastly patient when painfully beaten, crying aloud: “The threat of tortures shall 
not separate me from Thy love, O Christ!”  
Who can describe the courage of Bassa and the chaste Agrippina, who suffered in 
their desire for a blessed union with the Trinity? Through them the might of the idols 
was mightily shown to be enfeebled.  
Theotokion: The Virgin Queen, adorned with golden vesture, now standeth before 
the King, her Son, indisputably surpassing the glory of the angels, who cry: Glory to 
Thy power, O Christ!  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
The never-waning light which dwelt within thy body revealed thee to those who 
looked upon thee, emitting the radiance of miracles night and day.  
Following the steps of the Shepherd, the unblemished ewe-lamb divinely offered 
herself unto Him as an immaculate sacrifice.  
Possessed of a splendid intelligence and full of prophecy, O glorious Bassa, in the 
present thou wast deemed worthy to speak of the things of the future.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: Heal thou the affliction of my soul, O Mother of God who hast given 
birth to the supremely good Word Who blesseth all.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Receiving the body of the holy martyr like a never-setting sun which shone forth 
from Rome, Sicily is delivered from the cruelty of the demons’ darkness.  
The thrice-rich holy martyrs, who in the expectation of martyrdom died before 
death, valiantly bore thy life-bearing dead body away.  
The weaponry of the enemy was of no effect against thee, for with the labor of thy 
glorious struggles, O Agrippina, thou didst cast down his pride like a city which 
lacketh a foundation.  
A woman with an issue of blood was healed by touching thy body, and lepers who 
approached thee with faith were cleansed; and every other ailment fleeth when thy 
holy name is invoked, O martyr.  
Theotokion: Now accepting the words of Gabriel, O all-immaculate Virgin, we cry 
aloud: O only blessed Mother, O portal of the Sun of righteousness, Rejoice!  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
The radiant day of thy splendid struggles hath dawned, * whereon the divine 
Church, honoring them, * doth call all together with gladness to cry out to thee: * 
Rejoice, O virgin and martyr, ** most honored Agrippina!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
Like a golden dove protected by the sword of the Cross, thou didst destroy the 
Moslems who drew nigh unto thy city at night, and thus saved the faithful from a vile 
death at their hands, O martyr.  
Enduring multifarious tortures for the sake of Christ, O martyr, thou didst find 
delight therein, devoid of pain and death, crying aloud: O supremely hymned Lord 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The wondrous priest, beholding thy wonders resplendent with miracles, magnified 
God, O Agrippina, and chanted in gladness: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Bearing thy body up firmly against the passions with steadfast intent, O virgin, 
thou didst never experience womanly weakness, crying out to the Master: O Lord 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: Thou remainest a virgin even after giving birth, O thou who hast 
given birth unto God, and as a mother didst nourish Him Who sustaineth the world, 
O most immaculate one. To Him do we cry, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Night was seen to be like day by those who bore thy relics, O martyr. The place 
which received thee wast filled with all manner of sweet fragrance. The hordes of the 
demons were driven far away. And drops of healing have poured forth upon those 
who supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages.  
Desiring the immortal Bridegroom, thou didst follow in His sweet footsteps, 
emulating His sufferings and death, O glorious martyr, and crying aloud: Hymn the 
Lord, O ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Possessed of unwavering faith, and lighting thy lamp with the oil of thy blood, O 
martyr, thou didst enter into the bridal-chamber, chanting hymns of heavenly joy: 
Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Desiring to behold the beauty of the Lord and to visit His temple, ascending on 
the chariot of thy blood thou didst reach Him, chanting: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: The bush, which of old prefigured the strange mystery of thy 
birthgiving, remained unburnt, O most immaculate one; for thou hast given birth to 
the Fire of the Godhead, yet remained unconsumed, O Maiden. Wherefore, we hymn 
thee throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
At the behest of Him Who createth all things, Agathonica, Bassa and Paula eagerly 
hastened to the goal of martyrdom, and as a company they have truly attained their 
uttermost desire.  
Dwelling in the mansions of heaven, O virgin, gazing upon the beauties of things 
invisible, and receiving the effulgence of God, illumine those who hymn thee. 
 A wreath of grace hath been placed upon thy brow, O Agrippina, for thou didst 
finish the race and keep the faith intact, and the ranks of the righteous have received 
thee in beauty.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
As thou standest with boldness before the Creator and Master, O martyr 
Agrippina, with all the saints from ages past ask thou forgiveness of sins for those 
who hymn thee, O good virgin. 
 Theotokion: O Virgin Mary, who as a mother didst bear in thine arms Him Who 
sustaineth all things: Deliver me from the hands of the adversary, that, saved, I may 
praise thy mighty works.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Agrippina, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
The radiant day of thy splendid struggles hath dawned, * whereon the divine 
Church, honoring them, * doth call all together with gladness to cry out to thee: * 
Rejoice, O virgin and martyr, ** most honored Agrippina!  
 
 
