--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF THE APPEARANCE OF THE TIKHVIN ICON OF OUR MOST 
HOLY SOVEREIGN LADY, THE THEOTOKOS & EVER-VIRGIN MARY  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the icon, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
The hosts of heaven rejoice * in thy most glorious benefactions, O Mother of 
God, * and, calling mortals to spiritual gladness, * they show salvation unto this 
world, * and steadfast defense and protection * to all the Russian land. (Twice)  
Moved to compunction and joy * by thy most glorious manifestation, O Sovereign 
Lady, * the people kiss thy most pure image * as a treasury of miracles * which 
illumineth the faithful with the grace of God, ** delivering from misfortunes those 
who have recourse to it with love.  
O ye faithful, let us rejoice spiritually today * with the most glorious ranks of the 
angels, * splendidly celebrating the most radiant solemnity of the Mother of God; * 
for her most pure image hath appeared * like an ever-flowing wellspring, ** ever 
pouring forth abundant gifts of healing upon the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Strange and ineffable is the wonder of the appearance of thine image, O Sovereign 
Lady! It amazeth the inhabitants of heaven and moveth those on earth to awe, 
illumining them with the radiant grace of Christ our God Who was born of thee, and 
thine own grace as well. Him do thou entreat, O pure one, on thy divine festival, that 
He grant us enlightenment and great mercy.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the icon, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
O all-immaculate Virgin, * what thanks can we offer thee? * For by the radiant 
manifestation of the most pure icon * of thee and the Babe Who was born of thee ** 
thou hast made steadfast the hearts of the faithful.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
O most holy Sovereign Lady, * do not forget us, thy servants, * who bow down 
before thy wonder-working icon * and piously chant unto thee: ** deliver us, O Lady, 
from all misfortunes and temptations.  
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation.  
O all-hymned Mother, * take pity on our entreaty; * for we are the inheritance of 
thee and thy Son. * Save and have mercy upon us all, ** that we may all unceasingly 
magnify thee. 
  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody:  
Thy monastery, O Bride of God, * hath been revealed to be a calm haven for all 
who * have recourse to it with faith; * for it hath within its walls thine all-precious 
icon, ** which imparteth grace in abundance unto all.  
Troparion of the appearance of the icon, in Tone IV: 
Today thy most precious icon hath shone forth upon us in the air * like the most 
radiant sun O Lady, * illumining the world with rays of mercy; * and Russia, 
reverently receiving it from on high as a gift of God, * doth glorify thee O Mother of 
God as the Sovereign Lady of all, * joyously magnifying Christ our God Who was 
born of thee. * Him do thou entreat, O Lady, Queen and Theotokos, * that He 
preserve all cities and lands where Orthodox Christians dwell, * unharmed by all the 
assaults of the enemy, * saving those who with faith worship before the all-honored 
image of Him and thee, ** O Virgin who knewest not wedlock.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the icon: 4 in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “With what wreaths of praise ...”:  
With what pure lips * shall we bless the Theotokos, * who is more honorable than 
the cherubim, * more holy than the seraphim, * and more glorious than the angels 
and all the saints, * the immovable throne of the King, * the house wherein the Most 
High * hath made His abode, * the salvation of the world, * the sanctification of God, 
* who on her godly festival * doth richly impart great mercy ** unto the faithful?  
What spiritual songs * shall we now offer unto thee, O all-pure one? * For by the 
most wondrous transit * of thy most precious icon * thou hast sanctified the world; * 
by its wondrous appearance * thou hast amazed the whole Russian land; * and by its 
radiant arrival * thou hast illumined the desolate and trackless place * where thou dost 
now abide in thy divine icon, * unceasingly imparting great mercy upon the world ** 
through thine omnipotent intercession.  
What cries of compunction * did they offer unto thee, O Theotokos, * when the 
pious people beheld thy radiant icon * miraculously suspended in the air, * shining 
with beams of splendor? * With lamentation they prayed, * weeping and crying aloud: 
* “Come thou to us, O Queen! Come down, O Lady! * Send down the compassions 
of thy love for mankind! * Visit us from on high! With thy radiant coming illumine 
those who are in darkness, * and remain with us throughout the ages, ** richly 
imparting great mercy upon the world!”  
What shall we offer unto thee, O most holy Virgin, * for thy great goodness and 
love for mankind? * For most gloriously hast thou sent down * through the air, upon 
the land of Russia, * thy divine gift, thy greatly wondrous icon, * O pure divine 
Maiden; * and by the grace of God, * through the miracles which proceed therefrom, 
* we are delivered from misfortunes, * receiving an abundance * of healing of every 
illness of both our souls and bodies, ** unceasingly drawing forth great mercy.  
And 4 Stichera in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Rejoice, O pure Theotokos, our hope! Rejoice, thou who received joy from the 
angel! Rejoice, thou who hast given birth to the Effulgence of the Father! Rejoice, O 
blessed, pure and most holy Virgin, who alone art all-hymned! Rejoice, speedy helper 
and fervent aid of Christians amid tribulations! Rejoice, exalted boast and most high 
glory of Orthodoxy, who hast given birth to the good Shepherd Who, having sought 
us who were lost, hath loosed us who were bound with the bonds of sin, and granted 
the world great mercy! (Twice)  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Rejoice, O most holy Virgin, mediatress of our salvation! Thou hast poured forth 
joy and blessing upon all, having given birth in the flesh without seed to the Well-
spring of good things, Who is more comely in beauty than all the children of 
mankind: Jesus, the Redeemer of all the world, Whom thou didst bear upon thy most 
pure arm. And now gazing upon Him lovingly in the most precious image, we 
beseech Him and thee to radiantly come unto us and heal our bodily infirmities and 
save our souls.  
Rejoice today, O Christ-loving land of Russia, for the glory of the Lord hath shone 
forth upon thee in the most glorious appearance of the icon of the Mother of God! 
For, in accordance with the providence of God, it hath come to thee wondrously and 
in splendor upon the air. Dance now and be glad, O Novgorod the Great, for thou 
hast received within the boundaries of thy dominion her who emitteth divine radiance 
from on high, pouring forth the grace of miracles. Adorn thyself and keep splendid 
festival, O most honored monastery of the Mother of God, for thy comeliness hath 
been most beautifully made clear; for thou hast within thyself the great treasure of the 
whole world, the miraculous icon of the Sovereign Lady, which having arrived most 
gloriously upon the air, granteth great mercy to all the faithful.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
Today the multitudes of the faithful rejoice; for thy divine icon hath appeared on 
the air, O Sovereign Lady, like a sun of surpassing radiance, shining with great light, 
and, emitting rays of mercy in all directions, illumining all the faithful. Joining chorus, 
the angels minister unto thee today, and honoring thee, they have invisibly 
transported thine icon from place to place, O Mother of God; and when they had 
borne it to the place chosen by God, they reverently set it down with due 
glorification. But what shall we, who are clay, offer thee? And what fitting praise can 
we make for thine arrival? We are at a loss and marvel, magnifying the tender 
compassion which thou hast shown us. But earnestly entreat thy Son and our God, O 
most holy one, that He grant victory over all heresies to our Orthodox bishops, peace 
to the world, and great mercy to our souls.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM GENESIS  
Jacob went forth from the well of the oath, and departed into Haran. And he came 
to a certain place, and slept there, for the sun had gone down; and he took one of the 
stones of the place, and put it at his head, and lay down to sleep in that place, and 
dreamed: and behold a ladder fixed on the earth, whose top reached to heaven, and 
the angels of God ascended and descended on it. And the Lord stood upon it, and 
said: “I am the God of thy father Abraham, and the God of Isaac. Fear not; the land 
on which thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And thy seed shall be like 

--- PAGE 5 ---
the sand of the earth; and it shall spread abroad to the sea, and the south, and the 
north, and the east; and in thee and in thy seed shall all tribes of the earth be blessed. 
And behold I am with thee to preserve thee continually in all the way wherein thou 
shalt go; and I will bring thee back to this land; for I will not desert thee, until I have 
done all that I have said to thee.” And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said: “The 
Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.” And he was afraid, and sad: “How fearful is 
this place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!”  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF EZEKIEL  
Thus saith the Lord: “It shall come to pass from the eighth day and onward, that 
the priests shall offer your wholeburnt-offerings on the altar, and your peace-
offerings; and I will accept you,” saith the Lord. Then He brought me back by the 
way of the outer gate of the sanctuary that faceth eastward; and it was shut. And the 
Lord said to me: “This gate shall be shut; it shall not be opened, and no one shall pass 
through it; for the Lord God of Israel shall enter by it, and it shall be shut. For the 
Prince, He shall sit in it, to eat bread before the Lord; He shall go in by the way of the 
porch of the gate, and shall go forth by the way of the same.” And He brought me in 
by the way of the gate that faceth northward, in front of the house: and I looked, and, 
behold! the house was full of the glory of the Lord.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
Wisdom hath built a house for herself and set up seven pillars. She hath killed her 
beasts; she hath mingled her wine in a bowl and prepared her table. She hath sent 
forth her servants, calling with a loud proclamation to the feast, saying: “Whoso is 
foolish, let him turn aside to me.” And to those who want understanding, she saith: 
“Come, eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you. Leave folly, 
that ye may reign forever; and seek wisdom, and improve understanding by knowl-
edge.” He that reproveth evil men shall get dishonor to himself; and he that rebuketh 
an ungodly man shall disgrace himself. Rebuke not evil men, lest they should hate 
thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. Give an opportunity to a wise man, 
and he will be wiser: instruct a just man, and he will receive more instruction. The 
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the counsel of the law is the 
character of a sound mind. For in this way thou shalt live long, and years of thy life 
shall be added to thee.  
On the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera of the icon:  
In Tone III: Come, all ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us bless the 
wondrous appearance of the icon of the Mother of God; for it hath most gloriously 
shone forth in a godly manner, and the world hath thereby been enlightened by its 

--- PAGE 6 ---
holy manifestation. Wherefore, with mouth and heart, with hymns and spiritual 
songs, let us radiantly celebrate this holy day with all who have come hither.  
In Tone VIII: When thine icon was first painted by the proclaimer of the mysteries 
of the Gospel, and was brought to thee, for thee to take and impart to it the power to 
save those who honor thee, thou didst rejoice, in that thou art the merciful 
collaborator in our salvation, and having discoursed concerning the icon, thou didst 
chant the hymn: “Behold, now all generations shall call me blessed!” as once thou 
didst when conceiving God in thy womb, and gazing upon the icon thou didst say 
with authority: “My grace and power is with this image!” And we truly believe what 
thou didst say, O Sovereign Lady, that in this image thou art with us. Wherefore, 
standing before it with reverence, we thy servants bow down before thee. Visit us 
with thy maternal compassions.  
Who can confess the great depth of thy miracles as is meet, O pure one? For in thy 
loving visitation the wilderness hath received thy miraculous icon from on high. Then 
a pious man beheld thee in splendor, conversing with the holy hierarch Nicholas, and, 
unable to bear thine ineffable radiance, he fell upon the ground, bereft of sight until 
that wondrous hierarch raised him up, dispelling his fear with kindness. And thou, O 
pure one, illumining him with the light of thy mercy, didst command that it was thy 
good pleasure that a cross be erected, to the benefit and salvation of the faithful.  
In Tone IV: Let the clouds drop forth sweetness, and let all the earth rejoice in 
gladness for thine ineffable mercy, O most pure one. For a wondrous miracle is seen, 
O Sovereign Lady: what before was a wilderness bereft of any splendor and known 
and traversed by no one, is now, by thy visitation, O Mother of God, shown to be a 
monastery all adorned like a city, and an ever-splendid church, wherein a divine 
treasure, thy wondrous icon, is shown forth. And we, gazing upon its magnificence 
and falling prostrate with fervor, kiss it with joy and fear: fear, for we are unworthy 
because of our sins; and joy, because of the mercy which thou impartest to us, thy 
servants, in that thou art full of tender compassion.  
O good Sovereign Lady, mighty helper of the world: make mighty our Orthodox 
hierarchs against heresies and schisms, as once God did the meek David; and as of 
old thou didst save the Imperial City from the assaults of aliens, so now save this land 
from the attacks of the adversaries, and preserve it from all the incursions of the foe. 
For with God thou, O Bride of God, art the protection and salvation of all the 
faithful.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
The land of Russia rejoiceth today with the hosts in heaven, having been enriched 
from on high with the icon of the Mother of God, it crieth aloud, summoning the 
Christ-loving flock: Come, ye faithful, and adorn yourselves with light for the festival 
of the Theotokos! Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, and be glad on the 
wondrous feast of the Sovereign Lady of all! Behold the divine treasure which abun-

--- PAGE 7 ---
dantly imparteth gifts of miracles to all! What, then, shall we render unto the Lord 
Who hath shown us His love for mankind in giving us the image of Him and her who 
hath given birth to Him, Who hath sent it down upon us as a heavenly gift, and 
illumined the faithful? Wherefore, delighting in His great loving-kindness, let us 
joyfully send up cries of thanksgiving, chanting with gladness unto her who bore 
Him: Glory, O Lady, unto Christ our God Who was incarnate of thee, and hath 
deemed us worthy of such grace!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the icon, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
When Moses beheld the bush burning without being consumed, which prefigured 
thy most pure womb, wherein the divine Fire made its abode, O Virgin, he was seized 
with fear, marveling at the mystery; so also, O Sovereign Lady, when thy people 
beheld thy most pure image, which, by the good pleasure of Him Who was incarnate 
of thee, remained unconsumed by the material fire through the immaterial power of 
God, and with grace shone more brightly than the sun, illumining the hearts of the 
faithful, they cried out to thy Son with joy: Glory to Thy tender compassion, O Lover 
of mankind!  
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation.  
When amid horror and trembling, stones buried the builders of thy temple, O 
Lady, the people were pierced with sorrow, convinced that they were dead; but, O 
most glorious wonder! as of old the Word of God and God of all, Whose will it was 
to be incarnate of thee, O most hymned one, preserved Jonah unharmed for three 
days in the belly of the whale, so did He work a miracle through thine intercession: 
for though they were buried for three days, thou didst preserve them alive and 
unhurt, teaching all to chant with joy: Glory to the magnitude of the love for mankind 
and the compassions of Him Who hath glorified thee who hast seedlessly given birth!  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
When, with great sorrow, the people wished to take up the remains of those 
builders who had been buried under the stones for a space of three days, O thou who 
art full of grace, then, as thy Son and God wished to glorify yet more thine 
intercession for the holy monastery, they discovered them to be alive and unharmed, 
through thy protection. Wherefore, filled with gladness, they all glorified thee, their 
kind Sovereign Lady, and Him Who was born of thee, crying aloud with joy: Glory to 
Thy compassion, O Lover of mankind!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
Come, all ye faithful, and let us make haste to the church of the Mother of God; 
for, lo! her most precious icon shineth therein like a beacon of piety, illumining with 
the grace of God all the assemblies of those who love the feasts of the Church; and 

--- PAGE 8 ---
driving away the darkness of the gloom of sin, it worketh most wondrous miracles for 
those who have recourse to it, expelling evil spirits, granting strength against heresies 
to the Orthodox hierarchs, and having been revealed to be a rampart and bulwark for 
all the earth, it maketh her monastery steadfast by her mighty aid, and glorified in its 
most glorious victories over the enemy, it calleth all the faithful to keep festival, 
teaching them to cry aloud with joy unto the Mother of God: O Theotokos, thou, 
with God, art our might and confirmation, our hope and salvation, and we pray to 
thee: entreat thy Son and our God, that He deliver us from torment on the day of 
judgment, and deem us worthy of His heavenly kingdom.  
Troparion of the icon, in Tone IV:  
Today thy most precious icon hath shone forth upon us in the air * like the most 
radiant sun O Lady, * illumining the world with rays of mercy; * and Russia, 
reverently receiving it from on high as a gift of God, * doth glorify thee O Mother of 
God as the Sovereign Lady of all, * joyously magnifying Christ our God Who was 
born of thee. * Him do thou entreat, O Lady, Queen and Theotokos, * that He 
preserve all cities and lands where Orthodox Christians dwell, * unharmed by all the 
assaults of the enemy, * saving those who with faith worship before the all-honored 
image of Him and thee, ** O Virgin who knewest not wedlock.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the icon, in Tone IV: 
Today thy most precious icon hath shone forth upon us in the air * like the most 
radiant sun O Lady, * illumining the world with rays of mercy; * and Russia, 
reverently receiving it from on high as a gift of God, * doth glorify thee O Mother of 
God as the Sovereign Lady of all, * joyously magnifying Christ our God Who was 
born of thee. * Him do thou entreat, O Lady, Queen and Theotokos, * that He 
preserve all cities and lands where Orthodox Christians dwell, * unharmed by all the 
assaults of the enemy, * saving those who with faith worship before the all-honored 
image of Him and thee, ** O Virgin who knewest not wedlock. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is reated.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
With divine rays enlighten and make firm the minds of those who hymn thee, O 
all-immaculate Virgin, thou mighty helper of the whole world, that with love we may 
all hold festival, praising thee and glorifying the most glorious coming of thine image, 
and may pray; from every evil circumstance save thou thy servants by thy 
supplications, O thou who alone art blessed.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
By the omnipotent power of thy Son and God, O Bride of God, thine image hath 
come like a star of surpassing radiance, most gloriously arriving after travelling from 
the East to the West, illumining those held fast by the darkness of sorrows, delivering 
them from bonds, and from the threats of the enemy by thy mighty intercession, 
whereby thou hast revealed thyself to all the world as an invincible weapon; for the 
Master of all, Who took flesh of thee, glorifieth thy most pure image, and as a Son He 
honoreth thee as His Mother.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: Meet it is to magnify thee, O Theotokos, who 
art more honorable than the cherubim and more glorious beyond compare than 
the seraphim.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: O God, give Thy judgment to the king, and righteousness unto the Son of 
the King. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
Thou art truly the help of the helpless, O most pure Mother of God; wherefore, 
we, the lowly are exalted by thee and caught up in thee to the heights. Thou art a 
refuge for all and an all-merciful mediatress before God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation 
and generation.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 4 (LK. 1: 39-49, 56)  
In those days, Mary arose and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of 
Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came to 
pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; 
and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost: and she spake out with a loud voice, 
and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And 
whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo!, as 
soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my 
womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of 
those things which were told her from the Lord. And Mary said, My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath re-
garded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all 
generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; 
and holy is His name. And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to 
her own house.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Today the multitudes of the faithful rejoice; for thy divine icon hath appeared on 
the air, O Sovereign Lady, like a sun of surpassing radiance, shining with great light, 
and, emitting rays of mercy in all directions, illumining all the faithful. Joining chorus, 
the angels minister unto thee today, and honoring thee, they have invisibly 
transported thine icon from place to place, O Mother of God; and when they had 
borne it to the place chosen by God, they reverently set it down with due 
glorification. But what shall we, who are clay, offer thee? And what fitting praise can 
we make for thine arrival? We are at a loss and marvel, magnifying the tender 
compassion which thou hast shown us. But earnestly entreat thy Son and our God, O 
most holy one, that He grant victory over all heresies to our Orthodox bishops, peace 
to the world, and great mercy to our souls.  
Two canons of the Theotokos, with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos (chanted twice), 
with the acrostic “O thou who art full of grace, grant me the grace to chant the words 
of a most simple hymn”, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
O omnipotent Trinity, three-sunned Unity! Having illumined my soul, heart and 
mind and sanctified them with grace, I pray Thee Who art supremely good, lead me 
up to Thy divine love and teach me to hymn with devotion the compassion of the 
blessed Ever-virgin.  
O good Mother of the good King, who dost readily hearken to the petitions of all 
and art almighty in thy benefactions, shine forth the grace of thy light upon us and fill 
us with grace today, O thou who art full of the grace of God, that we may begin to 
chant hymnody unto thee.  
For the choirs of the angels the glorification of thy present feast is the cause of joy, 
O Sovereign Lady, for today they are moved to praise. But what shall we, who are 
clay, offer unto thee? If not only our fervent hymns of thanksgiving.  
We chant unto thee the cry of the archangel: Rejoice, O pure one! And even 
though we are unworthy, O Lady, accept this hymnody instead of goodness, 
illumining us with the light of thy mercy and granting grace unto all.  
A second canon, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O Christ, Bestower of light, on this notable day of the most glorious appearance of 
the icon of her who gaveth birth to Thee, grant that I may keep splendid festival and 
may ever hymn her miracles with gladness, in fear and joy.  
O Virgin who hast given birth in the flesh to the light-bestowing Word of God, 
the Wisdom of the Father: enlighten the profound darkness of mine ignorance and 
provide me with the words to hymn thy wonders.  
Today are the assemblies of the faithful enlightened and the hordes of the heretics 
put to shame, O Sovereign Lady, seeing thine icon traversing the air like the sun, 
destroying the gloom of impiety and illumining the faithful.  
With God, O divine Bride, thou alone art our greatness and boast; for through 
thee are we saved from misfortunes, to thee do we flee, and we pray earnestly: O 
Sovereign Lady, from everlasting torment deliver thy servants who hymn thy 
wonders!  
Katavasia: I will open my mouth ... 
ODE III  
Canon I  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Come ye faithful, and behold a most glorious sight, looking upon the most pure 
Virgin, who with reverence shineth forth on high in her most pure image, illumining 
with grace us who reverently chant: There is none more pure than thee, O Lady!  

--- PAGE 12 ---
The mind of each of the faithful is hallowed by thy grace, O Theotokos, and 
exalted by the wondrous coming of thine icon. Grant unto us, thy servants, who 
honor it with piety and glorify thee with faith, O Lady, to partake thereof.  
O Bride of God, grant that we may tread the heavenly path unassailed, 
strengthening us to do godly works; that leaving the path of the evil one’s wiles by thy 
help, O Virgin, we may have a share in eternal glory.  
With the beams of Christ the true Light, the Creator of the angels, Who shone 
forth ineffably from thee, O Mother of God, and with thine own grace, illumine the 
souls and hearts of us who are in darkness. O thou who art full of grace, sanctify us, 
guiding us to the love of heavenly light. 
Canon II  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
O Christ Jesus, pre-eternal King Who art full of mercy, illumine us with the 
appearance of the most pure image of Thee and the Ever-virgin who gaveth birth to 
Thee, and grant us forgiveness of sins and deliverance from misfortunes.  
When the people beheld thy most pure icon invisibly borne aloft by the angels and 
suspended in the air amid radiance, O Sovereign Lady, illumined with the light of thy 
mercy they were filled with ineffable joy.  
O God-loving hierarchs and priests, kings and princes, and all the people, radiantly 
join chorus today, for a radiant beam hath shone forth on high, holding the true Light 
depicted in the flesh. With Him she hath come down to us, granting enlightenment to 
all the world.  
Through thy most precious icon did the Creator of all work wonders of old and 
save the Imperial City from the incursions of aliens. So also be thou a protection and 
help for the land of Russia, O Sovereign Lady and Queen, saving it from all the 
assaults of the enemy.  
Sessional Hymn of the appearance, in Tone IV:  
Thy most pure image, O Lady, truly more precious than the ark of old, shining 
more brightly than an electric cloud, emitteth rays of thy mercy revealing them to all, 
in every place, in abundance, and with the grace of God mercifully preserveth those 
who honor its most glorious coming. And fervently rejoicing therein, O Sovereign 
Lady, we keep festival and glorify thy maternal loving-kindness toward us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE IV  
Canon I  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 

--- PAGE 13 ---
The Creator and Fashioner of all, Who upholdeth all things by His omnipotent 
power, hath today arrived most gloriously, O pure Virgin, borne on thine arm in His 
and thy divine and miraculous image, for the salvation and healing of all mankind.  
Come, ye faithful, let us bow down before the ineffable gift of God, the icon of 
Christ the light and the most pure Virgin, and with love let us fall down, crying aloud: 
For the sake of the kind Ever-virgin who hath given birth to Thee, O Benefactor, 
send down grace and mercy upon us, Thy servants.  
O Queen of the angels, noetic ark: God hath adorned and glorified thy most pure 
image with ineffable miracles and grace beyond that of the ark of the law, and hath 
commanded even the angels to venerate it. With them, O all-hymned one, do thou 
pray to Him on behalf of us who glorify His saving providence, that we also may 
obtain thy salvation.  
O all-good and immaculate helper given by God in His grace unto all of us 
Christians, entreat Him, that He overlook our countless sins and deliver us from 
flaming retribution and the outermost darkness, and from every torment.  
Canon II  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Let all the earth and the air be glad today, and let the sea cause joy to rain down, 
for by the miraculous journey of the most precious image of the Mother of God the 
land of Russia hath been most gloriously illumined.  
As behooveth servants, the ranks of the angels minister to thee, the Queen of all, 
and reverently honor thy most precious icon, hymning thee, the most holy Virgin. But 
how can we, the lowly, hymn thee, the all-pure one, as is meet?  
We cry out to thee the hymn of the archangel: Rejoice, O Bride of God, the Lord 
is with thee! Rejoice, thou joy of the angels and gladness of all mankind who truly 
glorify thee! Save the souls of those who hymn thee, O pure Theotokos!  
O Birthgiver of God, bestower of joy: fill thou with ineffable joy those who with 
faith glorify thee and hymn thee with all their soul O Virgin, and grant them never-
waning light, O Sovereign Lady who art full of grace.  
ODE V 
 Canon I  
Irmos: O God my spirit seeketh Thee early at dawn, * for the light of Thy 
commandments proceedeth Thy coming: * with them illumine our minds, O 
Master, * and guide us on the path of life. 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
In thy merciful good pleasure, O thou who art full of grace, today thou hast 
graciously enlightened our land with thy godly appearance, and hast sent down the 
mystical illumination of thy light upon the world, guiding the faithful to the light of 
heavenly glory, O Theotokos.  
We have become darkened by our thoughts and weighed down by our sins, O 
Sovereign Lady, and we are at a loss how to confess thy radiant grace and mercy; but 
illumine us, O most holy Virgin, visit us and make us rich through thy mystical gifts 
of divine desires, directing us to the light of the right path.  
Go thou before those who, from every direction, hasten to thy most honored icon, 
O Mother of God, who bow down before it with fervor and call upon thee with faith 
in every place; and save all from every misfortune, delivering them from cruel 
infirmities, and driving away evil spirits, imparting tranquility and health unto all, O 
Sovereign Lady.  
Forsake us not, neither disdain us, O Birthgiver of God, who are cruelly vexed by 
grievous thoughts, vile memories and the wicked enemy; but enshroud us with thy 
grace, protecting us from them and helping us, O blessed of God, saving us from all 
their assaults.  
Canon II  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
In the wilderness, O Mother of God, the reverent man was deemed worthy to 
behold thee manifestly with the holy hierarch, and he received from thee the words of 
thy good pleasure, for the great confirmation and furthering of the salvation of the 
world, O Queen.  
Wretched am I, O all-pure one, and unworthy of the grace to behold thee now; yet 
grant that I may behold thee in the future, and meet thy Son Who shall come in glory, 
and hear the divine voice crying in the kingdom of heaven.  
We flee to thy goodness, O pure Virgin, and direct the eyes of our hearts towards 
thee; and bending our knees while weeping, we entreat thee; disdain not our sighing, 
and be thou a protection and helper for us on the day of judgment.  
Thou art an intercessor for all Christians, O most pure Mother of God. Hearken 
to our supplication; look upon us, O all-hymned one, save thy city and monastery, 
and illumine thy flock with the radiance of the grace of thine aid.  
ODE VI 
 Canon I  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
In the most glorious arrival of thine icon, O Queen, the expanse of air and our 
land hath been filled with the grace of thy miracles and divine gifts, unto the 
confirmation of piety and of all the faithful, O all-hymned one. Thereby are our 
adversaries humbled today, and those who glorify thee are made firm in might.  
O city of God, holy habitation, Virgin Bride of God: from the assaults of the 
adversary and all the attacks of the enemy preserve thy holy dwelling, and all cities 
and lands where Christians dwell, who hymn thee with love and with faith honor thy 
most precious image.  
O Mother of God, ever grant sanctification, health and salvation to the souls and 
bodies of us who piously venerate thy divine icon, reverently and fearfully kissing it 
with both mouth and heart, faithfully hymning thee with all our soul.  
Having acquired thee as a mighty protection and an unassailable rampart, O Ever--
virgin Theotokos, after God it is on thee that we, the faithful, set our hope; and we 
earnestly pray: by thy power show forth the darts of the enemy and all the wiles of the 
demons to be as impotent and ineffective as those of children, O our mighty helper.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
O thy most wondrous miracle, O Sovereign Lady! For disobeying thy command, a 
man was caught up in horror from the pinnacle of the church, but, by thy mercy, O 
all-merciful one, he found himself on the ground, unharmed.  
No one hath disobeyed the commands of God as have I, wretch that I am. 
Wherefore, falling down before thee, I pray, O Sovereign Lady; before I perish 
utterly, guide me to the path of truth, and save me, O pure one.  
O Mother of God, who hast given birth unto Him Who endured crucifixion on 
the tree of the Cross for our sake, ever beseech Him that we who commemorate His 
holy suffering may do His divine will and become heirs to the eternal good things.  
O pure Virgin Sovereign Lady, deliver us from all cruel circumstances, entreating 
Him Who nailed our sins to the Cross, and grant that we may worthily stand at His 
right hand when He shall come in His glory.  
Kontakion of the icon, in Tone VIII: 
O ye people, let us make haste to the Virgin Theotokos and Queen, * giving 
thanks to Christ our God; * and gazing with compunction upon her miraculous icon, 
* let us fall down and cry out to her: * O our Sovereign Lady Mary, do thou visit this 
land in the miraculous appearance of thy precious icon, * save our Orthodox 
hierarchs and all Christians in peace and prosperity, * showing us to be inheritors of 
the life of heaven. * For to thee do we cry with faith: ** Rejoice, O Virgin, thou salva-
tion of the world!  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Ikos: Beholding the most wondrous appearance of the Mother of God, let us 
ascend to the summit of the virtues and lift our mind up to heaven; for she hath 
come, traversing the heavens, that she may draw up to the heights those who cry 
aloud to her saying: Rejoice, O blessed Virgin, chosen by God from among all 
generations; rejoice, Queen of heaven, Mother of the Lord God, the Creator of all! 
Rejoice, Object of the angels’ most joyous hymnody; rejoice, sight most desired by all 
the world! Rejoice, immovable foundation of the Faith of piety; Rejoice, most 
splendid knowledge of grace; rejoice, goodwill of God towards mankind! Rejoice, 
thou who hast led mortals to God; rejoice, consolation of our oppressed souls! 
Rejoice, speedy help for all the faithful; rejoice, intercessor given by God to the 
Christian people, whom do thou earnestly preserve from all misfortunes and evils, 
that we may cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin, salvation of the world!  
ODE VII  
Canon I  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thine image, O Sovereign Lady, which even the angels revere, ever shineth with 
ineffable grace and power; for today thou dost illumine mortals with its gifts, guiding 
them to the heavens, and leading them to everlasting life, in thine ineffable goodness, 
O thou who art full of grace.  
The mouths of orators are in nowise able to confess thy godly manifestation, the 
most glorious arrival of thine icon, and the abyss of thy miracles, O pure one. What 
then shall we, who are coarse, say? Only: have mercy and save us, O all-merciful 
Lady!  
O renowned helper of the faithful and bestower. of all good things: accept us who 
fall down in faith and cry out to thee with love: Have mercy upon us, O Sovereign 
Lady, have mercy upon us; and today, as in the age to come, be thou our helper and 
aid!  
O merciful Mother of God, open unto us today the portals of thy mercy, and 
snatch us from the jaws of the noetic wolves who would devour us and destroy us 
utterly. Have mercy, we pray thee, O Lady, have mercy! Turn not away from thy 
servants who have been put to shame!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
 
O the wonder! Thine only-begotten Son, the God of all, preserved thy most pure 
image unharmed amid the flame, O Mother of God; for it was found, shining with 
grace more brightly than the sun, illumining the faithful who chant with faith: Blessed 
art Thou, O God!  
O Theotokos, the ranks of heaven rejoice with those born on earth on thy 
splendid festival. With the light of thy radiance, O most pure one, illumine us who 
celebrate it and who stand with fear before thy most pure image; and save us all.  
O Queen, thou hast given birth in the flesh to the Word of God, the King of 
heaven, One of the Trinity. Beseech the Godhead, O Sovereign Lady, that victory be 
granted to our Orthodox hierarchs over all heresies and schisms; and to all the 
faithful aid, forgiveness of sins and salvation of soul.  
In that thou hast given birth to the Benefactor of all, O pure one, with thy light-
giving and divine grace cover thy servants, who hymn thee and pray to thee with 
unwavering faith; protect and preserve us from all the assaults of the enemy.  
ODE VIII 
 Canon I  
Irmos: O Thou who dost cover Thy chambers on high with the waters, * Thou 
Who hast set the sands to bound the sea * and Who upholdest all things: * the 
sun doth sing Thy praises, * the moon giveth Thee glory, * every creature 
offereth a hymn unto Thee, * as their Fashioner, throughout the ages. 
The excellent ranks of heaven piously reverence thy most pure image, and its most 
wondrous arrival, O all-pure one, which is shown forth as most glorious under the 
heavens and hath moved the Orthodox people to lift up their voices in hymnody and 
glorify thy Son as Creator of all, throughout the ages.  
Chanting most glorious hymns today, with devotion we lovingly bow down before 
thine image, which is revered even by the angels, O Sovereign Lady and Queen. With 
thy divine grace cover our Orthodox hierarchs, who glorify thee; strengthen them 
against heresies and schisms, and maintain their authority in peace.  
Rejoice, O all-blessed and all-immaculate one, cause of joy! Rejoice, thou who art 
full of grace, our might, rampart and refuge of salvation! Save us, thy servants, who 
have no help than thee before God; for in thee do we trust, and thee do we hymn 
throughout the ages.  
Thee do we have, with God, as the sole preserver of our life and our mighty hope 
of salvation. O tenderly compassionate one, we beseech thee to mediate for us until 
the end, that we may be delivered from the reckoning which is to come, and may find 
thy Son and God merciful on the day of judgment.  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
O thy most glorious wonders, O pure one! For the builders of thy holy church, 
who were buried beneath the stones for three days, were found alive and unharmed, 
preserved by thy protection; and they sent up cries of praise to thee, the Queen of all.  
Thou gavest life instead of death to one who had died, O Theotokos. Wherefore, 
O Bride of God, preserve unharmed by the enemy us, who have been slain because 
of our many sins, and lead us up to the better life, saving our souls.  
Today all the faithful are filled with joy and gladness because of thine icon, O 
Theotokos, for thou hast been revealed to be a cause of life for those in the jaws of 
death, an ever-flowing fountain pouring forth gifts of healing and imparting salvation 
unto all.  
O all-praised one, accept the supplication of the people who have come together 
from all places, fittingly to hymn the glorious arrival of the most pure image of thee 
and the Babe Whom thou didst bear, the true God; and fulfill their petitions.  
ODE IX  
Canon I  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Thine icon, O Lady, traveling upright a path through the luminous air, and 
radiantly traversing invisible ways, moved by God, hath illumined with grace on earth 
the faithful who cry with faith: Truly thou art higher in honor than all others, O pure 
Virgin!  
In nowise are we able to fittingly adorn the accounts of thine exalted miracles with 
rhetoric, O pure Queen; we can only pray fervently to thee, that having entreated thy 
Son, the Master and King of all, Who hath given thee to us as a most glorious helper, 
He may deem us worthy of His heavenly kingdom.  
O thou who art full of the grace of God, accept from us this song of hymnody in 
thanksgiving for thine ineffable tender compassion, fulfilling those of our petitions 
which are profitable; and lead us all up to the heights of heaven, for we cry out to 
thee with faith: Truly thou art higher than all, O all-immaculate Virgin!  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
All of us, the generations of mortals, joyously call thee blessed, O Theotokos, for 
thou hast filled us all with joy by the most glorious arrival of thine icon, O most pure 
one. And bowing down before it today, we entreat thee with compunction: in the age 
to come, O Lady, forget not to grant thy servants the joy of the elect!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Who doth not marvel at the appearance of thy most precious icon, O Lady; who is 
not amazed? For thou didst send it, as a light-bearing gift, through the air to the land 
of Russia, which hymneth thee with joy and magnifieth thee with faith.  
O Sovereign Lady, who hast given ineffable joy to the world through the 
manifestation of thy most pure icon; from every grief deliver those who bow down 
before it with faith and kiss it with fear. O most holy one, save and have mercy upon 
all, and grant us the kingdom of heaven.  
O Sovereign Lady, who hast given birth to God Who is the Lover of mankind, in 
thy love for us thou hast visited us in thy divine icon; and ever having recourse to it 
and gazing upon its magnificence, we cry out to thee with compunction: O 
Theotokos, ever save thine inheritance!  
With humble lips have I offered thee this meager hymnody, O most hymned one; 
but though I am coarse and full of sin, and am unworthy to hymn thee as is meet, yet 
I trust fervently in thy compassions, in that thou hast given birth to the Savior of the 
whole world. Disdain this not, O Queen, but accept it and save me.  
Exapostilarion of the icon:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Honoring thy most pure image, whereby thou hast illumined us, O divine Virgin 
Maiden, we now celebrate its arrival, receiving, through thy grace and that of thy Son, 
deliverance from tribulations, misfortunes and dangers, O Mother of God Most 
High.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the icon, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! * the icon of the Mother of God * hath shone forth 
universal joy upon us from on high, * and, imparting enlightenment unto all the 
world, * confirmation of piety, * and salvation for the faithful, * this divine gift hath 
been bestowed upon mortals. * Rejoicing therein, O Christ, we entreat Thee: ** Save 
our souls, in that Thou art full of loving-kindness. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 20 ---
O most glorious wonder! * The land of Russia hath been honored above all others 
* by the providence of the Most High! * For it, and none other, hath been deemed 
worthy, through His grace, * to receive this icon of the Mother of God * as a radiant 
and heavenly gift * most gloriously sent by God from on high. * And rejoicing 
therein, O Christ, it crieth out to thee with compunction: ** O Good One, save our 
souls, in that Thou art full of loving-kindness!  
Most gloriously, O Theotokos, * doth thy monastery boast in thee, among all 
lands, O Bride of God, * for it hath within its walls thy miraculous icon * which was 
wondrously and most gloriously transported through the air by the angels; * and 
receiving ineffable healings from it, * we cry out words of thanksgiving unto thee, * 
entreating thee with compunction: * O most holy Virgin, ** save our souls, in that 
thou art full of loving-kindness!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
As once the Imperial City, possessed of thine icon, O most pure Virgin, rejoiced, 
vanquishing the adversary with the aid of God and thee, so now the land of Russia, 
having wondrously acquired thine image, O Sovereign Lady, as its aid, doth celebrate 
with gladness, having been made firm. And thine all-honored monastery is also 
greatly adorned, having thee, with God, as a protection and a firm bulwark against all 
the assaults of the enemy. And thy church, O Theotokos, like that of Blachernae of 
old, shineth with thy most pure image, illumined with most glorious miracles; and, 
rejoicing spiritually, it holdeth chorus today, O Sovereign Lady, crying out with all the 
faithful: Rejoice, O most holy Virgin, my majesty and boast and everlasting gladness! 
Thou makest me rich with all-wondrous miracles and divine gifts; O Lady, thou 
inexhaustible wellspring of healings, consolation for those amid misfortunes, and 
protection and salvation of all the faithful  
Great Doxology, Troparion, litanies and dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the first canon of the icon, 
and 4 from ODE VI of the second canon.  
Come ye faithful, and behold a most glorious sight, looking upon the most pure 
Virgin, who with reverence shineth forth on high in her most pure image, illumining 
with grace us who reverently chant: There is none more pure than thee, O Lady!  
The mind of each of the faithful is hallowed by thy grace, O Theotokos, and 
exalted by the wondrous coming of thine icon. Grant unto us, thy servants, who 
honor it with piety and glorify thee with faith, O Lady, to partake thereof.  
O Bride of God, grant that we may tread the heavenly path unassailed, 
strengthening us to do godly works; that leaving the path of the evil one’s wiles by thy 
help, O Virgin, we may have a share in eternal glory.  
With the beams of Christ the true Light, the Creator of the angels, Who shone 
forth ineffably from thee, O Mother of God, and with thine own grace, illumine the 
souls and hearts of us who are in darkness. O thou who art full of grace, sanctify us, 
guiding us to the love of heavenly light. 
O thy most wondrous miracle, O Sovereign Lady! For disobeying thy command, a 
man was caught up in horror from the pinnacle of the church, but, by thy mercy, O 
all-merciful one, he found himself on the ground, unharmed.  
No one hath disobeyed the commands of God as have I, wretch that I am. 
Wherefore, falling down before thee, I pray, O Sovereign Lady; before I perish 
utterly, guide me to the path of truth, and save me, O pure one.  
O Mother of God, who hast given birth unto Him Who endured crucifixion on 
the tree of the Cross for our sake, ever beseech Him that we who commemorate His 
holy suffering may do His divine will and become heirs to the eternal good things.  
O pure Virgin Sovereign Lady, deliver us from all cruel circumstances, entreating 
Him Who nailed our sins to the Cross, and grant that we may worthily stand at His 
right hand when He shall come in His glory.  
After the Entrance: the Troparion of the icon, in Tone IV: 
Today thy most precious icon hath shone forth upon us in the air * like the most 
radiant sun O Lady, * illumining the world with rays of mercy; * and Russia, 
reverently receiving it from on high as a gift of God, * doth glorify thee O Mother of 
God as the Sovereign Lady of all, * joyously magnifying Christ our God Who was 
born of thee. * Him do thou entreat, O Lady, Queen and Theotokos, * that He 
preserve all cities and lands where Orthodox Christians dwell, * unharmed by all the 
assaults of the enemy, * saving those who with faith worship before the all-honored 
image of Him and thee, ** O Virgin who knewest not wedlock.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Kontakion of the Icon, in Tone VIII: 
O ye people, let us make haste to the Virgin Theotokos and Queen, * giving 
thanks to Christ our God; * and gazing with compunction upon her miraculous icon, 
* let us fall down and cry out to her: * O our Sovereign Lady Mary, do thou visit this 
land in the miraculous appearance of thy precious icon, * save our Orthodox 
hierarchs and all Christians in peace and prosperity, * showing us to be inheritors of 
the life of heaven. * For to thee do we cry with faith: ** Rejoice, O Virgin, thou salva-
tion of the world!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: The Song of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 320 (HEB. 9: 1-7)  
Brethren: verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a 
worldly sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the 
candlestick, and the table, and the showbread; which is called the sanctuary. And after 
the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the holiest of all; which had the golden 
censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the 
golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the 
covenant; and over it the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy seat; of which we 
cannot now speak particularly. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests 
went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the 
second went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he 
offered for himself, and for the errors of the people.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy 
holiness.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, and He will not annul it.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 54 (LK. 10: 38-42, 11: 27-28)  
At that time, Jesus: entered into a certain village; and a certain woman named 
Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat 
at Jesus’ feet, and heard His word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, 
and came to Him, and said, Lord, dost Thou not care that my sister hath left me to 
serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me. And Jesus answered and said unto 
her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing 
is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from 
her. And it came to pass, as He spoke these things, a certain woman of the company 
lifted up her voice, and said unto Him, Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the 

--- PAGE 23 ---
paps which Thou hast sucked. But He said, Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the 
word of God, and keep it.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
