--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 29th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
COMMEMORATION OF HOLY, GLORIOUS, ALL-PRAISED & PREEMINENT 
APOSTLES PETER & PAUL  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
Thine honored apostles hast Thou given * to Thy Church, O Lord, as a boast, * 
and therein shine forth the noetic luminaries * Peter and Paul, * as stars of the Word, 
* shedding light upon the whole world. * By them hast Thou enlightened the 
darkness of the West, * O Almighty Jesus, ** Thou Savior of our souls. (Twice)  
Thou hast granted confirmation * unto Thy Church, O Lord: * the steadfastness 
of Peter, * the understanding and splendid wisdom of Paul, * and the truly divine 
proclamation of them both, * which dispelleth the deception of the Greeks. * 
Wherefore, having been initiated into the mysteries by both of them, * we hymn 
Thee, O Almighty Jesus, ** Thou Savior of our souls.  
Thou hast provided the sinful * with a model of repentance: * Thy two apostles. * 
For the one denied Thee at the time of Thy suffering, yet repented, * while the other 
opposing the preaching of Thee, * later came to believe. * And both are preeminent 
among the assembly of their peers, * O Almighty Jesus, ** Thou Savior of our souls.  
Glory ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII:  
Thou didst vex and persecute the Church, O all-blessed Paul, but when thou wast 
called from heaven, thou didst defend it most gloriously. Pray thou now, that it be 
delivered from misfortunes, and that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Thy shelter, O Virgin Theotokos, * is spiritual healing; * for, having recourse unto 
it, ** we are delivered from spiritual infirmities.  
Prokeimenon of the day.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the tree ...”:  
O Peter, foundation of the apostles, * rock of the Church of Christ, * prince of 
Christians: * gloriously tend the sheep of thy fold, * protect thy lambs from the 
wolves of falsehood, * deliver thy flock from grievous perils; * for thee have we truly 
acquired * as a never-tiring advocate before God, ** and, boasting in thee, we are all 
saved.  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
O Paul, fisher of the nations, * intercessor for Christians, * beacon for the whole 
world, * ever-speaking mouth of Christ the living God, * who in preaching the divine 
Faith * hast passed over all the ends of the earth like the sun: * from the bonds of sin 
* release all who praise thee ** and are adorned by thy supplications.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
O Peter, preeminent disciple! * O Paul, who completed the rank of the apostles! * 
O foremost preachers, * earnestly pray ye now with boldness to God, * and send 
down speedy help * and release from misfortunes upon us * who are sorrowful, * that 
we may boast in faith, ** by deeds, now revealing your protection in your tabernacle.  
Glory ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone IV:  
Having chosen thee as the first, O Peter foundation of the Faith, Christ crowned 
thee, as He, the Master of all, foretold unto thee, saying: “Blessed art thou, O Simon 
bar Jonah, for flesh and blood hath not disclosed and made thee My sacred herald, 
but my Father Who is in the heavens!” Him do thou beseech, O divinely blessed 
apostle, that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Deliver us from our needs, * O Mother of Christ God, * thou who hast given birth 
to the Creator of all, * that we all may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou who alone 
art the intercessor for our souls!  
Troparion, in Tone IV:  
O first enthroned among the apostles * and teachers of the whole world: * entreat 
the Master of all, * that He grant peace to the world ** and great mercy to our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy apostles, the composition of 
Andrew Pyrrhus, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “What wreaths of praise ...”: 
With what wreaths of praise shall we crown Peter and Paul, who were separate in 
body yet united in spirit, the foremost of the preachers of God, the one as leader of 
the apostles, and the other as the one who labored more than the rest? For Christ our 
God, Who hath great mercy, hath truly crowned them with diadems of glory as is 
meet. (Thrice)  
With what beauties of song shall we hymn Peter and Paul? They are the wings of 
divine knowledge who soared above the ends of the earth and were borne aloft to the 
heavens, the hands of the grace of the Gospel, the rivers of wisdom, the arms of the 
Cross, wherewith Christ, Who hath great mercy, hath cast down the pride of the 
demons. (Thrice)  
With what spiritual hymns shall we praise Peter and Paul? Who have closed the 
ever-gaping mouths of the ungodly, they are the dreadful swords of the Spirit, the 
splendid adornments of Rome, the nurturers of the whole world, the noetic and 
divinely graven tablets of the new covenant, whom Christ, Who hath great mercy, 
proclaimed in Sion. (Twice)  
Glory ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone IV:  
By His thrice-repeated question, “Peter, lovest thou Me?”, Christ set aright the 
three denials. Wherefore, Simon said to the Author of mysteries: “Lord, Thou 
knowest all things, Thou understandest all things! Thou knowest that I love Thee!” 
Wherefore, the Savior said unto him: “Feed My lambs; feed My chosen ones; feed My 
sheep, which I have acquired for salvation by My blood!” Him do thou beseech, O 
divinely blessed apostle, that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Prophet David, the ancestor of God, * spoke of thee in psalmody unto Him Who 
hath accomplished great things in thee. * For God was well pleased without father to 
become a man from thee, * the Queen who standeth at His right hand, * and He - the 
source of life - showed thee to be His mother, * that He might renew His own image, 
corrupted by the passions. * Having found the lost sheep wandering on the mountain 
* He hath laid it upon his shoulders, * that He may bring it to his Father; * and in 
accordance with His own will * unite it to the heavenly Powers * and thus, O 
Theotokos, save the world, ** Christ, Who is richly and abundantly merciful. 
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  

--- PAGE 4 ---
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF PETER  
Brethren, blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who according 
to His abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection 
of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that 
fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God 
through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. Wherein ye greatly 
rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold 
temptations: that the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that 
perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honor and 
glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ: Whom having not seen, ye love; in Whom, 
though now ye see Him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of 
glory: receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF PETER  
Beloved, gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the 
grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ; as obedient 
children, not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance: 
but as He Who hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; 
because it is written, Be ye holy; for I am holy. And if ye call on the Father, Who 
without respect of persons judgeth according to every man’s work, pass the time of 
your sojourning here in fear: Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with 
corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by 
tradition from your fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb 
without blemish and without spot.  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF PETER 
Beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which 
war against the soul; having your conversation honest among the gentiles: that, 
whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your good works, which 
they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. Submit yourselves to every 
ordinance of man for the Lord’s sake: whether it be to the king, as supreme; or unto 
governors, as unto those who are sent by Him for the punishment of evildoers, and 
for the praise of those who do well. For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye 
may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: as free, and not using your liberty for 
a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. Honor all men. Love the 
brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the king. Servants, be subject to your masters with all 
fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. For this is thankworthy, 
if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what 
glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if, 
when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For 
even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an ex-

--- PAGE 5 ---
ample, that ye should follow His steps: Who did no sin neither was guile found in His 
mouth: Who, when He was reviled, reviled not again when He suffered, He 
threatened not; but committed Himself to Him Who judgeth righteously: Who His 
own self bore our sins in His own body on the Tree, that we, being dead, to sins 
should live unto righteousness.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, the composition of Andrew 
of Jerusalem, in Tone II:  
Come, ye assemblies of the faithful, and with fitting praises let us crown today 
Peter and Paul, the right laudable and beautiful company the chosen artisans of grace, 
for they have abundantly sown the word for all. Therewith they have made rich the 
grace of the Spirit, and as branches of the true Vine they have put forth for us a ripe 
cluster gladdening our hearts. To them do we cry aloud with open countenance and a 
pure conscience, saying: Rejoice, destroyers of the irrational and servants of those 
endowed with reason! Rejoice, ye beauteous chosen ones of the Creator and Fash-
ioner of all Rejoice, mediators of good things and dispellers of that which is false! Let 
us beseech them, that they ever entreat the Creator and Teacher to grant sure peace 
unto the world and great mercy to our souls.  
The composition of Arsenius: Let us praise the preeminent Peter and Paul as 
intercessors for the whole world: the disciples of Christ and foundations of the 
Church, the pillars and ramparts of truth, the divine trumpets of the teachings and 
sufferings of Christ. For having traveled the breadth of the whole world, sowing thy 
Faith as with a plough, they planted divine knowledge for all, revealing the word of 
the Trinity. O Peter, thou rock and foundation! O Paul, thou chosen vessel Yoked 
together by the bonds of Christ, they have drawn all to the knowledge of God: 
gentiles and Jews, cities and islands, they have led to Christ; and they pray that our 
souls be saved.  
The composition of Germanus: O Peter, preeminent among the glorious apostles, 
rock of faith! O wondrous Paul, rhetor and luminary of the Holy Churches! Standing 
before the divine throne, pray ye to Christ for us. O blessed Paul, mouth of the Lord, 
foundation of doctrines, who wast once a persecutor of Jesus the Savior, thou art 
now among the foremost enthroned among the apostles. Wherefore, thou hast seen 
ineffable things, O wise one, ascending even unto the third heaven, and crying aloud: 
Come with me, and we shall not be deprived of any good thing!  
The composition of John the Monk, in Tone III: The citizens of the heavenly 
Jerusalem, the rock of faith, the rhetor of the Church of Christ, the two servants of 
the Trinity, the fishers of the world: having forsaken that which is here on earth and 
departed unto God with suffering, beseech Him with boldness that our souls be 
saved.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone V: 
As the Wisdom of God, the consubstantial Word of the Father foretold in the 
Gospels, O all-praised apostles, ye are exceeding fruitful vines bearing ripe and 
comely Clusters upon your branches, and we the faithful, eating thereof, delight in the 
taste thereof with gladness. O Peter, rock of faith, and Paul, boast of the whole world, 
make steadfast the flock which ye acquired by your teachings.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, * and we, the faithful, glorify thee as is meet, * 
thou unassailable city, * impregnable rampart, ** and steadfast intercession and refuge 
of our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, the composition of Andrew of Crete, in Tone I: 
Who can relate the bonds and tribulations thou didst endure in all cities, O 
glorious Apostle Paul, the labors, pangs and vigils, the oppression amid hunger and 
thirst, in wintertime and nakedness, the basket (in which thou madest thine escape), 
thy beating with staves and stones, thy journeys, and the time thou wast cast into the 
deep? Thou wast a spectacle for angels and all mankind. Wherefore, enduring all 
things for the sake of Christ Who strengthened thee, thou didst acquire the world for 
Jesus Christ thy Lord. Wherefore, we who honor thy memory with faith beseech thee: 
Pray thou unceasingly, that our souls be saved.  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth in to all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  
Who can tell of thine imprisonment and tribulations throughout all the cities, O 
glorious apostle? Or who can imagine the struggles and exertions wherewith thou 
didst labor to spread the glad tidings of Christ, that thou mightest obtain all and lead 
the Church to Christ? Yet pray thou that it preserve thy goodly confession even unto 
its final breath, O Paul, apostle and teacher of the Church.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Let us praise Peter and Paul, the luminaries of the Great Church, for they have 
shone forth in the firmament of the Faith more brightly than the sun, and with the 
rays of their preaching have led the nations up from ignorance. For the one, crucified 
upon a cross, made his journey to heaven, where he hath received from Christ the 
keys of the kingdom; and the other, beheaded by the sword, passed over to the 
Savior. Both are fittingly blessed, and both make proclamation unto Israel, who 
unjustly lifted up their hands against the Lord Himself. Wherefore, through their 
supplications, O Christ our God, cast down those who rage against us, and make 
steadfast the Orthodox Faith, in that Thou lovest mankind.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., the composition of Ephraim of Karyes, in Tone VI: 
A joyous feast hath shone forth today upon the ends of the earth: the most 
honored commemoration of the most wise and preeminent Apostles Peter and Paul. 
Wherefore, Rome, joining chorus, rejoiceth in hymns and songs; and we celebrate, O 
brethren, observing this most honored day, crying: Rejoice, O apostle Peter, thou true 
friend of thy Teacher, Jesus Christ our God! Rejoice, O most beloved Paul, thou 
preacher of the Faith and teacher of the whole world! As ye have boldness, O ye two 
holy and chosen ones, entreat Christ our God, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, O most 
pure one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign 
Lady, ** the intercession, protection and salvation for our souls! 
At the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
O first enthroned among the apostles * and teachers of the whole world: * entreat 
the Master of all, * that He grant peace to the world ** and great mercy to our souls. 
(Twice)  
And “Virgin Theotokos rejoice! ...,” (Once) 
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
O first enthroned among the apostles * and teachers of the whole world: * entreat 
the Master of all, * that He grant peace to the world ** and great mercy to our souls. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Forsaking the fishing of the deep, having received from the Father in heaven the 
divine revelation of the incarnation of the Son, with boldness thou didst cry out with 
faith to thy Creator: “I know that Thou art the consubstantial Son of God!” 
Wherefore, as is meet, thou wast truly shown to be a rock of faith and the key-bearer 
of grace. O Apostle Peter, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto 
those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Another Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone was sealed ...”: 
O ye faithful, as is meet, let us praise the champion Paul, the net of the world, and 
the all-praised Peter, the rock of the Church, in that he holdeth the keys of heaven: 
for the whole world hath been enlightened by them with the Faith of the Trinity. 
Glory to Him Who hath glorified you! Glory to Him Who hath strengthened you! 
Glory to Him Who because of you hath given us everlasting life!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
Stretching forth thy divine arms, wherewith thou didst bear the Creator Who in 
His goodness hath become incarnate, O most pure virgin, beseech Him to deliver 
from temptations, sufferings and tribulations us who praise thee with love and cry 
aloud: Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! Glory to Him Who issued 
forth from thee! Glory to Him Who hath delivered us by thy birthgiving!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Receiving from Christ a calling from the heavens, thou wast shown to be a 
proclaimer of the light, illumining all with the teachings of grace; for having cast off 
the worship of the letter of the law, thou didst make plain to the faithful the 
understanding of the Spirit. Wherefore, thou wast fittingly caught up on high to the 
third heaven, and attained unto paradise. O Apostle Paul, entreat Christ God, that He 
grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
With luminous radiance ye enlighten the ends of the earth like stars with the 
doctrines of holy preaching, O apostles of the Lord, initiates of the mysteries of 
heaven.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
We, the faithful, bless the Theotokos, through whom we have been delivered from 
corruption: the fervent ally of those in tribulation, our helper and reconciliation with 
God.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify you, O apostles of Christ, who 
enlightened the whole world with your teachings, and led all the ends of the 
earth unto Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the 
work of His hands.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Let us praise Peter and the most wise Paul, who were shown to be preeminent 
among the disciples, the great and radiant luminaries; for shining forth with the fire of 
the divine Spirit, they burned away all the gloom of deception. Wherefore, they have 
fittingly been shown to be warriors of the kingdom on high, co-enthroned in grace. 
For this cause we cry aloud: O apostles of Christ God, ask forgiveness of 
transgressions for those who with love celebrate your holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
As the all-immaculate Bride of the Creator, * Mother of the Redeemer, who 
knewest not a man, * and as the receptacle of the Comforter O all-hymned one, * 
hasten thou to deliver me, * the vile abode of iniquity and noetic plaything of the 
demons, * from their evil machinations; * and make me the bright dwelling-place of 
the virtues, * O thou incorrupt light-bearing one. * Drive away the clouds of the pas-
sions and grant that, * by thy supplications, * I may receive a portion on high ** and 
share in the never-waning light.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and 
their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 67 (IN. 21: 15-23)  
At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the 
dead, and said to Simon Peter: “Simon, son of Jonah, lovest thou Me more than 
these?” He said unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He said unto 
him: “Feed My lambs.” He said to him again the second time: “Simon, son of Jonah, 
lovest thou Me?” He said unto Him: “Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love Thee.” He 
saith unto him: “Feed My sheep.” He said unto him the third time: “Simon, son of 
Jonah, lovest thou Me?” Peter was grieved because He said unto him the third time: 
“Lovest thou Me?” And he said unto Him: “Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou 
knowest that I love Thee.” Jesus said unto him: “Feed My sheep. Verily, verily, I say 
unto thee: When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou 
wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another 
shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.” This spake He, signifying 
by what death he should glorify God. And when He had spoken this, He said unto 
him: “Follow Me.” Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved 
following; who also leaned on His breast at supper, and said: “Lord, which is he that 
betrayeth Thee?” Peter seeing him said to Jesus: “Lord, and what shall this man do?” 
Jesus said unto him: “If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow 
thou Me.” Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should 
not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, “He shall not die”; but, “If I will that he tarry till 
I come, what is that to thee?”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron Idiomelon, in Tone VI:  
With hymns of praise let us honor the true preachers of piety, the most radiant 
stars of the Church: Peter, the rock of Faith, and Paul, the teacher of the Truth and 
initiate of the mysteries of Christ. For both of them, having sown the word of truth in 
the hearts of the faithful, beseech Christ God Who granteth fruitfulness unto all, that 
our souls be saved.  
Two canons, the composition of John of Damascus: the first to the holy apostle 
Peter, the Irmos of which is chanted twice, followed by 6 Troparia, and the second 
for the holy apostle Paul, with 6 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy Apostle Peter, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: There is none like unto Thee, * O exceedingly glorious Lord; * for by 
Thy mighty arm * Thou didst deliver the people * whom Thou hast acquired, 
* O Lover of mankind.  
With divinely inspired songs let us hymn today the preeminent of the apostles as 
the first called of Christ.  
Having foreknown thee, O all-blessed Peter, the Pre-eternal One ordained thee 
from of old as the leader of His Church, to be the first-enthroned.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Neither flesh nor blood, but the Father inspired thee to theologize Christ as the 
true Son of God Most High, O apostle.  
Theotokion: We hymn thee, the holy mountain, the most exalted chariot, the 
Mother of God and true Virgin.  
Canon of the holy apostle Paul, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified! 
When Christ called things into existence out of non-existence, O all-blessed Paul, 
He chose thee from thy mother’s womb to carry before the nations His divine name, 
which is above every name; for gloriously hath He been glorified.  
Declaring to thee the coming effulgence of piety and the cleansing away of 
falsehood, O Paul, Christ, Who showed Himself to be as bright as lightning on the 
mountain, dimmed thy bodily eyes while enlightening the eyes of thy soul with the 
understanding of the Trinity: for gloriously hath He been glorified.  
Performing circumcision on the eighth day, as a zealot of the traditions of thy 
fathers, O Paul, and showing thyself to be a legalistic Pharisee, a Jew by birth, of the 
tribe of Benjamin, thou didst come to consider all such things as but dung, and didst 
acquire Christ: for gloriously hath He been glorified.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, pure Mother of almighty God, who sprang forth 
from royal stock and gavest birth in the flesh, in a manner transcending nature, to 
God Who alone reigneth over all: Save me from misfortunes, who chant unto thy 
Son: For gloriously hast Thou been glorified!  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy apostle Peter  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
The sweet mouth of Christ God showed thee to be blessed and a sure treasure of 
the kingdom; wherefore, we hymn thee, O Apostle Peter.  
On the rock of thy theology hath Jesus the Master unshakably established the 
Church, and therein we glorify thee, O Apostle Peter.  
How much greater than the angels was Peter in the body! For Christ God said that 
at His radiant coming he would be a judge and would be co-enthroned.  
Theotokion: O thou who knewest not wedlock, who hast given birth unto God in 
the flesh: render me steadfast and unshaken by the assaults of the passions, for we 
have none other helper than thee, O pure one.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Canon of the holy apostle Paul  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Thou hast been set as a precious foundation stone for the souls of the faithful, a 
corner-stone of the Savior and Lord.  
O all-blessed Paul, pray thou that on thy foundations the splendors of most 
praiseworthy virtues may be set firmly.  
Ever perfectly bearing the mortality of Jesus on thy body, O Paul, thou wast 
deemed worthy of true life.  
Theotokion: Thee have we all of us Christians acquired as our rampart and refuge, 
and we glorify thee without ceasing, O thou who knewest not wedlock.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostles, in Tone VIII: 
What dungeon held thee not a prisoner? What Church had thee not as an orator? 
Damascus extolleth thee, O Paul, for it knew thee blinded by the light; and Rome, 
which received thy blood, boasteth in thee; but Tarsus rejoiceth yet more and loveth 
thee, honoring thine infancy. O Peter, rock of the Faith, and Paul, boast of the whole 
world, coming together from Rome make us steadfast.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy apostle Peter  
Irmos: This is our God, Who hath become incarnate of the Virgin * and hath 
deified our nature! * Hymning Him, let us cry aloud: * Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
As He promised, Christ made thee a divine fisher of men for His Church, 
entrusting its helm to thee first.  
Entreated by thee, O Peter, may Jesus, the Bestower of life, Who gaveth thee the 
authority to bind and to loose, be merciful unto me.  
Pray thou earnestly, O Peter, that the kingdom of Christ be opened unto those 
who honor thy divine memory with unwavering faith.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned Sovereign Lady, Birthgiver of God, having cleansed 
away mine evil thoughts by thy supplications, show me forth as fruitful, O Mother of 
the God of all.  
Canon of the holy apostle Paul  
Irmos: Thou didst mount Thy steeds O Lord, * Thine apostles, * and taking 
their bridles in Thy hands, * Thy chariot became salvation unto those who 
sing with faith: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Once Saul crouched like a lion, wrathfully destroyed the Church of Christ; but he 
was seized by the divine voice of the Lamb of God, Whom he had persecuted, and 
Who entrusted His flock to him as a shepherd.  
He who would enlighten the whole world was struck blind; but Ananias was sent 
to him, imparting unto him enlightenment of soul and body through divine 
revelation, and showing him to be a chosen vessel.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
As is meet, Damascus is given drink by Paul; for from him, as from the garden of 
paradise, a great well-spring of divine waters once issued forth and irrigated the whole 
earth abundantly with divine knowledge.  
Theotokion: The Lord hath cast down the mighty from their thrones, as the Virgin 
Mother said, and with divine good things hath He filled the hungry, who cry aloud 
with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy apostle Peter  
Irmos: Having acquired us the chosen people by Thy blood, O Lord, * do 
Thou grant us peace, * preserving Thy flock in oneness of mind.  
He Who through love received boldness before God hath fittingly become 
wondrous, though he was an ignorant fisherman, and he now worketh most glorious 
wonders through grace.  
Thy godly apostle, O Christ, having acquired neither gold nor silver for Thy sake, 
but rather virtue, hath been enriched by the power of miracles.  
By thine effective word the feet and joints of the lame were set aright, for most 
glorious things were accomplished by the divine Spirit.  
Theotokion: God became incarnate, O pure one, hypostatically united to the flesh 
He received from thee, yet remaining immutable, and incorporeal in His divine 
nature.  
Canon of the holy apostle Paul  
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
Thou didst choose true praise, O Apostle Paul, ever bearing the Cross of Christ 
the King as a trophy.  
For thee to live is Christ, and to die is an excellent acquisition; for through love 
thou wast crucified with Him Who was crucified for our sake, O most glorious Paul.  
Thou dost truly rejoice in the Lord, O honorable Paul, having departed from the 
body and passed over to Christ God, the Bestower of life.  
Theotokion: Ever beseech thy Son and our God, O pure Mary who knewest not 
wedlock, that He send forth His mercy upon us, the faithful.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy apostle Peter  
Irmos: For three days O Christ, Jonah lay within the sea monster, * prefiguring 
Thee, the Immortal One, * for Thou didst willingly lay dead for three days * in 
the heart of the earth.  
As of old with Thy right hand Thou didst save Peter who walked on foot upon the 
waters, O Christ, so do Thou save me, who am drowning amid the storm of cruel 
perils, in that Thou art full of loving-kindness.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Thou didst forsake things which were not essential, O Peter, and attain unto those 
things which are essential; and like a merchant thou didst manifestly search for Christ: 
the Pearl beyond price.  
O Peter, thou didst slay those who mindlessly tried to tempt the most holy Spirit, 
Whom before thou hadst theologized, openly confessing Him as God, O all-blessed 
one.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth for us to the incarnate Word of God Who 
transcendeth all nature; wherefore, with lips and soul we profess thee to be the 
Theotokos.  
Canon of the holy apostle Paul  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Spurning all the beautiful things of the world, thou wast wounded by the love of 
the Master and by the desire for the common salvation of mankind, wishing to bear 
witness unto Him, O blessed Paul. Pray thou now on behalf of the whole world.  
As an excellent emulator of the Master, clothed in Him, O Paul, thou wast truly all 
things to all men, that thou mightest acquire and save all the people; and pursuing the 
ends of the world for Christ, thou didst truly save them.  
As is meet Christ hath given thee life in the heavens, O Apostle Paul; for thou 
didst not desire a city which abideth here, O blessed one, but wast a faithful minister 
and celebrant of His mysteries.  
Theotokion: The Lord looked down upon thee, restoring my nature, in that He is 
mighty; and doing mighty works, O all-immaculate Birthgiver of God, through thee 
my God hath saved me from corruption, in that He is full of loving-kindness.  
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone II: 
The steadfast and divinely eloquent preachers, * the foremost of Thine apostles, O 
Lord, * hast Thou received into the rest and delight of Thy good things; * for Thou 
hast accepted their pangs and death as greater than any wholeburnt offering, ** O 
Thou Who alone knowest the hearts of all mankind.  
Ikos: Fill my tongue with light, O my Savior, and having enlarged my mouth and 
filled it, have pity on my heart, that I may speak, follow, and teach that which I 
should first do; for Thou didst say that he who doeth and teacheth is great. For if I 
speak only, and act not, I am accounted as sounding brass. Wherefore, grant that I 
may speak fitting things and do that which is profitable, O Thou Who alone knowest 
the hearts of all mankind.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy apostle Peter  
Irmos: Blessed art Thou, O supremely exalted God of our fathers, * O only 
begotten Son and beginningless Word, * Who didst exist in the beginning * 
with the Father and the Spirit.  
Chastised by the divine providence of Christ, thou wast permitted to emulate the 
Merciful One, O Peter, that thy distress over denying Him before His suffering might 
be assuaged.  
Having risen from the dead, Christ appeared to thee, the first-called and exceeding 
beloved, as the right glorious one who was first to preside over the apostles.  
The Master, healing thy threefold denial before His suffering, O Peter, confirmed 
thy love by a threefold divinely uttered question.  
Thou didst call the all-seeing God the Word as witness to thy love for Christ, O 
Peter; wherefore, He entrusted the beloved flock to thee.  
Theotokion: We all bless thee as the Mother of the God of all, who conceived in 
the flesh of thy womb the pre-eternal Word Who shone forth from God the Father.  
Canon of the holy apostle Paul  
Irmos: On the plain of Dura the tyrant once placed a furnace * to torment the 
God-bearers; * and therein the three youths chanted hymns unto the one God, 
* and the three together, chanted saying: * O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
He who in latter times was called and surpassed all others in zeal, became the seal 
and crown of Thine apostles, O Christ. With him the people of the Church chant 
unto thee: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Even though Paul the prisoner first persecuted Thy Church, O Christ, yet he later 
replaced his former ferocity with zeal for Thee; and gathered together the nations, 
who chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having from Jerusalem preached the Gospel unto all, thou didst take it round 
about the whole world, O Paul, teaching even unto the far ends of Illyricum, thou 
didst cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Caught up in awe, thou didst attain unto the third heaven, O most noetically rich 
apostle; and didst hear ineffable words, and cry aloud: Glory to the transcendent 
Father and the Son, and to the equally-enthroned effulgence of the Spirit of God 
Who searcheth the depths!  
Theotokion: Like rain upon the fleece Christ God descended upon thee, O Virgin, 
and issuing forth from thee in the flesh, He united those things that before were 
separate, thereby granting peace on earth and in heaven. O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 16 ---
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy apostle Peter  
Irmos: Christ Who doth bear all things in His unapproachable glory, * 
bedewed The venerable children in the midst of the flame, * who cried aloud 
unto Him: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The Master foretold thee: “They shall stretch forth thine arms and bind thee to a 
cross,”, and commanded thee to follow Him; wherefore thou dost cry aloud: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Working wonders, by the word of grace thou didst heal Eneus who was grievously 
paralyzed, and didst raise up Tabitha from the dead; wherefore they cried: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
O Christ Who announced unto Peter that the nations were cleansed, by spiritual 
radiance, do thou purify my thoughts, for I cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord!  
Theotokion: O all-holy Virgin who hast given birth to God the Word in the flesh, 
driving away darkness from my soul by thy supplications, and illumine me who cry 
aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Canon of the holy apostle Paul  
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the mystery of the 
Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning bush: * praise ye and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Paul was bound to thee by Thy love and underwent a goodly change; for the 
glorious one lived not for himself, O Compassionate One, but had Thee living within 
him throughout all ages.  
Thou didst betroth the Church unto Christ, presenting it to Him as a bride; for 
thou wast shown to be its wedding-escort, O God-bearing Paul. Wherefore, it 
glorifieth thee throughout all ages.  
Thou didst fight the good fight, and finishing thy race lawfully, didst preserve the 
treasure of the Faith. Wherefore, thou hast been deemed worthy of crowns of 
righteousness, O Paul.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O fiery throne of the Lord! Rejoice, O Virgin, unwedded 
Bride! Rejoice, cloud who shone forth the Sun of righteousness, Whom we supremely 
exalt throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy apostle Peter  
Irmos: With hymns do we magnify thee, O most glorious Bride, * and all-holy 
Theotokos, * who hast given birth to the Creator of all things, * visible and 
invisible.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Thine excellent grace is rightly glorified, for thy very shadow dispelleth the 
sufferings of the sick, O Peter; wherefore, we magnify thee.  
Blessed is Peter, who with ineffable divine power cast down Simon Magus, who 
through sorcery had soared into the heights of the air.  
By thy supplications grant forgiveness of sins, enlightenment of heart and gladness 
of spirit unto those who hymn thy memory, O apostle.  
O Peter, all thy words, relics and dust are full of glory, sanctity and miracles for 
those who with faith bow down with love before thy divine chains.  
Theotokion: The Fruit of thy womb caused the heavenly chorister, who 
announced “Rejoice!” with a loud voice unto thee who hast given birth to joy, to 
hymn thy name.  
Canon of the holy apostle Paul  
Irmos: Thou hast passed the limits of nature, * having conceived the Maker 
and the Lord, * and didst become a door of salvation * unto the world; * 
wherefore we unceasingly magnify thee, O Theotokos. 
We bow down before thy chains, which thou didst bear for Christ like a 
malefactor, O Paul, and we kiss the wounds which thou didst bear on thy glorious 
and victorious body.  
Now thou hast departed unto Him Whom thou didst unceasingly desire, O 
apostle; and dwelling within as a servant, with unceasing entreaties draw thou thy 
servants to thyself.  
No longer is Christ visible to thee in shadows or in a reflection, but thou dost gaze 
upon Him face to face, and He perfectly revealed to thee the understanding of the 
Godhead.  
Theotokion: O most holy Mother of God, thou wast the boast of the apostles of 
Christ, the glory of the martyrs and the foundation of the prophets; wherefore, we all 
magnify thee as is meet.  
Exapostilarion of the holy apostles:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Let us all hymn the foremost among the apostles, the godly Peter and Paul, the 
universal luminaries, the preachers of the Faith, the divinely sounded trumpets, the 
speakers of dogmas, the pillars of the Church and destroyers of falsehood. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O divinely joyous Maiden, Mother of God and Virgin, great and most glorious is 
the mystery of thy birthgiving, did the prophets proclaim, the apostles teach and the 
martyrs confess; the angels hymn it, and men bow down before it.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”:  
When the Savior put the question * to the twelve disciples and apostles: * “Whom 
do men say that I am?”, * Peter, the foremost of the apostles, * receiving grace from 
heaven, * answered, theologizing, crying out clearly: * “Thou art the Christ, the Son 
of the living God!” * Wherefore, he is fittingly blessed * as one who received 
revelation from on high, * rightly receiving the authority ** to loose and to bind.  
When Christ, the Word of God * Who revealed Himself through the Father, * 
asked “Whom do ye suppose that I am?”, * didst thou speak unto all with divine 
eloquence, and straightway cried aloud: * “Thou art the Son of the living God!” * 
Wherefore, thou didst receive as thy reward * the Savior’s words: “Blessed art thou, 
Simon, son of Jonah!” * For God doth glorify those who glorify Him * and calleth 
them to a rich delight; * and He set thee as the rock unashamed, ** the foundation 
and ground of the Church.  
Called from on high, and not by mortals, * when an earthly darkness * covered thy 
bodily eyes, * thus putting an end * to thine ungodly plans, * a heavenly light 
illumined thy noetic eyes, * disclosing the beauty of piety. * Wherefore, thou didst 
recognize Christ our God * Who brought forth light out of darkness. * Him do thou 
beseech, ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
As a preacher of Christ * bearing the boast of the Cross, * more than others didst 
thou discern * the most ardent divine love * which bindeth to the Desired One those 
who gaze upon it. * Wherefore, thou didst call thyself a prisoner of Christ, * who 
desired the burden of perils * as something sweeter than any food, * and who lived 
for thy Master. * Him do thou beseech, ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
Glory ..., the composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone VI: 
The most honored feast of the apostles hath arrived for the Church of Christ, 
bringing salvation unto us all. Wherefore, mystically plaiting hymns for them, let us 
say: Rejoice, O lamps unto those who are in darkness, shedding forth rays of the 
noetic Sun! Rejoice, O Peter and Paul, ye unshakable foundations of the divine 
doctrines, friends of Christ, precious vessels! Come ye into our midst, vouchsafing 
immaterial gifts unto those who praise your feast with hymns.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: * Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the holy 
apostle Peter, and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the holy apostle Paul.  
The sweet mouth of Christ God showed thee to be blessed and a sure treasure of 
the kingdom; wherefore, we hymn thee, O Apostle Peter. (Twice) 
On the rock of thy theology hath Jesus the Master unshakably established the 
Church, and therein we glorify thee, O Apostle Peter.  
How much greater than the angels was Peter in the body! For Christ God said that 
at His radiant coming he would be a judge and would be co-enthroned.  
Spurning all the beautiful things of the world, thou wast wounded by the love of 
the Master and by the desire for the common salvation of mankind, wishing to bear 
witness unto Him, O blessed Paul. Pray thou now on behalf of the whole world.  
As an excellent emulator of the Master, clothed in Him, O Paul, thou wast truly all 
things to all men, that thou mightest acquire and save all the people; and pursuing the 
ends of the world for Christ, thou didst truly save them.  
As is meet Christ hath given thee life in the heavens, O Apostle Paul; for thou 
didst not desire a city which abideth here, O blessed one, but wast a faithful minister 
and celebrant of His mysteries.  
Theotokion: The Lord looked down upon thee, restoring my nature, in that He is 
mighty; and doing mighty works, O all-immaculate Birthgiver of God, through thee 
my God hath saved me from corruption, in that He is full of loving-kindness.  
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
O first enthroned among the apostles * and teachers of the whole world: * entreat 
the Master of all, * that He grant peace to the world ** and great mercy to our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone II: 
The steadfast and divinely eloquent preachers, * the foremost of Thine apostles, O 
Lord, * hast Thou received into the rest and delight of Thy good things; * for Thou 
hast accepted their pangs and death as greater than any wholeburnt offering, ** O 
Thou Who alone knowest the hearts of all mankind.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, § 193 (II COR. 11: 21-30)  
Brethren: Howbeit whereinsoever any is bold, (I speak foolishly,) I am bold also. 
Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they Israelites? so am I. Are they the seed of 
Abraham? so am I. Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I am more; in 

--- PAGE 20 ---
labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths 
oft. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with 
rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in 
the deep; in journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by 
mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the 
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren; in weariness and 
painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and 
nakedness. Beside those things that are without, that which cometh upon me daily, 
the care of all the churches. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I 
burn not? If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern mine 
infirmities.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §67 (16: 13-19)  
At that time, Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, and asked His 
disciples, saying: whom do men say that I the Son of man am?” And they said: “Some 
say that thou art John the Baptist; some, Elijah; and others, Jeremiah, or one of the 
prophets.” He said unto them: “But whom say ye that lam?” And Simon Peter 
answered and said: “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.” And Jesus 
answered and said unto him: “Blessed art thou, Simon bar Jonah: for flesh and blood 
hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father Who is in heaven. And I say also unto 
thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of 
hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of 
heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and 
whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.”  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world  
 
We read the daily Epistle and Gospel on the first convenient day before this 
feast.  
N.B. If this feast falleth on a Wednesday or a Friday, we are permitted to eat 
fish and to drink wine.  
N.B. If the feast of the apostles falleth on a Sunday, the hymns of the apostles 
take precedence over the hymns of the resurrection.  
 
