--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR EUSEBIUS 
AT VESPERS:  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you ...”: 
What shall we call thee, O glorious one? * True hierarch and sacred teacher, * 
confirmation of the Orthodox, * and eye of the Church, * beacon which shineth forth 
a noetic light, * one who wast glorious among the martyrs, * O champion of truth, * 
and great accuser of falsehood. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved!  
What shall we call thee, O holy hierarch? * A river which proceedeth from the 
noetic Eden, * watering the earth * with spiritual dews, * cup which is full of divine 
water * which drowneth the followers of Arius, * pillar of fire which guideth the new 
people * by divine grace. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved!  
What shall I call thee, O Eusebius? * Bestower of piety * and destroyer of impiety, 
* adornment of passion-bearers and joy of priests, * sickle which cutteth down the 
tares * and gathereth in the wheat of heaven, * ever-flowing fount of miracles * which 
relieveth the burning heat of infirmities. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved!  
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
Strange and awesome is the mystery * of thy seedless birthgiving, O Virgin * who 
surpassest in majesty all human thought. * For unto us hast thou given birth * in the 
flesh unto the Word * Who didst not put off the Father’s essence, * upon Whom the 
many-eyed cherubim * dare not gaze, and before Whom ** all the ranks of the holy 
angels tremble.  
To whom hast thou likened thyself, * O my wretched soul, * who in no wise 
rousing thyself to repentance * dost not fear the fire which awaiteth the wicked? * 
Arise, and call upon her * who alone is quick to help, and cry aloud: * O Virgin 
Mother, * entreat thy Son and our God, ** that He deliver me from the wiles of the 
deceiver!  
O Sovereign Lady, thou help of all, * as thou hast given birth unto the Lover of 
mankind, * send down upon me a drop of thy mercy * and extend to me who am 
ever tempest-tossed * on the abyss of darkness * and am overwhelmed by the three-
fold waves * of the evils of life; * and grant me ** the portion of the elect and the 
righteous.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
O most immaculate and pure one, * who hast given birth to the unbearable Fire * 
Who burneth up sins * and bedeweth the faithful: by thy supplications * consume the 
tinder of my boundless offenses, * and with thy dew cool my soul, * which is 
withering away through the passions, * that with a loud voice I, thy servant, ** may 
magnify thy mercy and power.  
Stavrotheotokion: The ewe-lamb, as she beheld the Lamb * stretched out of His 
own will * upon the Tree of the Cross, * cried out maternally, * in pain with her 
weeping: * O my Son, what is this strange sight? * O Longsuffering One, how is it 
that Thou art slain, * Who, as Lord, bestoweth life upon all, granting resurrection to 
mortals? ** I glorify Thy great condescension, O my God!  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS:  
The canon to the holy hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor the namesake of 
piety,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified! 
Illumined with perfect light, numbered among the sacred choirs and adorned with 
the glory of martyrdom, O blessed one, preserve those who celebrate thy memory 
with faith, O blessed Eusebius, rendering Christ merciful.  
Sweetly aflame with desire for Christ from thy youth, thou didst subject thy flesh 
to thy soul with sacred powers, showing thyself to be a sacred vessel, O most blessed 
one; and thou didst shepherd thy people in sanctity, O venerable one, anointed with 
the chrism of grace.  
The Holy Spirit hath appointed thee as a chief shepherd who driveth away the 
gloom of the heretics with thy brilliant words, O wise one, and clearly pointeth out 
the right path, whereunto thou art a beacon for the hearts of us who enter thereupon.  
Theotokion: O blessed one, who hast given birth unto God, bless those who bless 
thee, O most pure one; guide them toward the good entries; fill them with divine 
blessings, and strengthen them to chant: Let us chant unto the Lord, for gloriously 
hath He been glorified!  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy fear, O Lord, do Thou plant * in the hearts of Thy servants * and 
be Thou the confirmation of us * who in truth call upon Thee.  
Thou wast meek and guileless, humble-minded and gentle, and full of divine love; 
and at thy repose thou wast adorned with a crown of martyrdom.  
Resplendent in the garments of thy blood, O sacred Eusebius, thou didst ascend 
to the holy places, splendidly crowned with the glory of the saints.  
Denouncing the followers of Arius, O blessed one, thou didst lay thyself open to 
persecution and a violent death. Wherefore, thou hast been deemed worthy of 
undying glory.  
Theotokion: By the will of the Father and the intervention of the divine Spirit 
thou didst give birth unto the Word, O most holy Virgin Mother, thou glory of 
hierarchs. Wherefore we hymn thee.  
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Having made thy life radiant with the beauties of the virtues, thou wast named 
pastor and honored hierarch, O most blessed Eusebius; and with the blood of thy 
martyrdom thou didst adorn thyself and depart on High to the immaterial choirs. 
With them, O father, entreat Christ on our behalf, that He have mercy on our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O pure, all-immaculate one who knewest not a man, who alone hast given birth 
within time to the timeless Son and Word of God, with the holy and honored 
patriarchs, the martyrs, prophets and the venerable, entreat Him, that He grant us 
purification and great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee suspended upon the Cross, * O Word of 
God, * Thy most pure Mother exclaimed, lamenting maternally: * “What is this new 
and strange wonder, O my Son? * How is it that Thou, the Life of all, hast tasted 
death, * desiring to bring life to mortals, ** in so far as Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
O wise one, thou didst halt the decay of deception with the salt of thine excellent 
teachings, and healed those who were afflicted with the heresy of impiety, O blessed 
Eusebius.  
Guiding thy people to the harbor of salvation, thou didst drown the disbelief of 
Arius with the inundation of thy blood, O pastor and martyr, thou adornment of 
hierarchs!  
Thou hast shone forth in the world as a brilliant star, enlightening the thoughts of 
the Orthodox with sacred splendor, O most blessed one. Wherefore, we faithfully 
bless thee.  
Theotokion: With lips, tongue and heart I confess thee to be the Mother of the 
Creator, and I entreat thee: Illumine my soul which hath become darkened through 
mine offenses.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
Making steadfast the wisdom of the Orthodox by thy teachings, O blessed one, 
thou didst endure imprisonment for piety’s sake.  
We know thee to be a pillar of Orthodoxy and a wellspring of healings, O most 
wise hierarch, thou confirmation of the Church.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Striking heavily against the iniquitous with thy divine precepts, O Eusebius, thou 
didst endure an unjust death at the hands of transgressors.  
Theotokion: O Birthgiver of God, thou hast been acknowledged to be the radiant 
candlestick which bearest the divine Lamp which illumineth all the ends of the earth.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Thou didst preach the consubstantial Word, the Son Who with the Father is 
beginningless; and thereby destroy the vain philosophizing of the madness of vile 
Arius, O Eusebius, thou impregnable and steadfast bulwark of the pious.  
With the outpouring of thy precious blood thou didst dye thyself a robe of royal 
purple, and with gladness entered into the divine Kingdom, to stand before the King 
of the ages, O all-blessed Eusebius.  
Thou didst show thyself to be like a rose, like a fragrant lily, like the paradise of 
God, having the Tree of Life, the Lord and Fashioner of all, in the midst thereof, O 
Eusebius; and now thou dost fill us with the fragrance of the divine Spirit.  
Theotokion: The divinely eloquent prophets, perceiving the unfathomable depth 
of thy mystery, O Maiden, clearly proclaimed it through images and divine 
prophecies; for, in a manner beyond all telling, thou didst give flesh to the Word of 
the Father, O pure one.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
Having lived piously in the rank of hierarch * and traversed the path of 
martyrdom, * thou didst extinguish the burnt offerings of the idolaters, * O holy 
hierarch Eusebius. * But as thou hast boldness before Christ God, * entreat Him, ** 
that our souls be saved.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Devoting thy time to hymns and supplications, O holy hierarch, thou didst slay the 
passions and didst show thyself to be a watchful guardian for us, the faithful, who 
piously hymn thee and keep thy memory.  
Revealed as both martyr and holy hierarch, in a divine manner hast thou inherited 
the blessings of heaven; and standing before the throne of the Creator thou dost cry 
aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou didst shine forth as the dawn, proclaiming Jesus Christ Who shone forth 
from the Father before the morning star, O beacon of the Church, adornment of 
hierarchs and ornament of sufferers.  
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving thou dost most gloriously renew the laws of 
nature, O Virgin, cleansing us who have become corrupt through evil transgressions. 
Wherefore as is meet, we praise thee.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * ‘Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord’. 
As a holy hierarch and martyr, O sacred preacher Eusebius, entreat the Savior of 
all with the holy hierarchs and martyrs, that He reveal to us His mercy.  
Living blessedly, thou didst shepherd thy sacred flock with the staff of thy words, 
driving away the wild beasts of heresy, O all-blessed one.  
Denouncing those who were afflicted with the drunkenness of deception and 
those who vainly propounded heresy, thou wast slain by them, O Eusebius, having 
suffered steadfastly.  
Theotokion: As thou art more highly exalted than the heights of heaven, thou 
didst give birth unto the exalted Word Who hath raised up from earth fallen human 
nature, O all-hymned one.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Thou wast deemed worthy to behold those distant things for which thy sacred 
soul did long, O father; and, rejoicing, thou hast made thine abode in unwaning 
splendor.  
By thy divine eloquence, good works and the most honorable splendors of thy 
sufferings wast thou shown to be adorned, O blessed Eusebius.  
Let us form a joyous chorus, praising the sacred Eusebius who was adorned with 
the comeliness of piety.  
Thy shrine bestoweth the grace of healing, and thine holy memory illumineth the 
world like a great sun, O Eusebius.  
Theotokion: O right beloved Virgin, bless thou my soul which hath been afflicted 
by sin, O thou that hast given birth unto our supremely good God in the flesh.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Having lived piously in the rank of hierarch * and traversed the path of 
martyrdom, * thou didst extinguish the burnt offerings of the idolaters, * O holy 
hierarch Eusebius. * But as thou hast boldness before Christ God, * entreat Him, ** 
that our souls be saved.  
 
