--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 25th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE 
AFTERFEAST OF THE NATIVITY OF THE FORERUNNER  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRED NUN FEBRONIA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy forerunner, in Tone IV: 
When John was born, he loosed the muteness of Zacharias, for it was not fitting 
for the father to be silent when the voice of the Word arrived. But since, when the 
priest had not believed in the beginning, his tongue was bound, so, when John 
appeared, he set his father free. To him was announced and born the voice of the 
Word, the forerunner of the Light, praying for our souls.  
Today the voice of the Word looseth the voice of his father, which was restrained 
because of his unbelief, and showeth forth fruitfulness to the Church, loosing the 
bonds of his mother’s barrenness. The lamp of the Light cometh forth; the splendor 
of the Sun of righteousness announceth His coming, for the edification of all and the 
salvation of our souls.  
By Anatolius: When the Word of God wished to be born of the Virgin, His angel, 
the highest of the prophets and greatest born of women, issued forth from elderly 
loins; for it was meet that he be the most glorious beginning of things divine: both an 
offspring produced past the age of fertility, and the conception accomplished without 
seed. O Thou Who workest miracles for our salvation, glory be to Thee!  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
Thou didst endure a twofold suffering * in thy contest, * O all-praised Febronia, * 
mingling the blood of martyrdom with the sweat of thine ascetic endeavor; * 
wherefore, the Benefactor hath given thee a twofold crown. * And thou hast entered 
in unto Him, * splendidly adorned, * as an all-immaculate virgin ** and an invincible 
martyr.  
The divine beauties of thy soul * came together with the comeliness of thy body, * 
for thou dost shine forth like a white lily * in the habitations of the venerable, * 
empurpled by the streams of thy blood, * O all-immaculate bride. * Wherefore, the 
comely Bridegroom of heaven * and the imperishable bridal-chamber ** have 
received thee as a virgin and martyr.  
O all-praised Febronia, * the angel of deliverance * hath come nigh to thee; * for 
from childhood thou wast revealed to fear the Lord, * and bringing thyself to the 
Almighty * as a pure and cherished offering, * thou didst trample underfoot the 
foolishness of Selenus, * earnestly hastening ** to Christ, thy Bridegroom. 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
Behold Elizabeth, who said to the Virgin Mary: “Whence is this to me, O Mother 
of my Lord? Thou bearest the King, I the warrior; thou the Law-giver, I the upholder 
of the law; thou the Word, I the voice which proclaimeth the kingdom of heaven!”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos;  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
Elizabeth conceived the forerunner of grace, and the Virgin conceived the Lord of 
glory. Both mothers kissed each other, and the babe leapt up, for within her womb 
the servant praised the Master. And the mother of the forerunner marveled and cried 
aloud: “Whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? May 
He Who hath great mercy save a despairing people!”  
Troparion of the holy forerunner, in Tone IV:  
O prophet and forerunner of the coming of Christ, * we who honor thee with love 
* are at a loss how to worthily praise thee; * for by thy glorious and honored nativity * 
thou didst loose the barrenness of her who gave birth to thee * and the muteness of 
thy father, ** and proclaimed to the world the incarnation of the Son of God.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: 
Thy ewe-lamb Febronia, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy forerunner, in Tone IV:  
O prophet and forerunner of the coming of Christ, * we who honor thee with love 
* are at a loss how to worthily praise thee; * for by thy glorious and honored nativity * 
thou didst loose the barrenness of her who gave birth to thee * and the muteness of 
thy father, ** and proclaimed to the world the incarnation of the Son of God.  
Glory ..., that of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: 
Thy ewe-lamb Febronia, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and two from 
the Menaion: that of the holy forerunner, with 4 Troparia, and that of the venerable 
martyr, with 4 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy forerunner, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Having had an angel of heaven foretell thy divine nativity, O glorious forerunner, 
thou wast revealed to be an earthly angel and heavenly man.  
In the supra-natural exaltation of thy life thou wast shown to be a reason-endowed 
heavenly firmament, having Christ in its midst like the sun, and the virtues like stars.  
Precious is thy death in the sight of the Lord Who sacrificed Himself for our sake, 
O wise one who bearest the male gender like a lamb of the Word.  
Theotokion: Having made His abode within thee, O Maiden, the Redeemer hath 
truly cast out the greatly lamentable sin which made its abode within me, and hath 
shown me to be a dweller in paradise.  
Canon of the venerable martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “Wisely do I hymn thee with 
songs, O Febronia”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
O pure Febronia, champion of the glory of Christ, grant me grace and thine 
enlightenment, that I may joyfully praise thy luminous solemnity.  
Continually enlightening thy soul with the thought of death, O martyr Febronia, 
thou didst ascend to the summit of martyrdom, offering thyself to Christ through 
thine agonies.  
Having manifestly renewed the meadow of thy heart through thy pangs, O martyr, 
thou hast received the crown of martyrdom, chanting to our God in thy sufferings.  
Theotokion: By a gesture, He Who createth all things became incarnate of thee, O 
Mother of God; and, piously desiring Him, the maiden Febronia brought herself to 
Him through martyrdom.  
ODE III  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
O greatly flourishing offshoot of a barren womb, show forth my barren soul as 
greatly fruitful with goodly offshoots, like a growing vine which produceth the sweet 
grapes of the virtues.  
The beauteous branch of sacred lineage gave rise to a truly sacred root and pure 
seed. And thou, O blessed one, hast baptized Christ, the life-bearing Offspring Who 
sprung forth from the divine root of Jesse.  
O all-famed one, grant me continual sighs, frequent tears, a contrite heart, a 
humble spirit, sorrowful lamentation, fervent compunction and abiding pangs.  
Theotokion: Having sprung forth from an earthly root, O pure Sovereign Lady, 
thou hast brought forth Christ, the ever-flowering and beauteous Offspring of nature, 
the flower of the Godhead; for the rod of Aaron was a prefigurement of thee.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Thou wast strengthened by the Spirit, to cast down the savagery of the tyrant and 
the polytheism of the ungodly, O most glorious Febronia.  
With Thy mighty arm, O Master, Thou hast now rendered the glorious Febronia 
steadfast, who struggled in martyrdom.  
Thy body, which was rent asunder in thy martyrdom for Christ, O all-wise and 
pure one, won for thee the delights of paradise.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, the glorious martyr Febronia found thee, the 
Mother of God, to be her help; whereby she put the tyrant to shame.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “O helper ...”:  
“O my Bridegroom, Jesus most sweet,” cried Febronia, * “it is not difficult for me 
to follow Thee; * for the sweetness of Thy love hath given my soul wings of hope, * 
and the beauty of Thy mercy hath sweetened my heart, * that I might drain the cup of 
sufferings in emulation of Thee, * that Thou mayest worthily reckon me among the 
wise virgins * who dance with Thee in Thy bridal-chamber.” * Wherefore, O 
venerable passion-bearer, honoring the struggles of thy labors, we entreat thee: ** 
Pray that we not find the portals of the bridal-chamber locked to us.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy forerunner, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded ...”:  
The fruit of Zachariah, the flower of the barren woman, the honored forerunner 
John hath been born for us today according to the promise; and, leaping up within his 
mother’s womb, even before his birth he proclaimeth the Creator of all. He hath 
shown forth the ineffable and salvific manifestation of God, and we all honor him.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the wisdom ...”:  
Thy soul bound by the love of Christ, O wise martyr, as a disciple of the Word 
thou didst pass over corruptible and transitory things with forgetfulness; and having 
first mortified the passions with fasting, thou didst later put the deceiver to shame 
with suffering. Wherefore, thou hast been deemed worthy of a twofold boldness 
before the Creator, O glorious and most noetically rich Febronia, in that thou wast 
obedient to Him. Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins to those who 
honor thy holy memory with love.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
As the all-immaculate Bride of the Creator, * Mother of the Redeemer, who 
knewest not a man, * and as the receptacle of the Comforter O all-hymned one, * 
hasten thou to deliver me, * the vile abode of iniquity and noetic plaything of the 
demons, * from their evil machinations; * and make me the bright dwelling-place of 
the virtues, * O thou incorrupt light-bearing one. * Drive away the clouds of the pas-
sions and grant that, * by thy supplications, * I may receive a portion on high ** and 
share in the never-waning light.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE IV  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
The mouths of men are incapable of praising thee, whom the sweet and honeyed 
mouth of Christ, full of life, praised, granting His words unto all; yet accept thou my 
hymnody and my entreaty, O thou who knewest Love, for it is inescapable.  
Thy pure heart was shown to be the phial of the Holy Spirit, holding the virtues 
like scents, perfuming men’s minds and sweetening their good works, O forerunner; 
for blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.  
The time draweth nigh when the axe shall be laid to the root; and witness hath 
been made, that every tree which beareth not good fruit shall be felled by the axe and 
cast into the fire of Gehenna. Wherefore, bring forth fruits of repentance, O my soul.  
As thou dwellest in the heavens and hast received a city which hath unshakable 
foundations, thou hadst no desire for a city here; and thou hast revealed the abiding 
Jerusalem, the free mother of Paul, Sion most high.  
Theotokion: Fervent faith hath been declared, but not the report of thine awesome 
mystery, O Maiden; for, though seen, it can in nowise be explained, and though 
witnessed, it is unapproachable. For with thee it eludeth and avoideth 
comprehension, and revealing itself, discloseth little of its essence.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
There was no fault found in thee, O all-praised Febronia; for Him Who was both 
thy Redeemer and thy Love, didst thou strive to please, adorned with the pangs of 
asceticism and the sufferings of martyrdom, O divinely wise and most noetically rich 
martyr.  
From infancy thou didst desire the love of the ever-flowing Well-spring sought by 
all the reason-endowed; and burned with fire, full of the pangs of martyrdom, thou 
didst endure dismemberment, O Febronia, boast of virgins.  
Nurtured on the words of God, O divinely wise one, and commending the salvific 
discourse of the sacred books to those who desired to learn of God, O martyr, in a 
godly manner thou didst extend thy hands to receive the reward of thy teaching, 
enriched with the glory of the martyrs.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, thou hast been revealed as the portal of the 
Light, having shone forth upon all who are in darkness Christ, the Sun of 
righteousness, the infinite Light; and Febronia, strengthened by His rays, hath 
acquired the glory of the martyrs.  
ODE V  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
The eloquent language of those who with philosophy thunder forth discourses and 
words of power flowing forth in number and covenant, and their elaborate high 
oratory are unable to worthily praise thee.  
O forerunner, Christ hath shown thee to be a shower-laden cloud which raineth 
down understanding, spreading dew upon those withered by the flame of ignorance 
and cooling those who were perishing.  
With gifts of incorruption, divine benefactions and bestowals do thou enrich me 
who have become poor and stripped bare of every virtue, and by thy salvific 
protection clothe me with the robe of divinity.  
My soul, rife with vile thoughts and corrupt fantasies, O blessed one, hath been 
made barren because of the thorns of the passions; but, having burned away its 
weeds, and cleansed it with the fire of thy supplications, sow in it the fear of God.  
Theotokion: O Lady and Virgin, who art called the city of Christ the King which is 
gladdened by the flowing of the mystical river, arrange for my wretched soul a 
dwelling-place in the habitations of all those who are gladdened.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Clad in a purple robe woven for thee of thine own blood, O martyr, thou didst 
strip thy body bare and cast off the garments of the passions; and, standing before the 
tribunal of the tyrants, O Febronia, thou didst emulate the nakedness of Christ.  
Kindled by thy love of thy noetic Bridegroom and set afire by His incorrupt 
beauties, thou didst endure the severing of thy hands and painful wounds, O martyr 
Febronia, thou boast of the martyrs.  
The torrents of thy blood quenched the flame of polytheism, and thine uprooted 
teeth removed the delusion of idolatry, and rendered thee eternally beautiful, O 
Febronia.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: Thy severed feet trod the path of the divine martyrs and passed over 
to Him Who was born of the holy Virgin, joyously walking into paradise, O virgin 
Febronia, bride of God.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Learning the immortality of the immaterial ones in thy mortal and material flesh 
like one incorporeal and immaterial, O Baptist, in fasting thou didst adorn thyself 
with supreme love of knowledge, and didst partake of both angelic and human 
nature.  
A most radiant sun among stars, a sweet spring among seasons, enriching every 
nature with impeccable majesty, thou standest above the council of the saints as the 
sun doth above all the stars.  
O great aid of Christians, ardent comforter of sinners, herald of the kingdom of 
heaven, introducer of divine baptism, preacher of repentance: make me steadfast with 
models of penitence.  
Theotokion: Thou art like the ladder which extended from earth to heaven, O 
Sovereign Lady; thou art truly the impassable gate, the golden jar, and bridge leading 
to the heavens, giving access to life.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
By God’s providence over all things and by thine endurance, thou didst cast down 
the ungodly and prideful savagery of the wicked Selenus, O glorious one, who sought 
thy blood; and thereby the godly Lysimachus was saved.  
The wise and God-bearing Bryene, who instructed thee with doctrines, showed 
thee to be a divinely radiant lamp, O maiden, and thou didst in nowise disappoint her 
hope; for she presented thee to Christ as an undefiled bride, O Febronia.  
Theotokion: The animate bridal-chamber of the Master, shining radiantly with the 
bright rays of virginity, the most pure Virgin Theotokos of godly magnificence is 
glorified like a lily among the masses of thorns.  
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Kontakion of the holy forerunner, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Today she who before was barren * giveth birth unto the forerunner of Christ, * 
he is the fulfillment of all prophecy; * for, laying his hand in the Jordan upon Him * 
Whom the prophets foretold, * he hath been shown to be the prophet, herald and 
forerunner ** of the Word of God.  
Ikos: Isaiah and all the prophets of old beheld Jesus Christ, our true god, in images 
and shadows; but this prophet was the greatest of them, as is written, for he beheld 
God the Word in the flesh, Whom He foretold, and touched Him, and even before 
his birth proclaimed Him the joy of all the world, when he leaped within his mother’s 
womb, for he was first to be the prophet, herald and forerunner of the coming of the 
Word.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Christ, the true Head of the whole Church, showed thee forth, O blessed one; as 
the summit of the prophets, the seal of the apostles, the first of fasters, the perfection 
of the righteous and the confirmation of the martyrs.  
From thy mother’s womb thou wast filled with the Holy Spirit, O forerunner, and 
thou didst quaff neither wine nor strong drink, as the angel told thy father. 
Wherefore, thou hast been called great in the sight of God.  
He Who first baptized men in fire by the Holy Spirit will later plunge into the fire 
of Gehenna those who do not believe on Him. O Baptist, deliver me from that bitter 
baptism!  
Theotokion: The inanimate jar of old called thee the animate Jar, O Sovereign 
Lady; for thou didst bear Christ, the Manna of life Who taketh away the bitterness of 
death, the true sweetness and enlightenment of the world.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Thou pourest forth streams of healing upon those who have recourse to thy tomb 
with faith, O Febronia, and cry out to thy Bridegroom: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages!  
O profitable was thy commerce, O divinely wise one! For with a cup of blood thou 
didst purchase the kingdom of God, O all-praised one, crying out: Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: Thou dancest with the choirs of the virgins, O right wondrous virgin 
Febronia, crying out to the Virgin Mother of God: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, 
O most pure one! 
ODE VIII  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Through wounding by the staff of Moses, the dry, hard and uncut stone poured 
forth sweet and potable water for the disobedient and ignorant people of Israel; and 
from a barren and childless womb a river of healings hath poured forth upon us.  
With praises the assembly of the righteous, the company of the prophets, the army 
of the martyrs and the band of ascetics, the ranks of the venerable and all the saints, 
keep thy memory, O prophet; for the memory of the righteous is truly celebrated with 
hymns of praise.  
Let the forerunner be hymned: the animate heaven adorned with the virtues as 
with stars, the golden sun shining with rays of gold, the lamp of grace, the treasury of 
the Spirit, the great preacher of the kingdom, the divinely inspired orator, the tongue 
with voice of thunder, the great trumpet.  
Theotokion: Strange, wondrous and awesome is the tale of thy strange and most 
glorious birthgiving, O all-hymned Mary! For the Lord of glory, before Whom the 
cherubim and seraphim stand, Who is One of the Trinity without commingling, was 
immutably born, incarnate of thee without seed.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Thy splendid memory is now celebrated, shining with radiant lightning-flashes, O 
Febronia; for thou didst draw nigh to the Light and became light, crying out to the 
Creator and Bestower of light: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou wast first made marvelous by thine ascetic feats, O all-famed one, and after 
that, thou wast adorned with feats of martyrdom; for hastening after thy Love, O 
radiant maiden, thou didst endure the cutting off of both thy breasts, O Febronia, 
whereby the sweet scent and fragrance of thy goodly piety perfumeth the faithful.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Weighed down by the burden of transgressions and broken down by the waves of 
the passions, I flee to thy protection, O all-praised Febronia, seeking deliverance from 
both. As thou art wondrous and the chosen one of the Master, O virgin, disdain me 
not who cry aloud, but by thy supplications rescue me from soul-destroying snares.  
Theotokion: The tongues of orators cannot hymn thee, O Mary, Birthgiver and 
Bride of God; for from thy virginal womb which knew not wedlock thou hast given 
birth to Him Who is God over all, O pure Maiden. To Him doth Febronia now cry 
aloud, chanting: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, supremely exalt 
throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Lo! unto Thee, my blessed Master, the fervent Helper of my soul, I have brought 
this poor offering, wisely fulfilling my ministry as servant. Hearken unto it, valuing 
mine intention above my deeds, and my thought above my gift.  
With impure and defiled lips do I, who am impure, defiled and besmirched with 
pleasures, entreat thee, the most pure kinsman of the most pure Virgin, O blessed 
one: Wash thou my body, cleanse my spirit and sanctify my soul.  
O initiate of the mysteries of the heavenly bridal-chamber, true friend of Christ the 
Bridegroom, who art worthy to stand and listen to the joyous voice of the 
Bridegroom, show me forth also as good to God Who with blessings summoneth the 
heir of His kingdom into his inheritance.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin Mother of God, thou animate tongs of the 
seraph who immaterially bearest the Ember Who burneth away the dross from men’s 
souls, thou flaming throne of Him Who is borne up by the cherubim: with immaterial 
fire burn away the dross of my soul, and deliver me from the unquenchable fire.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
O divine turtle-dove of the Master, rendered golden by the splendor of virginity, 
who hast made thy body bright by asceticism and hast furnished thyself with golden 
wings through the golden luster of thy confession and thy divine blood: illumine 
those who hymn thee.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Conversing with the mind of God, thine own mind laid bare, O divinely wise 
Febronia, thou didst utterly trample down carnal desires and hast been deemed 
worthy to attain a blessed end; and now thou reignest in splendor with Christ thy 
Bridegroom, abiding in gladness within the ineffable mansions of heaven.  
Thou pourest forth healings like rivers upon those who have recourse to thy 
precious shrine with faith, O godly Febronia, thou pillar of virginity, beauteous flower 
of nature, daughter of the King, who hast within thee the blessedness of divine glory.  
Theotokion: Thou hast set aright the stumbling of women by giving birth to the 
Word Who raiseth on high those who have fallen, in that He is good and mighty in 
power, O Virgin. Him did the glorious Febronia ardently desire, crying out in 
rejoicing: “I hasten after Thee!”  
Exapostilarion of the holy forerunner:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Today the joyous nativity of the forerunner looseth the burden of his father’s 
muteness and the barrenness of his mother, and proclaimeth true joy and gladness. 
Wherefore, all creation doth celebrate it with splendor.  
Theotokion: O Virgin who hast given birth to the hypostatic Wisdom, the 
transcendent Word, the Physician of men’s souls and bodies, heal thou the grievous 
and burdensome sores and wounds of my soul, and cause thou the pangs of my heart 
to disappear.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and, Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Thou didst cause thy tongue to shine forth with splendor, crying out, O Zacharias: 
“This child will be a prophet of God and the forerunner of the divine Word!”  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Tree of the Cross. * O Jesus, * she 
that kneweth not wedlock said weeping: * “O sweet Child, why hast Thou abandoned 
me * who alone gave birth to Thee, * O unapproachable Light of the beginningless 
Father? * Hasten Thou, and glorify Thyself, * that those who glorify Thy divine 
sufferings ** may receive divine glory!” 

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
 
Troparion of the holy forerunner, in Tone IV:  
O prophet and forerunner of the coming of Christ, * we who honor thee with love 
* are at a loss how to worthily praise thee; * for by thy glorious and honored nativity * 
thou didst loose the barrenness of her who gave birth to thee * and the muteness of 
thy father, ** and proclaimed to the world the incarnation of the Son of God.  
Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: 
Thy ewe-lamb Febronia, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone VI:  
“O my Bridegroom, Jesus most sweet,” cried Febronia, * “it is not difficult for me 
to follow Thee; * for the sweetness of Thy love hath given my soul wings of hope, * 
and the beauty of Thy mercy hath sweetened my heart, * that I might drain the cup of 
sufferings in emulation of Thee, * that Thou mayest worthily reckon me among the 
wise virgins * who dance with Thee in Thy bridal-chamber.” * Wherefore, O 
venerable passion-bearer, honoring the struggles of thy labors, we entreat thee: ** 
Pray that we not find the portals of the bridal-chamber locked to us.  
Kontakion of the holy forerunner, in Tone III:  
Today she who before was barren * giveth birth unto the forerunner of Christ, * 
he is the fulfillment of all prophecy; * for, laying his hand in the Jordan upon Him * 
Whom the prophets foretold, * he hath been shown to be the prophet, herald and 
forerunner ** of the Word of God.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §181 (II COR. 6:1-10)  
Brethren: As workers together with Him, beseech you also that ye receive not the 
grace of God in vain. (For He saith, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the 
day of salvation have I succored thee: Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now 
is the day of salvation.) Giving no offense in any thing, that the ministry be not 
blamed: but in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much 

--- PAGE 14 ---
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in 
tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings; by pureness, by knowledge, by 
longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy Spirit, by love unfeigned, by the word of 
truth, by the power of God, by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on 
the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report: as deceivers, and yet 
true; as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold, we live; as chastened, 
and not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as 
having nothing, and yet possessing all things.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was 
attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Verse: And He brought me up out of the pit of misery, and from the mire of 
clay.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §33 (LK 7:36-5O)  
At that time, one of the Pharisees desired Jesus that he would eat with him. And he 
went down into the Pharisee’s house, and sat down to meat. And behold, a woman in 
the city, which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee’s 
house, brought an alabaster box of ointment, and stood at his feet behind him 
weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of 
her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment. Now when the 
Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spake within himself, saying, This man, if 
he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is that 
toucheth him; for she is a sinner. And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have 
somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on. There was a certain creditor 
which had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. And 
when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me, therefore, 
which of them will love him most? Simon answered and said, I suppose that he, to 
whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged. And he 
turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into 
thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath washed my feet with 
tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head. Thou gavest me no kiss: but this 
woman, since the time I came in, hath not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil 
thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment. 
Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved 
much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little. And he said unto her, Thy 
sins are forgiven. And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, 
Who is this that forgiveth sins also? And he said’ to the woman, Thy faith hath saved 
thee; go in peace.  
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
