--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 30th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE  
SYNAXIS OF THE TWELVE HOLY, GLORIOUS & ALL-PRAISED APOSTLES  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 for the apostles Peter & Paul, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “With what wreaths of praise ...”: 
With what wreaths of praise shall we crown Peter and Paul, who were separate in 
body yet united in spirit, the foremost of the preachers of God, the one as leader of 
the apostles, and the other as the one who labored more than the rest? For Christ our 
God, Who hath great mercy, hath truly crowned them with diadems of glory as is 
meet.  
With what beauties of song shall we hymn Peter and Paul? They are the wings of 
divine knowledge who soared above the ends of the earth and were borne aloft to the 
heavens, the hands of the grace of the Gospel, the rivers of wisdom, the arms of the 
Cross, wherewith Christ, Who hath great mercy, hath cast down the pride of the 
demons.  
With what spiritual hymns shall we praise Peter and Paul? Who have closed the 
ever-gaping mouths of the ungodly, they are the dreadful swords of the Spirit, the 
splendid adornments of Rome, the nurturers of the whole world, the noetic and 
divinely graven tablets of the new covenant, whom Christ, Who hath great mercy, 
proclaimed in Sion.  
And 3 of the twelve holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
As witnesses and beholders of the incarnation of the Word, * ye are blessed, O 
most spiritually rich disciples; * for ye have appeared to the world, * as bright as 
lightning, * pouring forth the sweetness * of the noetic mountain. * As separate and 
ever-flowing rivers of paradise * ye irrigate the Churches of the nations ** with divine 
waters.  
Like rays shining with spiritual radiance * ye were sent throughout the whole 
world, * abundantly showing forth * the working of miracles, * O ye who were 
servants of the mysteries of Christ, * divine graven tablets * of the law ordained by 
God, * inscribed by the grace of God, ** O most noetically rich initiates of divine 
mysteries.  
The pen of the fishermen * hath effaced the arrogance of the philosophers * and 
the prating of the orators, * while manifestly setting forth * the glad tidings of the 
good mysteries, * the divinely wise teachings of the dogmas, * the partaking of eternal 
nourishment, * the delight of the angels, ** and everlasting glory.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
The most honored feast of the apostles hath arrived for the Church of Christ, 
bringing salvation unto us all. Wherefore, mystically plaiting hymns for them, let us 
say: Rejoice, O lamps unto those who are in darkness, shedding forth rays of the 
noetic Sun! Rejoice, O Peter and Paul, ye unshakable foundations of the divine 
doctrines, friends of Christ, precious vessels! Come ye into our midst, vouchsafing 
immaterial gifts unto those who praise your feast with hymns.  
Both now ..., Dogmaticon, in the same tone: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
Thine honored apostles hast Thou given * to Thy Church, O Lord, * as a boast, * 
and therein shine forth the noetic luminaries * Peter and Paul, * as stars of the Word, 
* illumining the whole world. * By them hast Thou enlightened the darkness of the 
West, * O Almighty Jesus, ** Thou Savior of our souls.  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  
Thou hast granted confirmation * unto Thy Church, O Lord: * the steadfastness 
of Peter, * the understanding and splendid wisdom of Paul, * and the truly divine 
proclamation of them both, * which dispelleth the deception of the Greeks. * 
Wherefore, initiated into the mysteries by them both, * we hymn Thee, O Almighty 
Jesus, ** Thou Savior of our souls.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Thou hast given to the sinful a model of repentance: * Thy two apostles; * for the 
one denied Thee at the time of Thy suffering, * yet repented, * while the other 
opposed the preaching of Thee, * but later came to believe. * And both are 
preeminent among the assembly of their peers, * O Almighty Jesus, ** Thou Savior 
of our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
A joyous feast hath shone forth today upon the ends of the earth: the most 
honored commemoration of the most wise and preeminent Apostles Peter and Paul. 
Wherefore, Rome, joining chorus, rejoiceth in hymns and songs; and we celebrate, O 
brethren, observing this most honored day, crying: Rejoice, O apostle Peter, thou true 
friend of thy Teacher, Jesus Christ our God! Rejoice, O most beloved Paul, thou 
preacher of the Faith and teacher of the whole world! As ye have boldness, O ye two 
holy and chosen ones, entreat Christ our God, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: * Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
O first enthroned among the apostles * and teachers of the whole world: * entreat 
the Master of all, * that He grant peace to the world ** and great mercy to our souls. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
O first enthroned among the apostles * and teachers of the whole world: * entreat 
the Master of all, * that He grant peace to the world ** and great mercy to our souls. 
(Twice)  
 Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
The spiritual choir of the apostles hath been mystically sent into the world by God 
Most High; and they have been shown forth as physicians for the suffering. And 
calling upon the Unity in three Hypostases, they have wisely described the divine 
incarnation of the Lord Emmanuel. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O Virgin, we hymn thee, the unburnt bush which Moses saw, the mountain of 
God, the holy cloud, the undefiled tabernacle, the God-pleasing table, the palace of 
the King Most High, the all-splendid and impassable gate. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
O divine trumpets of the Comforter declaring the inspiration of the words of 
salvation, make ye proclamation to the world. O apostles of the divine Light, rousing 
those who sleep in the darkness of deception, lead them to the light of divine 
knowledge, entreating Christ God, that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence when He took flesh in thy 
womb, the one Lord remained God though He had become a man; and even after thy 
birthgiving He preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He grant us great mercy.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy apostles Peter & Paul, with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos, with 
the acrostic: “I honor Peter and hymn Paul with understanding”, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O Lord, grant me the gifts of Thy most holy Spirit like drops of rain, fitting 
discourse; and I shall rejoice, faithfully praising the corrections of Thy foremost 
apostles.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
O all-famed Peter, zealously thou didst forsake transitory things and follow in the 
footsteps of Christ; and leaving behind thine unbelief, O Paul, thou didst follow Him 
Who called thee.  
O apostles Peter and Paul, receiving the grace of the divine Spirit which descended 
upon you in essence, ye traversed the world, teaching the ends of the earth.  
Theotokion: The most eloquent of orators and musical tongues of exalted sound 
are unable to honor or hymn thee, O pure one; for in thee alone have divine 
mysteries which transcend man been wrought.  
Canon of the twelve holy apostles, with 6 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor 
the wise apostles of Christ”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
O Christ, in that Thou art God grant unto me, who desires to hymn the choir of 
the apostles, the radiance of the most holy Spirit and the light of Thy wisdom by their 
supplications.  
Strengthened by Thy power and grace, O Christ, Thine honored apostles 
destroyed the power of the adverse foe, in that they have become seers of God 
through Thine expansive gesture.  
Working healings by Thy name, O Master, the glorious apostles looked upon the 
multitudes of the nations and illumined them with Thy light.  
Having learned heavenly wisdom, O most wise and glorious apostles of Christ, 
with your successful preaching ye manifestly showed the overweening discourse of 
the impious to be foolish.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin Mother, thou hast given birth to One of the 
supremely divine Trinity, Who through thee hath revealed Himself to be like unto us 
in the flesh, through the good pleasure of Him Who begat Him, and through the 
activity of the most holy Spirit.  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy apostles Peter & Paul  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Andrew, thy kinsman, O Peter, showed thee Christ the Messiah, and thou didst ap-
proach Him with faith; and thou, O wondrous Paul, wast enlightened by Ananias 
with divinely ordained baptism.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
With the enlightenment of grace Peter netted the race of Israel, which had fallen, 
and been deceived by the letter of the law; and Paul delivered the flock of the nations 
from delusion.  
Thou didst send Thy disciples to the nations naked and simple, bearing Thy holy 
name instead of a sword, O Christ; and with faith they set at naught the warfare of 
delusion.  
Theotokion: O all-famed apostles Peter and Paul, all the earth was full of the 
knowledge of the Lord Who shone forth from the Virgin, and restored the world by 
your divine preaching.  
Canon of the twelve holy apostles  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Divinely proclaiming the heavenly and precious doctrines on earth, and declaring 
them with fiery tongues, O preachers of Christ, ye transmitted them.  
O Master, Thou didst show forth Thy disciples as noetic heavens which declare 
Thy glory to all the ends of the earth.  
O most wise ones, ye are inscribed in the heavens and have been revealed as 
dwelling with Christ, preserve us now who honor you with love.  
Theotokion: He Who dwelleth in the highest and hath made His abode among us, 
O most pure one, hath manifested Himself, seedlessly receiving flesh from thee.  
Sessional Hymn of the twelve holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up upon the Cross ...”:  
O ye who have made your abode in unapproachable Light, as habitations of the 
Light, ye ever illumine your holy temple with divine proclamations. Wherefore, with 
faith we cry out: Entreating the Creator, O apostles, deliver us from darkness, from 
all manner of misfortunes and the cruel invasion of pagans.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy apostles Peter & Paul, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Let us praise Peter and the most wise Paul, the great and radiant luminaries, who 
have been shown to be the preeminent disciples; for, shining with the fire of the 
divine Spirit, they have utterly consumed the darkness of falsehood. Wherefore, they 
have been shown to be worthy citizens of the kingdom on high, sharing the throne of 
grace. For this cause we cry out to them: Entreat Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of sins unto those who with love celebrate your holy memory.  
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy apostles Peter & Paul  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Piously joining the mighty with the lowly, orators with the unlearned, O Peter and 
Paul, apostles of Christ, ye won the victory.  
The godly Peter denounced the cruel apostate Simon Magus as a lover of gold, and 
now the wise Paul hath rendered blind the steps of Elymas, who blasphemed Christ.  
Though the fisherman and the tent-maker were coarse of speech, yet they have 
seasoned with divine salt the souls of those who love wisdom, leading them to Christ 
by faith.  
Theotokion: Of old, manifestly declaring with divinely inspired speech, the divine 
Habbakuk called thee the pure and overshadowed mountain of Him Who cometh 
from the south and is incarnate of thee, O Sovereign Lady.  
Canon of the twelve holy apostles  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
The sound of the words of the divine apostles passed through the whole world 
like fire, burning up the tinder of falsehood and illumining the assemblies of the pious 
with grace.  
The world of ungodliness, darkened in gloom, did the disciples of the Lord, the 
divinely radiant beacons, illumine with rays of grace, shown forth by the radiance of 
their preaching.  
Illumined by the sacred rays of the noetic Sun, ye shine forth in the world like the 
sun, O all-famed ones, dispelling the gloom of delusion with divine light.  
Possessing Thy Cross as a staff of power, O Word, those who themselves beheld 
Thee, divided the salty sea of life, roiling the waters of polytheism like steeds.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: The animate heaven of Thee, O Christ, the King of kings, adorned 
with divers radiances, the most pure Virgin hath now been glorified as the Theotokos.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy apostles Peter & Paul  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
In that thou art steadfast, O Peter, Christ called thee a stone, and on thee did He 
set the Church, against which the gates of hell will not prevail; and thee, O Paul, He 
called His vessel, chosen to bear His name before the nations.  
Peter denied the Teacher thrice, and thrice made himself His by declaring his love 
for Him; and Paul, who before was a blasphemer who grievously oppressed the 
faithful, later preached Him Whom he before had persecuted.  
An incorruptible name and everlasting glory have Peter and Paul obtained from 
Christ; for the one hath received the keys of heaven, and the other, caught up into 
paradise, heard ineffable words which surpass men’s understanding.  
Theotokion: Full of the divine Spirit, Isaiah foretold the birth without father of 
Emmanuel, God with us, from thee, O pure Virgin, Whom thou didst bear. 
Wherefore, we all hymn thee.  
Canon of the twelve holy apostles  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Thy divine and most wise ministers hast Thou shown forth in the world as light, 
proclaiming Thee, the never-waning Light, unto all.  
Having manifestly passed through every virtue, O apostles, ye have utterly 
destroyed the divers webs of the demons’ malice.  
Speaking with fiery tongues, O apostles, ye have revealed to us the effulgence of 
the Trinity, the Godhead in unity.  
Theotokion: Thee do we present as an invincible weapon against our enemies for 
thou art our foundation and our hope of salvation, O divine maiden. 
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy apostles Peter & Paul  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Splendid were the miracles of Peter, and wondrous the signs of Paul: for their 
garments and handkerchiefs worked healings when placed upon the sick.  
The truly glorious Peter and the truly wondrous Paul, the two godly ones, the most 
precious habitations of the life-creating Trinity, are commemorated by all. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 
Like a divine and excellent physician Peter hath healed the souls and bodies of the 
sick, and Paul hath enlightened the nations, signing them with the light of the Lord.  
Theotokion: We must needs hymn thee, yet are truly unable to do so worthily; 
wherefore, we hymn thee with silence, honoring the ineffable mystery wrought in 
thee, O Virgin.  
Canon of the twelve holy apostles  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Having made Thy disciples steadfast through wisdom and miracles, Thou didst 
make them stronger than the foolish prating of the Greeks; and they have abolished 
their false precepts.  
The divine rivers of wisdom have filled all the valleys of the Church with salvific 
waters of salvation, enriching them with streams from the well-springs of salvation.  
Revealed as living stars, O all-famed ones, ye destroyed all the darkness of delusion 
with radiant effulgence, shining forth the light of divine knowledge.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, the noetic Bridegroom found thee to be a perfect 
and most comely turtle-dove, a radiant lily and blossom of the valley; and He made 
His abode within thee.  
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Christ the Rock hath radiantly glorified the rock of Faith, * the most excellent of 
His disciples, * as He doth Paul and the assembly of the twelve today; * and, faithfully 
celebrating their memory, ** we glorify Him Who glorified them.  
Ikos: Celebrating now your most honored and most blessed memory, in hymns we 
earnestly cry out to you: O most radiant and divinely luminous beacons of the world, 
ye twelve beloved disciples of Christ, in that ye have boldness before Him, pray for 
us; for to you hath been given the grace to heal and forgive sins. Wherefore, earnestly 
entreat Him, that we be delivered from sins and temptations, that we may glorify Him 
Who alone is the Lover of mankind, Who hath glorified you.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy apostles Peter & Paul  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Peter was called blessed by Christ when he called Him the Son of the living God; 
and Paul was honored as a right profitable vessel; and they cried aloud: O Lord God 
of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Peter made wise the servants of the law as He was commanded, and Paul 
enlightened the gentiles; and both cleaved unto Christ through grace and cried aloud: 
O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
As a most excellent shepherd of Christ Peter hath received the flock, and Paul 
became their divine teacher; and they cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Mary, excellent in holiness, O Virgin who hast given 
birth to God in the flesh, O pure one who knewest not wedlock: entreat Him, that 
He deliver us from every assault and from sin.  
Canon of the twelve holy apostles  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
O Supremely good One Who art God by nature, before making Thy disciples sons 
Thou didst lovingly show them to be heirs of the inheritance of the Father, and it was 
Thy good pleasure that they walk with Thee, their God and Master.  
Bestowing an outpouring of wisdom, a breadth of heart, and right eloquent 
tongues upon Thy godly disciples, O Word, Thou didst send them forth to preach the 
Gospel of the kingdom to all the ends of the earth.  
The apostles, shown to be clouds of the light of God, let fall life-creating waters as 
rain upon all, crying aloud: blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Thou wast revealed to be wholly adorned by the glory of God, O 
most pure one, Mother and Virgin who alone didst conceive God the Word Who 
existed from before the beginning of time. Blessed art thou among women, O all-
immaculate Sovereign Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy apostles Peter & Paul  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Strengthened by divine power, Peter resurrected the dead Tabitha; and Paul raised 
up the dead Eutyches, who had fallen from a great height; and both cry out: Hymn 
the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Having received an awesome and wondrous vision, Peter enlightened Cornelius, 
and Paul baptized Gaius, Crispus, Panestius and Stephaninus; and both cry out: 
Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
At night, by His angel, Christ released Peter, who was fettered and kept under 
guard; and while Paul and Silas were praying, their feet made fast in stocks, He set 
them free and caused the prison to quake. Wherefore, they hymn Christ throughout 
the ages.  
Theotokion: Deliver us from the most pernicious passions, and break asunder now 
the bonds of offenses wherewith each is bound; for we all have sinned, and, being 
guilty, we ask cleansing. Through thine entreaties, O Theotokos, grant it to us who 
supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages.  
Canon of the twelve holy apostles  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
With the fire of the Spirit the divine and most wise choir of the apostles utterly 
consumed many of the sanctuaries of the demons as though they were tares, and 
having enlightened the hearts of the faithful, cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord!  
O godly disciples and apostles of Christ, who together thundered forth unto us the 
commandments of God, ye havens of the faith and common benefactors of mankind: 
serve ye the Savior, that we may honor you.  
Let us honor the most precious vessels, the receptacles of the virtues, the first-
fruits of humanity, the trumpets of preaching, the torrents of life incorruptible, the 
God-bearing flashes of lightning, the well-springs of healing, the beautiful feet of the 
Gospel.  
Theotokion: He Who is full hath humbled Himself for our sake, that we may share 
in His fullness; for the Infinite One, entering into thy most pure womb, became 
incarnate without leaving the bosom of the Father. Wherefore, we all call thee 
blessed, O Mary Bride of God.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy apostles Peter & Paul  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Ye passed over all the world, soaring as on wings, preaching the Gospel of Christ 
to all tribes, nations and lands; bringing them to the Faith, O most blessed Peter and 
wondrous apostle Paul.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Having attained an advanced age, O Peter, discharging the debts of nature ye 
endured the cross in emulation of thy Teacher Christ. And when thy head was 
severed, O Paul, O the wonder! instead of blood, milk poured forth in torrents, 
converting the unbelieving.  
O ye two godly ones, who wisely dedicated yourselves to the souls of the whole 
world, converting them from ungodliness to piety, and, even after your death, saving 
the souls of the faithful: be ye now mindful of us, and intercede before Christ, O 
preeminent apostles.  
Theotokion: O good Savior Who lovest mankind by nature, filled to overflowing 
with tender compassion: through the divine entreaties of Thine all-hymned Virgin 
Mother and the supplications of Thine apostles Peter and Paul, send down upon us 
from heaven Thy mercy and aid.  
Canon of the twelve holy apostles  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Having received from the Master the authority to loose the bonds of 
transgressions, O ye who beheld God, mercifully cleanse us of sins who hymn you, 
and grant unto us salvation.  
O glorious apostles who learned exalted preaching and doctrine in the upper 
chamber, ye have all received the full effulgence of the Spirit which was made 
manifest to you essentially; and now as is meet, ye are called blessed.  
Christ hath now bestowed never-fading wreaths upon you, His friends, as ye rest, 
filling you with divine vision. Entreat Him now, that He save all the Churches.  
Theotokion: Desiring to come in the flesh, He Who hath adorned all things by His 
word made His abode within thee, finding thee to be holier than all others, and hath 
revealed thee to be the true Theotokos, O Virgin Mother.  
Exapostilarion of the twelve holy apostles:  
Spec. Mel.: “To the disciples ...”:  
Let us hasten together joyously praising the twelve most honored disciples, crying 
aloud: Rejoice, O ye who traveled the world over, drew the nations from among the 
toils of unbelief and taught them divine things!  
Glory ..., O ye faithful, let us all praise the choir of the twelve today, having been 
confirmed by them; and let us cry aloud to Christ: Through their prayers, O Savior, 
bring peace to Thy world!  
Both now ..., Theotokion: In thee do we boast, O Theotokos, and thee do we have 
as our intercessor before God. Stretch forth thine arm and crush our enemies, and 
send to thy servants help from the Holy One.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”:  
O supreme foundation of the apostles, * having forsaken all things thou didst 
follow after thy Teacher, * crying out to Him: “I will die with Thee, * that I may live 
the blessed life!” * And thou wast the first bishop of Rome, * the glory and boast of 
the greatest of cities, O Peter, * the confirmation of the Church * against which the 
gates of hell will truly not prevail, * as Christ hath foretold. * Him do thou entreat, ** 
that He save and enlighten our souls.  
Parted from thy mother’s womb, * thou didst avoid all the burden of material 
greatness, * truly soaring aloft on wings of divine love * to divine heights, O Paul, * 
where, entering into the most radiant darkness of the divine Light * like one of the 
incorporeal ones, * enriched with the teachings of ineffable discourses, * thou wast 
sent to those in darkness, * to proclaim the light of Christ our God. * Him do thou 
beseech, ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
O Savior, Thou Light from before time began: * when it was Thy good pleasure to 
come to me, a man, * in Thine ineffable love for mankind, * and to become flesh in 
Thy goodness, * Thou didst show forth the apostles, Thy disciples, * as secondary 
lights * of Thine effulgence, * brilliant flashes of lightning; * and when they were sent 
forth * they illumined all creation with Thy divine light, ** entreating Thee to save 
and enlighten our souls.  
O Peter and Paul, * ye husbandmen of the Word, * O Andrew, James and John 
most wise, * Bartholemew and Philip, Thomas and Matthew, * Simon, Jude and the 
godly James, * ye twelve universally honored disciples * who preached throughout the 
world the all-holy Trinity, * God Who is eternal in essence, * ye truly impregnable 
ramparts * and unshakable pillars of the Church: ** entreat the Master of all, that we 
be saved.  
Glory ..., the composition of Cosmos the Monk, in Tone VIII: 
O disciples of the Savior, ye traversed creation, enlightening it and like tinder, 
consuming the delusion of idolatry by your teachings, and having drawn the nations 
out of the abyss of ignorance unto divine understanding, ye saved them. And now, 
pray ye to Christ, that He be merciful to us on the day of judgment.  
 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  
Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the holy 
apostles Peter and Paul, and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the twelve 
apostles.  
Divinely proclaiming the heavenly and precious doctrines on earth, and declaring 
them with fiery tongues, O preachers of Christ, ye transmitted them. (Twice) 
O Master, Thou didst show forth Thy disciples as noetic heavens which declare 
Thy glory to all the ends of the earth.  
O most wise ones, ye are inscribed in the heavens and have been revealed as 
dwelling with Christ, preserve us now who honor you with love.  
Having made Thy disciples steadfast through wisdom and miracles, Thou didst 
make them stronger than the foolish prating of the Greeks; and they have abolished 
their false precepts.  
The divine rivers of wisdom have filled all the valleys of the Church with salvific 
waters of salvation, enriching them with streams from the well-springs of salvation.  
Revealed as living stars, O all-famed ones, ye destroyed all the darkness of delusion 
with radiant effulgence, shining forth the light of divine knowledge.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, the noetic Bridegroom found thee to be a perfect 
and most comely turtle-dove, a radiant lily and blossom of the valley; and He made 
His abode within thee.  
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
O first enthroned among the apostles * and teachers of the whole world: * entreat 
the Master of all, * that He grant peace to the world ** and great mercy to our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone II: 
Christ the Rock hath radiantly glorified the rock of Faith, * the most excellent of 
His disciples, * as He doth Paul and the assembly of the twelve today; * and, faithfully 
celebrating their memory, ** we glorify Him Who glorified them.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §131 (I COR. 4:9-16)  
Brethren: God hath set forth us, the apostles, last, as it were appointed to death: 
for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools 

--- PAGE 15 ---
for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are 
honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and 
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-place; And labor, 
working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: 
Being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the off-
scouring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as my 
beloved sons I warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet 
have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel. 
Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK, §12 (3:13-19)  
At that time, Jesus goeth up into a mountain, and calleth unto him whom he 
would: and they came unto him. And he ordained twelve, that they should be with 
him, and that he might send them forth to preach, And to have power to heal 
sicknesses, and to cast out devils: And Simon he surnamed Peter; And James the son 
of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and he surnamed them Boanerges, which 
is, The sons of thunder: And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, 
and Thomas, and James the son of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and Simon the Canaanite, 
And Judas Iscariot, which also betrayed him.  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
 
