--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY 
 COMMEMORATION OF HIEROMARTYR PANCRATIUS OF TAORMINA 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
When the pre-eminent among the disciples, * travelled throughout the whole 
world confirming all, * he found thee to be like a precious stone, * and set thee as a 
foundation of the Church, * O blessed one, * as one who cast down the pillars and 
temples of idolatry * by the divine power of the Word, * Whose good pleasure it was 
to consort with mankind ** in the flesh.  
Dispelling the evil spirits of malice by the Word, * thou didst make mortals 
spiritual * by the grace of the Spirit, * O martyr Pancratius, * working the field of 
their hearts, * and casting the divine seed thereupon, * the fruits of which thou hast 
offered * to the heavenly Husbandman, ** praying for those who praise thee with 
faith.  
With noetic splendors * thou didst make the West like unto the East, * bearing the 
sun of the knowledge of God * Who shone forth upon us from the Virgin in a 
manner past understanding; * and having set in thy suffering, O father, * thou didst 
shine forth with the never-setting Light, * in the place where, no longer through a 
looking glass, * but clearly, thou dost behold ** the longed-for beauty of the Judge of 
thy contest, O Pancratius.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
The only uncontainable God, * Who became a man in His goodness, * didst thou 
bear in thy womb * without restraint and confinement, * O most holy Bride of God. 
* Wherefore, I beseech thee: * Release me from the passions which restrain and 
confine me, * that having traversed the straight and narrow path, ** I may attain unto 
that which leadeth to life, O Virgin.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Tree of the Cross. * O Jesus, she 
that kneweth not wedlock said weeping: * “O sweet Child, * why hast Thou 
abandoned me * who alone gave birth to Thee, * O unapproachable Light of the 
beginningless Father? * Hasten Thou, and glorify Thyself, * that those who glorify 
Thy divine sufferings ** may receive divine glory!” 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Pancratius, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr Pancratius of Taormina, in Tone I: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
Made ever steadfast by the foundation of thy words, O Pancratius, the Church 
knoweth thee to be a most precious stone. Wherefore, we honor thy memory today.  
With the plough of thy divine words, O Pancratius, thou hast renewed hearts hard-
ened before by the darkness of false belief; and thou hast manifestly shown them to 
be fruitful for the sake of their faith.  
Proclaiming the threefold Unity united in a single nature, thou didst burn away the 
gloom of godlessness and enlighten men with teachings of luminous splendor.  
Theotokion: From thee, O pure Lady, Jesus the Lord, the Bestower of light, shone 
forth, illumining the ends of the earth; through Him have they that are in darkness 
and shadow seen the light.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 
Made steadfast by the Spirit, thou didst drive away evil spirits; and by the labor of 
thy prayers, demolished the temples of the idols, raising up churches in their stead, O 
right wondrous one.  
With thy sword-like discourse thou didst cut down the thorns of impiety, O 
venerable one; and plant in the souls of all the saving teachings of the virtues which 
cause the fruits thereof to abound, O sacred one.  
The preeminent Apostle Peter found thee to be a vessel receiving the pure 
radiance of the divine Spirit, O most honorable one, and sent thee to the West to 
drive away the darkness of ungodliness.  
Theotokion: O thou who tasted not wedlock, we, the faithful, call thee blessed, for 
thou art the most luminous cloud, the golden ark and jar, the exceeding lofty ladder, 
and more spacious than the heavens.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou didst appear ...”:  
Having shown thyself a champion of piety and a victor, O sacred Pancratius, thou 
standest now before the Lord with the incorporeal ones in the heavens. Pray thou 
that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O ye faithful, let us bless the Theotokos, * our helper, the fervent aid of those 
amid misfortune, ** by whom we have been delivered from foreign bondage.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding thy Son lifted up upon the Tree, O most pure one, 
with thy maternal womb wounded with pain, thou didst piteously cry aloud: “Woe is 
me! How is it that Thou hast set, O my timeless Light?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
Shown to be a fiery spirit by the fire of the Comforter, thou didst utterly consume 
falsehood, O wise Pancratius, and, shining like a beacon upon those who are 
drowning in the sea of ignorance, thou didst bring them to the havens of the divine 
will.  
Peter, having drunk to satiety of the unquarried Rock, sent thee forth as another 
river, to give drink unto hardened souls, O divinely wise one, and to dry up the rivers 
of ungodliness with the torrents of divine preaching.  
Made luminous by the splendor of the understanding of Christ, O wise one, the 
sound of thy words poured forth. Thereby the wisdom of the Greeks was shown to 
be foolishness, and the malice of the philosophers to be utterly consumed, O 
hieromartyr Pancratius.  
Having made thy life splendid with beauty, thou didst cast all of the assaults of the 
demons into darkness, and, dispelling the darkness of ungodliness, thou didst show 
forth as children of the day those who submitted to thy teachings with love.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth, O pure Maiden, unto the incarnate Word in 
two natures, Who most gloriously told those who were enslaved to falsehood the way 
to salvation.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, * for we know no other God than 
Thee, * and we call upon Thy Name, * for Thou art the God of the living and 
the dead. 
By showing forth wonders thou didst draw the people into thy net; by thy word 
thou didst bring down the temples of the pagans, and didst erect churches of beauty, 
unto the restoration of mankind.  
With thy blood didst thou dye thy sacred vesture, and dry up the blood offered to 
demons; and as one triumphant thou didst ascend to heaven, receiving a crown of 
victory.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
In thy presence a temple of the idolaters broke asunder; and a door to salvation 
was opened to the heathen, whereby divine grace hath been given to the hearts of the 
faithful, O father, thou keeper of the sacred mysteries of God.  
Theotokion: Like rain Christ descended upon thy womb, O pure one; and dried up 
the torrents of polytheism, bringing forth the water of divine knowledge for those 
who are amid the flame of falsehood.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
Jesus, the enlightenment and God of all, having filled thy mind with grace and 
richly illumined it, gave deliverance to the people through thy words of foolish 
wisdom.  
Having preached the Gospel of God as an hierarch, thou didst splendidly seal thy 
divine teachings with thy blood, O martyred sacred-initiate Pancratius.  
Thou didst deliver mankind from idolatrous sprinklings of vile blood, and, 
slaughtered like a lamb, O Pancratius, thou didst offer thyself unto God as a living 
sacrifice.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one who hast given birth unto Christ the Savior, 
lead me up to the light of salvation and life, who am oppressed by the assaults of 
fruitless thoughts.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou didst appear ...”:  
Thou wast shown to be a brilliant star * for the people of Taormina, O Pancratius, 
* and wast shown also to be a sufferer for Christ. * Standing now before Him, ** pray 
thou for those who honor thee, O blessed one.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither touched 
nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a single mouth * 
Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * ‘O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou.’ 
With thine own blood wast thou baptized, having before baptized the people in 
the waters; and thou didst pass on to Christ rejoicing. Making thine abode with Him, 
thou art ever splendidly enriched by sharing in the blessings of heaven, O most 
blessed one.  
Thou didst draw forth with the hook of thy words, those who were engulfed in the 
brine of evils, O sacred one; and with the pure rain of prayers thou didst dry up the 
turgid depths of false belief, O sacred-initiate of Christ.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
The unbroken rock, the teacher of sacred truths, set thee as the foundation and 
ground of the sacred Church; and thereon hath all the malice of the infantile foe been 
destroyed.  
Theotokion: The Word of God found thee alone to be most pure, O all-
immaculate and pure one; and being born of thy womb, O Bride of God, He 
cleanseth the faithful of the defilement which hath come upon us by our lack of 
abstinence from evil.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Consumed by the fire of divers trials, thou didst remain unharmed; and thy mind 
sharpened by splendid visions, revealed thee to be a sword cutting down the 
brushwood of polytheism, O wise one.  
Thou didst manifestly work signs and wonders, bringing people to the knowledge 
of Christ, setting forth those things which were to come to pass, like a prophet of 
God, through the inspiration of the Comforter, O divinely wise one.  
Showing to the people the image of the Creator, which He bore of His own will, 
uniting Himself to us, thou dost thereby work signs and wonders, driving away the 
audacity of polytheism.  
Theotokion: Like rain Christ, Who alone is our Benefactor, descended into thy 
womb, and hath thereby truly given drink to all creation, having dried up the turgid 
rivers of idolatry, O Virgin.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The ever-flowing wellspring of life, * light-bearing candlestick of grace, 
* the animate temple, and most pure cloud, * wider than the heavens and the 
earth, * the Theotokos do we the faithful magnify. 
Thy mind and soul enlightened by the radiant splendors of Peter, thou didst attain 
unto the West like a star of great brilliance, illumining with thy teachings those who 
were sunk in the abyss of ignorance, O Pancratius.  
Knowing that the honor accorded an icon passeth over to its Prototype, O 
glorious one, thou didst everywhere set up the precious icon of Jesus our God, unto 
the destruction of the temples of the demons.  
Rejoicing, thy city and the assembly of the faithful keep this thy splendid festival, 
honoring thee faithfully, O wondrous Pancratius. Cease thou never to bless them as 
pastor, offering up prayer for all.  
Theotokion: Have pity on us who hymn Thee, O Lord Who wast ineffably born 
of the Virgin, delivering Thy servants from temptations, the passions and tribulations 
by her prayers, in that Thou alone art our Benefactor, and the Lover of mankind.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
 
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Pancratius, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Thou wast shown to be a brilliant star * for the people of Taormina, O Pancratius, 
* and wast shown also to be a sufferer for Christ. * Standing now before Him, ** pray 
thou for those who honor thee, O blessed one.  
 
 
