--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 5th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE UNCOVERING OF THE PRECIOUS RELICS OF OUR 
VENERABLE & GOD-BEARING FATHER SERGIUS THE WONDER-WORKER, 
ABBOT OF RADONEZH 
AT LITTLE VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
O the joy of the ranks of heaven * and the gladness of mortals on earth * at the 
present festival * of the venerable uncovering of the wonder-working relics * of the 
venerable Sergius, great among the fathers. ** Through his supplications, O Christ, 
save Thou our souls. (Twice)  
Today hath dawned the uncovering of the wonder-working relics * of the blessed 
Sergius, sanctified from his mother’s womb * the man of God in heaven * and angel 
in the flesh on earth; * and it calleth all the fullness of the Church ** to send up glory 
to Christ God.  
The angels rejoice in heaven above, * and mankind joineth chorus on earth below. 
* Adorned, the Church of God is jubilant, O father Sergius, * over the translation of 
thy precious relics, * crying aloud unto Christ: ** Thou art my might and 
confirmation O Christ!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Come all ye ends of the earth, rejoicing with psalms and spiritual songs, and let us 
piously praise the honored translation of our helper; and surrounding him and his 
wonder-working shrine, let us invoke his aid, saying thus: O most blessed father 
Sergius, by thy supplications grant victory over all heresies to our Christ-loving 
hierarchs, and protect their reason endowed flock with peace, granting them the 
conquest of all their enemies; and save thou our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion. 
Prokeimenon of the day. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Thou wast the dwelling-place * of the most-holy Spirit O father. * By thy 
supplications * show us to be the habitation of the Holy Trinity, ** O divinely wise 
and most noetically rich Sergius.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Come, O ye faithful, and, rejoicing, * let us enter the church in gladness of heart, * 
venerating the precious relics * of the divinely wise Sergius; and let us receive healing 
** and forgiveness of sins through his supplications.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Accept the hymnody of thy children, * O father Sergius, * and grant the petitions 
which are profitable * for those who love thee ** and hymn the uncovering of thy 
relics.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
O Virgin Theotokos * the choirs on high * chant with those below * unceasingly 
glorifying ** thy most pure birthgiving.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
From thy youth thou didst receive Christ within thy soul, O venerable one, * and 
didst desire more than all to withdraw from the tumult of the world. * Thou didst 
manfully dwell in the wilderness, * and therein didst produce the fruit of humility, the 
children of obedience. * Wherefore, as thou didst become the abode of the Trinity, 
thou hast illumined with thy miracles * all who have recourse to thee with faith, grant-
ing healing in abundance unto all. ** O Sergius our father, entreat Christ God, that 
He save our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS 
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
When, before thy birth, * she who had conceived thee went to the church of God, 
* thou didst cry out thrice within her womb, * glorifying the Trinity, O divinely wise 
father Sergius. * And before thou didst come to know the world, thou didst know 
God, * and wast known of God, O most blessed one, * making manifest unto all * 
the radiance of the grace of God which would descend upon thee, * and showing 
forth the purity of thy soul and body * through the splendors of thy countenance, * 
for which thou didst become a chosen vessel of Christ our God. * Him do thou 
entreat, ** that He save and enlighten our souls. (Twice)  
When the zeal of God came upon thee, * O divinely wise and all-blessed father 
Sergius, * thou didst overcome all things in the world, * and, loving Christ alone with 
all thy soul, * and following His life-bearing footsteps, * thou didst attain unto the 
wilderness; * and having planted it with the seed of thy labors * and watered it with 
showers of thy tears, * thou didst multiply the fruits of the virtues; * and, having fed 
thy children therewith, * thou didst lead them unto Christ God. * Him do thou 
entreat, * that He save and enlighten our souls. (Twice)  
When thou, O divinely wise one, didst hear the divine voice saying to thee: * “Lo! 
the most pure one cometh!”, * then, in great ascetic struggle, thou didst earnestly pray 
* that thou be vouchsafed her awesome visitation; * and straightway a light surpassing 
the sun in brightness * illumined thee, O venerable one, * and thou wast deemed 
worthy to behold the Sovereign Lady Mother of God * with both spiritual and bodily 
eyes, * and with thine ears thou didst hear her sweet voice saying: * “I shall ever be in 
this place, * and thy monastery shall lack for nothing!” * Her do thou beseech, ** that 
she save and enlighten our souls. (Twice)  
When the time arrived * for thy departure unto God, * then didst thou hasten, like 
a most radiant star, to the mansions of heaven, * and there thou standest with the 
choirs of the saints * before the throne of the consubstantial Trinity; * and thy 
blessed and precious body, * which for many years was covered by the earth, * hath 
now been surrendered by the ground emitting the splendor of miracles * upon those 
who honor thine uncovering, O divinely wise Sergius. * Grant victories over all 
heresies to our Christ-loving hierarchs, * and ask of Christ our God forgiveness of 
sins for all the faithful. * Him do thou entreat, ** that He save and enlighten our 
souls. (Twice)  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Come, all ye faithful, ye assemblies of the Church of Russia, * and let us delight in 
the present splendid festival! Come, ye fullness of the priesthood, ye company of 
monks, and see how the Church of God is adorned, filled with psalms, hymns and 
spiritual songs; and the honored and glorious monastery of the divinely blessed father 
Sergius is filled with gladness and joy at the uncovering of his precious relics. And 
giving voice to praise, it calleth the whole world joyfully to cry out to the Lord: O 
Christ our Master, Thou hast given to Thy holy Orthodox Church a mighty warrior, 
an invincible weapon against our enemies, visible and invisible, and an infinite 
treasury of inexhaustible gifts for the Christian people, by his supplications grant great 
mercy to our souls.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among mankind; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth 
forth from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, * twofold in 
nature but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and 
perfect man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O unwedded 
Mother, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS 
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
A READING FROM PROVERBS 
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace; but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
 The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them in the sight of the unwise they seemed to die; and their departure is taken 
for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction; but they are in peace. For 
though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality. 
And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for God proved 
them, and found them worthy for Himself, as gold in the furnace hath He tried them 
and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall 
shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, 
and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign forever. They that put 
their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall 
abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera: 
In Tone VI: Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, ye company of fasters, 
and, assembling with faith today, let us honor Sergius the true faster, who gladly 
following in his Master’s footsteps, traversed the narrow path and the life of 
dispassion; and let us cry out with faith: O all-blessed one, companion of the 
venerable and boast of fasters, entreat the Lord on our behalf, that our souls find 
mercy.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
O venerable and God-bearing Sergius, thou didst forsake all for the sake of 
Christ’s love, and, having entered the wilderness, wast in nowise affrighted by the 
machinations of the invisible foe; for even though they descended upon thee many 
times, gnashing their teeth and displaying their rage, by thy supplications thou didst 
cause them to vanish like smoke without a trace. Immaculate was thy soul, and 
mighty thine endurance! Unceasingly beseech Christ, that our souls be saved.  
O most sacred and great Church of Russia, having drunk of the streams of the 
well-spring of the Gospel with the Orthodox princes, monks and layfolk, let us be 
glad in the Spirit on this appointed feast of the good shepherd and teacher, and, 
surrounding his healing relics, let us lovingly venerate them and crown them with 
hymns and praises as with flowers, saying: Rejoice, O blessed Sergius, thou heavenly 
man and earthly angel, dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit! Rejoice, for thou hast guided 
mortals to the path of salvation! Rejoice, thou boast and confirmation of our 
Orthodox hierarchs, O venerable and God-pleasing Sergius, most radiant lamp of thy 
native land, and intercessor for our souls!  
In Tone I: Today heaven is glad on high, and the earth rejoiceth with mankind. Let 
the newly-elect assemblies of Russia join chorus, and let the companies of monastics 
hold splendid festival! And the Holy Church of God, wondrous in righteousness, 
illumined as with most radiant beams, filled with the manifold miracles which flow 
forth from the precious and healing relics of the venerable father Sergius, calleth the 
whole world to praise his struggles. Wherefore, assembling all together, we who with 
gladness celebrate his uncovering in hymns and songs, also hymn Christ our God, 
that by the supplications of our father Sergius, He grant us peace and great mercy.  
Today the festival of the translation of the relics of our divinely blessed father 
Sergius hath dawned! Come, all ye faithful, let us crown the Church of God with 
hymns, and therein let us glorify Christ our God, Who is hymned in the Trinity, 
crying out and saying: O Christ our Master, Thou hast given Thy favorite unto the 
city of Moscow as a steadfast rampart; to all the parts of Russia Thou hast shown him 
to be a mighty intercessor, and to the Christian people Thou hast revealed him as a 
bestower of miracles, a healer of incurable infirmities, an expeller of demons, and an 
intercessor for our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Come, ye multitude of monastics, and with songs and hymns let us praise Sergius 
today, the emulator of piety; and, surrounding his precious and healing shrine, let us 
lovingly venerate it, saying: Rejoice, O most glorious Sergius, most radiant beacon for 
thy native land! Rejoice, for in purity thou hast united thyself to the purest Light! 
Rejoice, for thou standest with the angels before the Trinity, to Whom do thou 
unceasingly pray, that great mercy be granted to our souls.  
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI. 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O all-pure 
one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign Lady, ** 
the intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast granted a sign ...”: 
O Lord, Thou hast granted to Thy Church an adornment: * the precious and 
much-healing relics * of Thy favorite, the venerable Sergius, * and possessing them 
like a royal ornament, she is adorned, * and bearing them like a most splendid crown 
she rejoiceth, * summoning her children, whom she begat in the Gospel by water and 
the Spirit. * Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving dispensation, * O Jesus, Thou Lover of 
mankind, ** and Savior of our souls.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
O Lord, Thou hast given invincible might * to the reigning city of Moscow, * and 
confirmation to all the lands of Russia, * and to Thine honored monastery steadfast 
fortification * and an unshakable bulwark: * the healing and holy relics of the most 
blessed Sergius who loveth Thee. * Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving compassions, * 
O omnipotent Jesus, ** Thou Savior of our souls.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
O Lord, Thou hast given to Thy faithful servants, our Orthodox hierarchs, * 
steadfast defense and a weapon of salvation, * and to all pious Orthodox people great 
victory over the adversary, * a precious adornment to priests, and free healing to all 
the sick: * the holy relics of the venerable and thrice-blessed Sergius, * which we now 
venerate with joy, * receiving divers healings; and we glorify Thine ineffable loving-
kindness, * O kind-hearted Jesus, ** Thou Savior of our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
We honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks, O Sergius our father; for 
by thy steps have we learned how to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, having 
labored for Christ, hast denounced the power of the enemy, O converser with the 
angels and companion of the righteous and the venerable. With them do thou entreat 
the Lord, that our souls find mercy.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * Mother of 
God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, * 
granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting now our supplications, 
** pray thou that we all be saved. 
At the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
From thy youth thou didst receive Christ within thy soul, O venerable one, * and 
didst desire more than all to withdraw from the tumult of the world. * Thou didst 
manfully dwell in the wilderness, * and therein didst produce the fruit of humility, the 
children of obedience. * Wherefore, as thou didst become the abode of the Trinity, 
thou hast illumined with thy miracles * all who have recourse to thee with faith, grant-
ing healing in abundance unto all. ** O Sergius our father, entreat Christ God, that 
He save our souls. (Twice)  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...,” (Once) 
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”: 
The day of thy memorial hath arrived, O all-famed father Sergius, gladdening thy 
chosen flock; and thereon we celebrate with honor the uncovering of thy holy relics 
and magnify with joy the Lord Who hath given thee the grace of miracles, crying 
aloud: Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! Glory to Him Who hath crowned 
thee! Glory to Him Who hath given healing to all through thee! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, * the Master of all became 
incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, * at his cry, as the righteous David said. 
Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, * having borne thy Creator. 
* Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! * Glory to Him Who came forth 
from thee! ** Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy birthgiving. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Let our great pastor now be praised! And with hymns let the godly Sergius be 
praised; the most radiant pillar of monasticism who sheddeth upon us the radiance of 
miracles, which proceed from his most precious relics, and who like a dew-bearing 
cloud extinguisheth the flame of our passions, bedewing the minds of the faithful! 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
Polyeleos, and magnification: We bless thee, O venerable father Sergius, and we 
honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the angels.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication. 
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
We all earnestly pray to thee, the merciful favorite of Christ, our pastor and 
teacher, and we lovingly kiss thy precious relics, and joyfully cry out with all our soul: 
Destroy the incursions of the heathen and bring them under Christian authority, 
dispel the phantasms of the demons from the flock of thy disciples, and deliver from 
all temptations those who hymn thee with love, O venerable Sergius. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Beyond understanding and unapproachable is the dread mystery of God wrought 
in thee, O divinely joyous sovereign Lady; for having conceived the Infinite One, 
thou didst give birth to Him, clad in the flesh taken from thy most pure blood. Him 
do thou ever entreat as thy Son, O pure one, that our souls be saved.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, § 43 (MT. 11: 27-30) 
The Lord said to His disciples: All things are delivered unto Me of My Father, and 
no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save 
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that 
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn 
of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For 
My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VIII: 
O venerable father, thou didst despise the beauty of the world and the food which 
passeth away, loving the monastic life more than them; and thou wast deemed worthy 
to become a converser with angels and the greatly radiant beacon of the Russian land, 
shining forth in miracles like another sun. Be thou mindful of us who celebrate thy 
sacred memory; for we are thy children and the reason-endowed sheep of thy 
teachings, and we call upon thee for help, asking that through thee we may receive 
peace and great mercy.  
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, 
including the Irmos; and that of the venerable one, with 8 Troparia, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Parting the abyss of the Red Sea, * God drowned Pharaoh therein, * 
but led Moses dryshod over to the wilderness, * and rained manna as food 
upon the people of Israel, * for He is mighty.  
With the light of Thee, the three-Sunned Godhead, O my Creator, illumine the 
darkened eyes of my soul, I beseech Thee, and cleanse Thou my heart, that I may 
hymn the uncovering of the precious relics of the venerable Sergius, who loved Thee.  
Grant me words for the opening of my mouth, O Word of God, make my tongue 
brilliant, O Merciful One, and be not mindful of the multitude of my sins, that, 
guided by Thy grace, I may hymn Thy venerable saint, Sergius.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
As thou didst preach the Trinity by crying out within thy mother’s womb, so did 
the Trinity glorify thee. Lo! thy precious relics, hidden for so many years beneath the 
ground, were found to be incorrupt, filling the faithful with sweet fragrance and 
miracles.  
Theotokion: O most pure Sovereign Lady who art more exalted than the hosts of 
heaven, and hast given birth to the Savior and Creator of all, Who is consubstantial 
with the Father and the Spirit: grant us discourse, O all-hymned one, that we may 
hymn thee who art the helper of our race.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth, ... 
ODE III  
Irmos: Let not the vainglorious sage praise himself, * but let him consider this: 
* There is none as holy as our God, * Who exalteth our horn, * granting might 
unto our rulers.  
Strengthened by the power of the Cross of the Lord, thou didst make the spiritual 
passions and reasoning of the flesh subject to thy spirit; wherefore, thou didst 
become a most comely habitation of the most holy Spirit and the chosen resting-place 
of the indivisible Trinity.  
Having become a model for all who have labored for Christ with all their soul by 
thy life in this world, thou didst shine forth in purity like the sun; wherefore, thou 
hast received recompense an hundredfold from the hand of the Almighty, O divinely 
wise Sergius, for which cause we joyfully call thee blessed.  
Come, let us now come together on this present feast, and let us behold and be 
filled with joy, that we may glorify Christ Who hath glorified those who glorify Him, 
and hath given us the divinely blessed Sergius as an invincible rampart and bestower 
of miracles.  
Theotokion: Rejoicing, we offer thee thanks together with hymnody, O Mother of 
God, for in the flesh thou hast given birth to the Almighty God, Who hath given thee 
unto Christians as a steadfast intercessor.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
With great abstinence thou didst sail across the sea of life, and put in at the calm 
harbor, the mansions of heaven, shining like a radiant star, and like a never-setting 
sun illumining the whole world with the lightning-flashes of thy miracles, and thereby 
enlightening the flock of thy disciples. To our pious Orthodox hierarchs and all the 
faithful dost thou grant forgiveness of sins, correction of life, and victory over the 
adversary, that, standing joyfully round about thine honored and much-healing shrine, 
we may lovingly venerate thy holy relics and cry aloud to thee, as to a caring father: O 
divinely wise and most blessed father Sergius, entreat the Holy Trinity, for Whom 
thou didst labor in this life, that we who honor the uncovering of thy precious relics 
with love may be granted the forgiveness of sins. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, * and the earth is full of Thy 
glory, O Christ; * wherefore, we cry out with faith: * Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
Thou didst cleave unto God from thy mother’s womb, O blessed father Sergius, 
having in thy heart the fear of God as the beginning of wisdom, and as the root and 
foundation of all good things, thou didst love poverty of spirit. Wherefore, Christ the 
Master hath enriched thee with miracles.  
Like a fragrant lily thy precious relics have been budded forth from the bosom of 
the earth, O most blessed Sergius, and like a treasure they emit the radiance of 
miracles, gladdening thy spiritual children.  
Today the royal city of Moscow rejoiceth, and the whole world is filled with 
gladness; and thy monastery, O divinely blessed Sergius, boasting, is adorned, having 
thy precious relics within it as an inexhaustible and most wondrous treasure.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Lady, Queen of all creation, who wast foretold by many 
prophets and hast given birth to the King of the hosts of heaven: grant victory to thy 
servants, our pious Orthodox hierarchs, over all heresies, O Sovereign Lady, and by 
thy supplications grant unto us all the kingdom of heaven.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Lord, Thou art my portion * Thou art the glory of my countenance; * 
for by the knowledge of God Thou alone hast delivered me * from the 
darkness of ignorance. * Wherefore I pray to Thee, O Christ: * Grant peace to 
Thy servant, * in that Thou lovest mankind!  
The Holy Church, wondrous in righteousness in our God the Trinity, is splendidly 
adorned, O divinely wise Sergius, and a multitude of the people spiritually rejoice, 
beholding thee carried with honor in the arms of the hierarch of God, borne up upon 
the shoulders of the priests.  
Filled with joy at the visitation of the Mother of God, thou didst become a light 
for thy flock and a guide for the new Israel, O father, leading us from earth to the 
mansions of heaven, where thou now enjoyest ineffable effulgence.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Thy mother’s womb was sanctified by thine honored conception, and the glorious 
city of Rostov was rendered splendid by thy nativity; thy great and abundantly 
glorious monastery hath been glorified by thy struggles, and the whole world hath 
been filled with thy miracles, O venerable father Sergius.  
Theotokion: O most pure Mother of God, thou steadfast helper of those who set 
their hope on thee, O protection and guardian of our city, invincible bulwark of this 
holy community, and weapon of salvation for our devout hierarchs: save all who 
piously venerate thy holy image.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Let not the watery tempest drown me, * nor the abyss destroy me; * for 
I have been cast into the heart of the deep of the sea. * Wherefore, like Jonah I 
cry aloud to Thee: * Raise up my life from the corruption of wickedness, unto 
Thee O God!  
Having loved Christ from childhood, O father Sergius, following His life-bearing 
footsteps thou didst flee this world, and didst attain unto the never-waning light of 
understanding, where thou now standest with boldness before the Holy Trinity, 
Whom do thou beseech on behalf of us all.  
The ranks of the incorporeal ones marveled at thy life in the flesh, and the hordes 
of the demons were affrighted by the victory which God gave thee over them; and we 
glorify thee, O venerable Sergius, standing round about the shrine of thy precious 
relics, and we magnify Christ who hath glorified thee with miracles.  
By thy supplications, O most blessed father Sergius, ask what is beneficial for all 
who venerate the honored and glorious uncovering of thy holy relics with love and 
pure faith, and who celebrate thy sacred memory with splendor.  
Theotokion: Having conceived the Creator and Savior of all without seed in thy 
womb, O Lady and Mother of God, and having given birth to Christ God in the 
flesh, by thy supplications render Him merciful unto us, that we all may be deemed 
worthy of His revelation and kingdom.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”: 
Thy precious relics, shining forth from the ground today like a most radiant sun, * 
have been found to be incorrupt, resplendent with a multitude of miracles like a 
fragrant flower, * pouring forth divers healings upon all the faithful, and gladdening 
thy chosen flock, * which, having wisely assembled, thou didst shepherd well. * On 
their behalf thou dost now stand in supplication before the Trinity, * praying that 
victory be granted to our Orthodox hierarchs over all heresies, ** that we may all cry 
out to thee: Rejoice, O divinely wise Sergius!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Ikos: Having disdained that which is in the world, O divinely wise father, thou 
didst acquire incorrupt habitations which are above the world, and having been 
enriched with abundant gifts by the right hand of the Almighty, in accordance with 
the number of thy virtues, and been crowned with the wreath of honor as a victory, 
thou dost enrich with miracles all who hymn thee thus: Rejoice, O thou who, before 
thy nativity, didst glorify the Holy Trinity by a threefold exclamation; Rejoice, thou 
who didst consider the beauty and glory of the world to be as dung! Rejoice, for thou 
didst make thine abode in the wilderness; Rejoice, for thou didst make of it a city! 
Rejoice, for therein thou didst erect an all-honored temple for the praise of the Holy 
Trinity; Rejoice, for, having assembled there multitudes of monastics, thou didst lead 
them to the Lord! Rejoice, for thou wast deemed worthy of the merciful visitation of 
the Mother of God; Rejoice, for thou didst serve her in the flesh like an angel! 
Rejoice, for thou prayest to the Lord on behalf of those who honor the uncovering of 
thy precious relics; Rejoice, for thou art a weapon of salvation for our Orthodox 
hierarchs and a vanquisher of all heresies! Preserve them ever in health and gladness, 
that we may all celebrate thine uncovering with splendor, joyously crying: Rejoice, O 
divinely wise Sergius!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Forsake us not to the end for Thy names sake, * for we have not 
forsaken Thy commandments, * and take not Thy mercy from us * O Lord 
God of our Fathers, * who art supremely hymned throughout the ages. 
By divine preservation thy precious body was kept intact, O divinely wise Sergius, 
which was covered wholly by the earth for many years, and it came forth, untouched 
by any harm. And we, thy children, beholding it, cry out with joy: Blessed is the God 
of our fathers!  
Thou wast clothed in the raiment of gladness, and thy precious head was crowned 
with a wreath of joy; and thou hast entered in splendor into the heavenly bridal-
chamber of Christ the King, receiving honor for thy labors, and chanting to the Lord: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Resplendent in thy radiant life, O wondrous Sergius, in this life thou didst attain 
unto the ranks of the incorporeal ones; and now thou joinest chorus with them 
before the throne of the God of all, Whom do thou beseech, that He grant 
forgiveness of sins unto those who with love celebrate the memory of the uncovering 
of thy precious relics.  
Theotokion: Extend supplication, O most pure Virgin Lady, unto our God Who 
was born of thee, and Who through thee hath restored Adam and renewed our 
nature, that we may all cry out to thee: O most pure one, blessed is the Fruit of thy 
womb!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In wisdom hast Thou fashioned all things, O Master, * Thou didst 
establish the earth firmly upon the fathomless depths of the waters, * in 
accordance with Thy knowledge, * wherefore we hymn Thee chanting: * 
Unceasingly bless ye the Lord all ye works of the Lord. 
The Church of God is gladdened today, arrayed as in a robe of royal purple; and 
thy holy monastery, O divinely blessed Sergius, doth possess as a treasure beyond 
price thy precious body which imparteth divers healings unto all who chant with faith: 
Unceasingly bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The temple of God is illumined with heavenly light, and therein the assemblies of 
the pious rejoice, beholding thee, O divinely blessed Sergius, borne in the hands of 
the hierarchs and venerated with mouth and soul by all the faithful who cry out to 
Christ: Unceasingly bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Standing now with the armies of heaven before the Trinity, and dwelling with the 
choirs of all the saints, ask thou that forgiveness of sins be given to those who honor 
thy memory with faith; and to us who celebrate with splendor the uncovering of thy 
precious relics grant salvation, that rejoicing, we may chant: Unceasingly bless ye the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: The Pre-eternal One is conceived in thy womb, O pure Virgin, and 
the perfect God, Who is born an Infant in the flesh, of thee, the Maiden who knewest 
not wedlock, is seen by men to be perfect God and man, co-enthroned with the 
Father and the Spirit. Him do we supremely exalt throughout the ages  
ODE IX  
Irmos: On the mountain Moses beheld the unconsumed bush; * and in the 
cave Joseph heard the ineffable birth. * O Theotokos, and undefiled Virgin, * 
thou Mother who knewest not a man: * thee do we magnify!  
Thou wast taken up to the heights of heaven by the virtues, O divinely wise 
Sergius, and in gladness of heart thou standest before the throne of the Holy Trinity. 
Forget not thy servants, but grant perfect health and wondrous victory over all 
heresies to our pious Orthodox hierarchs, that we may all magnify thee unceasingly 
with hymns.  
More brightly than the rays of the sun, O God-bearer, doth thy most glorious 
memory illumine the faithful who piously honor thee, who venerate the shrine of thy 
precious relics with faith and love, and praise thee in hymns, O divinely wise Sergius.  
O divinely blessed father Sergius, accept thou this small supplication, offered to 
thee by mine unworthy hand and with heartfelt love, and by thy supplications grant 
salvation for our souls, health for our bodies and peace for the world, that we may 
magnify thee yet more in hymnody.  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Theotokion: O most hymned Virgin Lady, Mother of Christ our God, save all who 
set their hope on thee, who have recourse to thine aid, and in hymns piously magnify 
thee, who art the Theotokos.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Assembling today, those of heaven rejoice with those on earth, and the companies 
of the faithful, together with the priests and monks, are filled with spiritual gladness 
and the gifts of thy miracles, O venerable Sergius, glorifying the Lord on the day of 
thine uncovering. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O most pure Virgin, who hast given birth to the hypostatic Wisdom, the eternal 
Word of the Father, Christ the Physician of mortals, heal thou the grievous and long-
standing wounds and sores of my heart, and quell the uprisings of the passions of my 
flesh.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
As a greatly radiant star * of Christ, the never-setting Sun, * thou dost enlighten all 
* with the beams of thy virtues, * O divinely wise father Sergius, blessed of God, * 
and with the radiance of miracles thou dost illumine all the ends of the earth * and 
those who with faith cherish thy holy memory * and splendidly honor in hymns ** 
the venerable uncovering of thy relics. (Twice)  
Thou hast been shown to be a beacon of great radiance, * a most excellent 
physician of the sick, * and a right prudent shepherd of monastics, * a weapon of 
salvation for our pious Orthodox hierarchs, * victory over the enemy, * the 
adornment of all the land of Russia, * a constant advocate * for all who invoke thy 
name with faith, O Sergius, ** and celebrate the uncovering of thy precious relics 
with love.  
Like a fragrant flower, * incense of sweet savor, * a divine phial of myrrh, thou 
sendest forth * the scent of thy sweet perfume * upon all nations, * and with the 
lightning-flashes of thy miracles * thou dost illumine the Christian people, * who 
celebrate thy sacred memory with faith, ** O venerable and divinely blessed Sergius.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Having assembled today, O ye faithful Christian people, let us be filled with joy, 
and, forming a choir, let us spiritually celebrate the right eminent solemnity of the 
venerable father, crying out to Christ in psalms and hymns: O Master Christ, to our 
latter-day race thou hast revealed such a bestower of miracles, the great ally of the 
whole Russian land! O venerable and divinely wise father Sergius, earnestly beseech 
Christ our God on behalf of all who honor thee with faith and love!  
Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the venerable one.  
Strengthened by the power of the Cross of the Lord, thou didst make the spiritual 
passions and reasoning of the flesh subject to thy spirit; wherefore, thou didst 
become a most comely habitation of the most holy Spirit and the chosen resting-place 
of the indivisible Trinity. (Twice) 
Having become a model for all who have labored for Christ with all their soul by 
thy life in this world, thou didst shine forth in purity like the sun; wherefore, thou 
hast received recompense an hundredfold from the hand of the Almighty, O divinely 
wise Sergius, for which cause we joyfully call thee blessed.  
Come, let us now come together on this present feast, and let us behold and be 
filled with joy, that we may glorify Christ Who hath glorified those who glorify Him, 
and hath given us the divinely blessed Sergius as an invincible rampart and bestower 
of miracles.  
Having loved Christ from childhood, O father Sergius, following His life-bearing 
footsteps thou didst flee this world, and didst attain unto the never-waning light of 
understanding, where thou now standest with boldness before the Holy Trinity, 
Whom do thou beseech on behalf of us all.  
The ranks of the incorporeal ones marveled at thy life in the flesh, and the hordes 
of the demons were affrighted by the victory which God gave thee over them; and we 
glorify thee, O venerable Sergius, standing round about the shrine of thy precious 
relics, and we magnify Christ who hath glorified thee with miracles.  
By thy supplications, O most blessed father Sergius, ask what is beneficial for all 
who venerate the honored and glorious uncovering of thy holy relics with love and 
pure faith, and who celebrate thy sacred memory with splendor.  
Theotokion: Having conceived the Creator and Savior of all without seed in thy 
womb, O Lady and Mother of God, and having given birth to Christ God in the 
flesh, by thy supplications render Him merciful unto us, that we all may be deemed 
worthy of His revelation and kingdom.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
From thy youth thou didst receive Christ within thy soul, O venerable one, * and 
didst desire more than all to withdraw from the tumult of the world. * Thou didst 
manfully dwell in the wilderness, * and therein didst produce the fruit of humility, the 
children of obedience. * Wherefore, as thou didst become the abode of the Trinity, 
thou hast illumined with thy miracles * all who have recourse to thee with faith, grant-
ing healing in abundance unto all. ** O Sergius our father, entreat Christ God, that 
He save our souls.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Thy precious relics, shining forth from the ground today like a most radiant sun, * 
have been found to be incorrupt, resplendent with a multitude of miracles like a 
fragrant flower, * pouring forth divers healings upon all the faithful, and gladdening 
thy chosen flock, * which, having wisely assembled, thou didst shepherd well. * On 
their behalf thou dost now stand in supplication before the Trinity, * praying that 
victory be granted to our Orthodox hierarchs over all heresies, ** that we may all cry 
out to thee: Rejoice, O divinely wise Sergius!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
 
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, §213 (5: 22-6: 2) 
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, § 24 (6: 17-23) 
At that time, Jesus came down and stood in the plain, and the company of his 
disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the 
seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their 
diseases; and they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the 
whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed 
them all. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye poor: for 
yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. 
Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate 
you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, 
and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and 
leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven:  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
