--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 5th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE VENERABLE MARTYRS ELIZABETH & BARBARA, 
& THE OTHER HOLY MARTYRS OF ALAPAEVSK  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the venerable martyrs, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
O venerable martyr Elizabeth, * having taken thy cross upon thy shoulder, * and 
being obedient even unto death * for Him Who loved thee, * thou didst say: No one 
shall separate me ** from His love! (Twice)  
The venerable martyr Barbara, * faithful to her abbess during this transitory life, * 
remained loyal even unto her end, * following the saying of Christ, the Judge of the 
contest: * He who is faithful in that which is least ** is faithful also in much. (Twice)  
O martyred kinsmen, ye scions of a goodly root, * Sub-deacon John, Constantine 
and Igor, * who suffered well and received crowns: * Pray ye unto the Lord, * that we 
also may offer Him ** spiritual fruit.  
Today we celebrate the feast of the venerable Sergius * in honor of the translation 
of his relics, * and the martyred Grand Duke Sergius * is translated to the eternal 
mansions, * together with the faithful Theodore. ** And they all make supplication 
on our behalf.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Revealed as sheep of the true Shepherd, O passion-bearers and venerable martyrs 
Elizabeth and Barbara, O Princes John, Constantine, Igor and Sergius, O martyrs 
Theodore and Vladimir, ye remained steadfast amidst savage wolves; and having 
finished well the course, O divine ones, ye have made your abode in the heavenly 
fold.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure Virgin Mother, * beholding the most iniquitous 
people * who unjustly nailed Thee to the Tree, ** was wounded within, as Symeon 
foretold.  
Stichera Aposticha from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
O all-praised martyrs of Christ, who reckoned as naught the assaults of the 
persecutors and violent death, and right boldly armed yourselves for battle with manly 
mind, ye clothed yourselves with the glory of victory, and have been numbered 
among all the righteous. And praising you ever with them, we call you blessed.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
Beholding thee, O Jesus, nailed to the Cross * and accepting suffering of Thine 
own will, O Master, * the Virgin Thy Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my sweet 
Child! * How is it that Thou dost endure * wounds unjustly inflicted, * O Thou Who 
healest human infirmities * and dost deliver all from corruption ** in Thy loving-
kindness?  
Troparion of the venerable martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Causing meekness, humility and love to dwell in thy soul, * thou didst earnestly 
serve the suffering, * O holy passion-bearer Princess Elizabeth; * wherefore, with 
faith thou didst endure * sufferings and death for Christ, * with the martyr Barbara. 
** With her pray for all who honor you with love.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the venerable martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Causing meekness, humility and love to dwell in thy soul, * thou didst earnestly 
serve the suffering, * O holy passion-bearer Princess Elizabeth; * wherefore, with 
faith thou didst endure * sufferings and death for Christ, * with the martyr Barbara. 
** With her pray for all who honor you with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion:  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without the Martyria; and this canon of the 
venerable martyrs, with 6 Troparia, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Protected by the breastplate of faith, O invincible passion-bearers, ye eight most 
honored warriors of Christ, armed yourselves against the enemy with the Cross.  
Placing your hope not in princes and the sons of men, but on God alone, O holy 
ones, ye served Him faithfully in holiness and righteousness.  
The iniquitous children of darkness deprived you of life and a transitory kingdom; 
yet did they make you children and heirs of the kingdom of heaven.  
Great are your sufferings, and greater yet your gifts! Entreat the King of heaven, 
that those who keep your memory with faith may be delivered from corruption and 
misfortunes.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, in me there are no works of salvation, for I heap 
sins upon sins and wickedness upon wickedness; wherefore, in thy supplications, O 
pure one, have compassion and save me.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Thou didst love the people chosen by God, O great-martyr Elizabeth, saying, like 
Ruth of old: “Let Holy Russia not perish!” And thou didst seek that all be saved and 
come to the knowledge of the Truth.  
Thou wast deprived of thine earthly spouse, yet found a heavenly Bridegroom, for 
Whose sake thou didst cut thyself off from this world and all in it, saying: There is 
none more holy than Thee, O Lord!  
The merciful Elizabeth acquired love for her enemies, not only in word, but in 
deed and in truth; and emulating Christ God, she prayed for those who slew her, 
saying: Forgive them; for they know not what they do!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Evil men slandered thee, unmindful that the devil is a liar; yet as a humble 
emulator of Christ thou didst endure all in meekness.  
Theotokion: The judgment is at the doors; the judgment-seat is ready. Prepare 
thyself, O lowly soul, and cry aloud: When Thou shalt come to render judgment, O 
Word, condemn me not, through the supplications of her who gave Thee birth.  
Sessional hymn of the venerable martyrs, in Tone III: 
Today, we celebrate with splendor the memory of the passion-bearers of 
Alapaevsk, who, buried alive in a deep pit, valiantly suffered, sending up unceasing 
glorification unto Christ; and they set at naught the deception of the devil and 
trampled down death, crying: Christ is risen from the dead!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
O holy Virgin, Mother of Christ, glory of the martyrs and joy of the angels: with 
them beseech thy Son, that He have pity and save thy servants.  
Stavrotheotokion: Having obtained the Cross of thy Son as a staff of strength, * O 
Theotokos, * therewith we cast down the arrogance of the enemy, ** and with love 
unceasingly magnify thee.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
As one zealous in obedience to thy fathers, thou didst acquire the mother of 
immaculate prayer: the most profound humility.  
Martha served Jesus, while Mary sat at His feet. Thou wast a model of them, O 
venerable martyr, for in activity thou didst find ascent to divine vision in thy 
monastery.  
Their hearts purified by prayer and tears, the venerable Elizabeth and her 
companion Barbara now behold the light amid light unapproachable.  
Thou gavest neither sleep to thine eyes nor slumber to thine eyelids until thou 
hadst attained the love of goodness, ever teaching thy children: Love one another!  
Theotokion: Laying hold of the fruits of sin I have died, and offering thee a barren 
soul, I cry: Show it forth as fruitful, O thou who hast destroyed corruption by thy 
Fruit.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
Feeders of the hungry, comforters of travelers, and visitors of the incurably ill 
were ye; wherefore, ye have inherited the things of heaven.  
The compassionate Elizabeth strove to seek out the lost sheep, emulating the good 
Shepherd, Who said: I have come to save the perishing!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thou didst acquire constant meekness, exalted humility, unfeigned love and 
spiritual wisdom; wherefore, we call thee blessed.  
Lamentation and inconsolable woe overtook thy peaceful convent when wicked 
men took thee away from among thy faithful disciples; but thou didst comfort them 
all.  
Theotokion: Having thee as our hope and confirmation, and an immovable 
bulwark of salvation, O all-hymned one, we are delivered from every vexation.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Bearing the wounds of the Lord Jesus upon your bodies, in patience ye subdued all 
the power of Hades.  
O invincible martyrs, ye did not reject Him Who sacrificed Himself for you, but 
offered yourselves to Him as an unblemished sacrifice.  
The house of your souls was founded upon the rock of the commandments of 
God; wherefore, ye remained unmoved, O ye eight holy martyrs.  
They who on earth were persecuted for Christ’s sake now rejoice as blessed 
inhabitants of heaven throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned Sovereign Lady, in a manner past all telling thou hast 
given birth unto Him Who resteth in the saints; wherefore, we honor thee with 
hymns.  
Kontakion to the holy martyr Princess Elizabeth, in Tone IV:  
Taking up the Cross of Christ, * thou didst pass from royal glory to the glory of 
heaven, * praying for thine enemies, O holy martyred Princess Elizabeth; * and with 
the martyr Barbara thou didst find everlasting joy. ** Therefore, pray ye on behalf of 
our souls.  
Ikos: When thy spouse was slain, O right glorious martyr Elizabeth, thou didst 
betroth thyself to Christ, the heavenly Bridegroom; and, forsaking thy royal palaces 
and putting away all riches and luxuries, thou didst take unto thyself the poor and 
infirm as children. Wherefore, the enemy of mankind’s salvation hated thee and 
moved wicked men to slay thee; but the merciful Savior set at naught their vile 
machinations, receiving thee and thy companions into His heavenly mansions, where 
ye pray on behalf of our souls.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
The saints were slaughtered like lambs for the transgression of their people, and 
were led, mute, to the struggle which awaited them, lifting their eyes unto Jesus, the 
Author of faith.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Cast into the shaft, like the three children in the furnace the holy martyrs chanted 
the hymn of victory over death, singing: Blessed art Thou, O God our Redeemer!  
“Blessed are ye who henceforth die in the Lord; ye shall find rest from your 
labors,” said the Holy Spirit, commanding us also to cry: Blessed art Thou, O God 
our Redeemer!  
It is fitting that we honor those who suffered mightily for the Lord, who cast 
down the machinations of the enemy and chant together: Blessed art Thou, O God 
our Redeemer!  
Theotokion: Grant us unexpected joy, O thou who didst receive the angel’s 
“Rejoice!”, that we may cry out with a great voice: Blessed art Thou, O God our 
Redeemer!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: O ye Children, equal in number to the Trinity, * bless ye God the 
Father and creator; * sing ye the praises of the Word who descended and 
changed the fire into dew; * and supremely exalt ye throughout the ages * the 
most Holy Spirit, who giveth life unto all. 
Christ-loving soldiers, removing your holy bodies from the earth, reverently placed 
them in coffins, singing as a funeral hymn: Chant, O ye priests! Ye people, supremely 
exalt the Lord throughout all ages!  
Having loved Sion, the dwelling-place of God, and desiring to behold the good 
things of Jerusalem all the days of her life, the holy Elizabeth received burial therein, 
where priests chant and the people supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages.  
The earth was hallowed by the deposition of the sacred relics of the martyrs; for it 
hath acquired them as a wellspring pouring forth all manner of healings, unceasingly 
curing the bodily and spiritual sufferings of those who supremely exalt Christ 
throughout all ages.  
Triadicon: O God in three Hypostases! Accept the cry of pain of us sinners, which 
issueth forth from our hearts. Look down upon our suffering land, that therein the 
priests may continually chant and the people hymn thee throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: O pure one who art the portal of the Light, enlighten the eyes of our 
heart, driving away the cloud of the passions and their profound darkness, that the 
priests may hymn, and the people may supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
O ye eight passion-bearers, in the expectation of the eighth day ye remained 
unshaken until the end of your transitory life.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
O right praiseworthy royal scions, ye received nobility of spirit in place of a 
worldly nobility, and have been shown to be heirs of the kingdom on high, where ye 
reign now with Christ.  
God is the God of the living, saith the Lord; wherefore, forget not your children in 
exile, we pray, and the suffering land of Russia, that we may be delivered from our 
cruel enemies.  
Before your holy relics in the earthly Jerusalem I pray: let me not perish before the 
end, but help me and lead me into the heavenly Sion.  
Theotokion: Before thy mighty icon, O Sovereign Lady, the holy passion-bearers 
prayed: Take not thy protection away from us!  
Exapostilarion of the venerable martyrs:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”: 
Come, ye assembly of those who love the martyrs, gathered here in the Garden of 
Gethsemane, let us fall down before the precious relics of the passion-bearers, and in 
fervent supplication let us ask that they send down upon us peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
God, Who clothed Himself in me, hath issued forth from thee, and in the robe of 
incorruption, He hath clad me who was stripped naked of the divine vesture through 
mine evil ways, O Lady Theotokos, thou refuge of all mankind, the confirmation and 
rampart of the crowned martyrs, and the joy of the angels.  
Stichera Aposticha from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone I:  
Suffering sorely in prison, ye offered up supplication; and cast into the mine-shaft, 
with good cheer ye chanted like Daniel in the lions’ den. Wherefore, deliver from the 
pit of our passions, us who with faith and love keep your sacred memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: The Sovereign Lady, the unblemished ewe-lamb, * beholding 
her Lamb upon the Cross, * bereft of form and comeliness, * lamenting, said: “Woe 
is me! * Whither hath Thy comeliness gone, * O most Sweet One? * Where is Thy 
splendor? Where is the brilliant grace * of Thine image, * O my Son most beloved?”  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes: 4 Troparia from the Oktoechos, and 4 Troparia from ODE 
III of the canon of the venerable martyrs.  
Thou didst love the people chosen by God, O great-martyr Elizabeth, saying, like 
Ruth of old: “Let Holy Russia not perish!” And thou didst seek that all be saved and 
come to the knowledge of the Truth.  
Thou wast deprived of thine earthly spouse, yet found a heavenly Bridegroom, for 
Whose sake thou didst cut thyself off from this world and all in it, saying: There is 
none more holy than Thee, O Lord!  
The merciful Elizabeth acquired love for her enemies, not only in word, but in 
deed and in truth; and emulating Christ God, she prayed for those who slew her, 
saying: Forgive them; for they know not what they do!  
Theotokion: O all-hymned Sovereign Lady, in a manner past all telling thou hast 
given birth unto Him Who resteth in the saints; wherefore, we honor thee with 
hymns.  
Troparion of the venerable martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Causing meekness, humility and love to dwell in thy soul, * thou didst earnestly 
serve the suffering, * O holy passion-bearer Princess Elizabeth; * wherefore, with 
faith thou didst endure * sufferings and death for Christ, * with the martyr Barbara. 
** With her pray for all who honor you with love.  
Kontakion to the holy martyr Princess Elizabeth, in Tone IV:  
Taking up the Cross of Christ, * thou didst pass from royal glory to the glory of 
heaven, * praying for thine enemies, O holy martyred Princess Elizabeth; * and with 
the martyr Barbara thou didst find everlasting joy. ** Therefore, pray ye on behalf of 
our souls.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS, § 99 (ROM. 8: 28-39)  
Brethren: We know that all things work together for good to those who love God, 
to those who are called according to His purpose. For whom He did foreknow, He 
also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be the 
firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom He did predestinate, those He also 
called: and whom He called, those He also justified: and whom He justified, those He 
also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be 
against us? He that spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how 

--- PAGE 9 ---
shall He not with Him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay any thing to the 
charge of God’s elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is 
Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, Who is even at the right hand of God, 
Who also maketh intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? 
shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or 
sword? As it is written: For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as 
sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through 
Him Who loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor 
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor 
depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, 
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 36 (MT. 10: 16-22)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of 
wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: 
for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a 
testimony against them and the gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end 
shall be saved.”  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
 
 
