--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 1st DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY & UNMERCENARY PHYSICIANS & WONDER-
WORKERS COSMAS & DAMIAN, WHO WERE MARTYRED AT ROME 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy unmercinaries: 3, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
With rays of miracles * dispel every infirmity of our sicknesses, * freely extending 
grace to us, * and enrich us with the gifts of the Master * Who hath taken on His 
shoulders ** the afflictions of earthborn mortals.  
Having first been trained well as physicians, * ye cleansed away the illnesses of all 
with faith; * and in later times, * having armed yourselves spiritually, * ye divinely 
dispel ** the symptoms of spiritual sicknesses.  
Having received grace freely from Christ God, * ye heal the ailments of all without 
fee, * O unmercenary ones, * and cleanse not only our infirmities, * but even 
reasonably treat cattle, ** in that ye are merciful.  
And 3 Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Like rivers in full flood * and manifestly overflowing * with spiritual waters, * ye 
irrigate creation * with divine signs and the most glorious gifts of healing, * drying up 
soul-corrupting passions, * healing infirmities, and expelling evil spirits, * O God-
bearing unmercenaries, ** intercessors for our souls.  
Having subdued the irrational passions, * O holy ones, * with spiritual powers, * 
ye impart well-being * to men and cattle, * having been enriched by Christ * with the 
gift of healings. * Wherefore, celebrating your sacred and radiant solemnity, ** we ask 
for the cleansing of our souls.  
Your divine temple * hath been shown to be like a splendid heaven of salvation, * 
which now displayeth * salvific miracles like stars, * and the divine working of 
healings * like a radiant sun, * O most blessed Cosmas and most glorious Damian, * 
ye servants of the Lord ** and intercessors for our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Boundless is the grace of the saints, which they have received from Christ. 
Wherefore, their relics continually work miracles by the power of God, and their 
names, when invoked with faith, heal incurable sicknesses. Through them, O Lord, 
free us also from the passions of soul and body, in that Thou lovest mankind.  
 
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: When, of old, the unblemished ewe-lamb and immaculate 
Sovereign Lady, * beheld her Lamb * upon the tree of the Cross, * she exclaimed 
maternally, and marveling cried aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new 
and most strange sight I see? * How hath the thankless synagogue * betrayed Thee to 
the judgment-seat of Pilate * and condemned Thee to death, * Who art the Life of 
all? * Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, ** O Word!”  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Ever having Christ working within you, O holy unmercenaries, ye work wonders 
in the world and heal the sick. For your healing is an inexhaustible well-spring, which 
when drawn from, floweth in abundance every day, pouring and gushing forth in 
great quantities, granting healing to all who draw forth from it, yet remaining ever full. 
What, therefore, shall we call you? Healing physicians of souls and bodies? Healers of 
incurable sufferings who heal all and have received this gift from Christ the Savior, 
Who granteth great mercy unto us.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth birth to 
Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son How is it 
that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  
Troparion of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone VIII: 
O holy unmercenaries and wonder-workers Cosmas and Damian, visit our 
infirmities. ** Freely have ye received, freely give unto us.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone VIII: 
O holy unmercenaries and wonder-workers Cosmas and Damian, visit our 
infirmities. ** Freely have ye received, freely give unto us. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion. 
Both canons from the Oktoechos, with 8 Troparia, excluding the martyrica;  
Canon of the holy unmercinaries, with 6 Troparia, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
O ye two radiant and wise unmercenaries, standing with all the elect before the 
adored Trinity, pray that those who keep your radiant memory may be enlightened by 
the divine radiance of the Spirit.  
Showing yourselves to be elevated in mind high above material things, O wise 
saints, ye have received the immaterial radiance of the Spirit. Wherefore, O 
unmercenaries, ever dispel the darkness of infirmities by your divine visitations.  
Having acquired spiritual eyes which slumber not, O glorious, merciful and God-
bearing unmercenaries, in divine fulfillment of the commandments of God, by His 
grace ye rouse to goodly health those who sleep in infirmities.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, from thy pure blood thou hast given flesh to our 
Savior and God Who, through the Spirit, hath shown us the honorable unmercenaries 
as physicians for our souls, and salvific and fervent helpers.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Your divine temple doth sacredly pour forth in spiritual streams the fragrant myrrh 
of healings, ever washing away the fetid passions.  
Ever dwelling in the mansions of heaven, O most wise ones, through the grace of 
the Almighty ye ever show your tabernacle to be a well-spring of healings.  
Curbing the passions of the flesh with the reins of abstinence, ye have most 
abundantly received spiritual radiance, whereby, ye enrich the world with healings.  
Theotokion: God chose thee as the most beautiful among women, O pure one, 
and He Who resteth in His saints was well pleased to be born in the flesh from thee.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
By the grace of the Spirit ye have been revealed to all to be bestowers of healing, 
wonder-workers and radiant beacons of miracles; for by faith ye cool the flame of the 
passions and warm the minds of those who believe in Him. Wherefore fleeing to your 
divine church, and having acquired spiritual healing, we cry aloud: O God-bearing 
unmercenaries, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who 
celebrate your holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., in the same melody: 
Shining forth rays of healings upon those on earth, O godly wonder-workers, ye 
manifestly drive away the infirmities of all, having truly acquired within yourselves the 
never-waning Sun, Christ our God. Wherefore, assembling as is meet, O holy and 
God-bearing unmercenaries, we venerate your honorable memory. Entreat Christ 
God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who honor your holy memory with 
love.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
With life-bearing actions and all manner of activities, ye heal the mortal sufferings 
of all, O light-bearing pillars, immovable ramparts, divine branches of the true Vine.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Let the unmercenaries, the breasts of the Church who pour forth the milk of 
healings, nurturing all with the divine food of enlightenment, be praised with joyful 
hymns.  
Your church, O saints, hath been shown to be a source of healing, and a calm and 
salvific harbor, for the tempest-tossed. And having recourse thereto, we all attain 
tranquility and deliverance from evils.  
Theotokion: O Virgin grant unto me the mercy which is within thee, for thou hast 
truly given birth to the merciful Word Who hath shown unto the ends of the earth, 
the merciful healers and wonder-workers.  
ODE V 
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Manifestly illumined with divine splendors, ye travel about the whole world 
enlightening all, dispelling the darkness of the passions, and expelling demons, O 
God-bearing unmercenaries.  
Like two lamps ye illumine the world, O God-bearers, moved by the Spirit to go 
about all creation, visiting those who are on their beds in pain, rescuing them from 
misfortunes.  
Without fee granting healing to the infirm, and deliverance from the passions, O 
God-bearing unmercenaries, ye have been revealed by God to be great intercessors; 
the helpers and assistants of all. 
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth to the hypostatic Wisdom of God, O most 
pure Virgin Theotokos who hast shown forth the saints as most wise. Through them 
the arrogance and evil machinations of the wicked-minded one have fallen down.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Not by human skill, but by divine grace ye cleanse men of infirmities, O glorious 
ones, wherefore, having assembled, we call you blessed as is meet.  
Bound with love for Christ, O God-bearers, by divine grace ye destroy all the 
malice of the demons, wherefore, we celebrate your solemn feast.  
As shoots of the divine vine pouring forth the wine of healings upon us who are 
caught in the grief of infirmities, ye fill us with gladness, O unmercenaries.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: O Lady, thou wast made a most pure temple by the supremely pure 
Word, Who hath forever magnified in miracles and signs the divine temple of the 
unmercenaries.  
Kontakion of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone II: 
Having received the grace of healings, * ye extend health to those in need, * O 
most glorious physicians and wonder-workers. * By your visitation cast down the 
audacity of the enemy, ** healing the world with miracles.  
Ikos: The discourse of the wise physicians surpasseth all reason and wisdom, 
imparting understanding unto all, for, having received grace from the Most High, they 
grant health to all, from whence, even I have been granted the grace to sing of the 
abundance of healings the God-bearing favorites and ministers of Christ bestow; for 
they deliver multitudes from sickness, healing the world with miracles.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Opening a God-given well-spring, O holy ones, ye pour forth rivers of pure 
healings upon all, washing away the defilement of the passions and the most vile 
wickedness of the demons.  
Strengthened by the grace of the omnipotent Spirit, Thy two right wondrous 
unmercenaries ever grant health to the sick, O Word, Who art the Wisdom and 
Power of God.  
Thou alone art holy, for Thou dost glorify Thy saints, and by them, deliver the 
world from misfortunes, enlightening those who cry aloud: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: In bringing forth Christ, O Mary, thou hast budded forth a staff from 
the root of Jesse, Who hath adorned with miracles as with flowers, His favored 
unmercenaries.  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Ye were revealed by the divine Spirit to be devoid of all evil, O saints, becoming 
the vesture of salvation, the cause of forgiveness, and the avoidance of evils for us 
who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Becoming sons through divine communion, O Cosmas and Damian, through faith 
ye have now truly acquired both your Father’s portion of heavenly delight and the 
radiant activity of miracles; and ye cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
With the divine drops of your, blood, O saints, ye wash away the spiritual 
defilement of our souls, driving away the suffering of pain, and repelling the assaults 
of the demons, as ye are our intercessors and merciful healers.  
Adorned by the Spirit like lilies, like noetic flowers, like roses, O saints, ye emit 
sweet fragrances, dispelling the stench of the passions, and have been revealed as 
such to us who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: By thee death hath been slain, O most pure one, for thou hast given 
birth to Christ God, the hypostatic Life, Who hath revealed the unmercenaries to be 
intercessors, and physicians, for us who cry aloud: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, 
O most pure one!  
ODE IX 
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Behold, what is so good or so beautiful, as it is written, as for the brethren, whom 
we now fittingly bless, to dwell in oneness of mind, in a place of splendor, in the 
mansions of heaven, in never-fading glory?  
How great is the temple, ever adorned with miracles, which ye ever visit, O right 
wondrous Cosmas and Damian, granting health to those who are in need thereof. 
Wherefore, ye are fittingly blessed.  
Today the angels, the divine apostles, the prophets, the venerable and all the 
righteous rejoice with us in your memory, O blessed ones; for, dwelling joyfully with 
them, ye pray on behalf of all the world.  
O ye two divine and radiant unmercenaries, and most honorable God-bearers: ask 
forgiveness of sins, amendment of life and deliverance from all evils on behalf of us 
who ever praise you.  
Theotokion: O only most pure Ever-virgin, since thou wast the abode of the Light 
Who hath illumined all, thou hast revealed the saints to be most radiant, ever driving 
away the darkness of soul-corrupting passions by the Spirit.  
Exapostilarion of the holy unmercinaries: 
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”: 
What utterances can rightly describe the unmercenaries’ grace of healing? For, 
after God, they are the saving physicians of the whole world.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: With thy mighty protection, O pure one, preserve all of us, thy 
servants, unharmed from the assaults of the enemy; for thee alone have we acquired 
as our refuge amid tribulations.  
On the Praises, 6 Stichera of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone I: 
Having received the grace of healings from God, O most comely unmercenaries, 
without fee ye fervently heal the passions of our souls and bodies. Wherefore, 
bestowing health upon the faithful through you, Christ hath revealed you to the all 
the world as steadfast luminaries. Entreat Him that our souls be saved. 
Drawing forth an abyss of healings from the nous of the Most High, O 
unmercenaries, ye pour forth healings upon all the faithful; for, having supra-naturally 
drawn forth from the treasuries of the Spirit saving remedies for the suffering of 
ailments, ye heal the afflicted with mystical therapy. Wherefore, as ye are manifestly 
temples of the life-creating Trinity, the Godhead made His abode within you. Pray ye 
to the Trinity, that our souls be saved.  
The composition of Theophanes, in Tone II: 
Living actively with divine love and desire for the things to come, ye made straight 
the ways of salvation. Wherefore, having preserved the purity of your souls unsullied, 
ye stood fast against material things until the end; and rendered golden by the divine 
Spirit, ye grant healing to the infirm without fee, O sacred twain, radiant company, ye 
enlightened and godly unmercenaries, who visit us in our tribulations and pain, and 
freely heal the afflictions of our souls. 
The composition of Germanus, in Tone II:  
Vouchsafed great gifts, O all-famed ones, ye lived a humble life on earth; and 
going about everywhere, freely healing the sufferings of the sick, ye were shown to be 
conversers with the angels. O wise Cosmas and Damian, most comely brethren, heal 
also our sufferings through your supplications.  
Verse: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; * He 
hath wrought all His desires in them.  
The pool of healing cured but one person every year, but the temple of the 
unmercenaries healeth a great multitude of the infirm; for inexhaustible and 
unmovable are the riches of the saints. Through their supplications, O Christ, have 
mercy upon us.  
Verse: Behold, what is so good or so joyous * as for brethren to dwell together 
in unity?  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
The composition of Germanus, in Tone II: 
The choir of the saints rejoiceth throughout all ages, for they have inherited the 
kingdom of heaven. And the earth which received their relics emitted a sweet 
fragrance, for they were servants of Christ, who have made their abodes in everlasting 
life.  
Glory ..., the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV: 
The holy unmercenaries, possessed of a well-spring of healings, grant healing to all 
in need, for they have been deemed worthy of great gifts by Christ the Savior, the 
ever-flowing Wellspring. For the Lord told you, in that ye are emulators of the 
apostles: “Behold, I have given you authority over unclean spirits and every disease.” 
Wherefore, having lived well in His commandments, ye freely received. Freely give 
also, healing the sufferings of our souls and bodies.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of mankind, 
crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What is this, O my 
Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou 
hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** I 
marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Who will not marvel, who will not render glory, who will not hymn with faith the 
miracles of the wise and most glorious unmercenaries? For even after their holy 
repose they richly impart healings unto all who have recourse to them with faith, and 
their precious and holy relics pour forth the grace of healings. O ye two holy ones! O 
ye honored ones! O the wisdom and glory which cometh from the grace given to you 
by God! Wherefore, we cry out in hymns to God our Benefactor, Who hath given 
them to us for the healing of our souls and bodies.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
The unblemished heifer, * beholding her Bullock * willingly nailed upon the Tree, 
* cried out aloud, lamenting piteously: * “Woe is me, O my most beloved Child! * 
How hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews * rewarded Thee, * desiring to leave 
me childless and bereft of Thee, ** O my most beloved Child?”  

--- PAGE 10 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the holy unmercenaries.  
Your divine temple doth sacredly pour forth in spiritual streams the fragrant myrrh 
of healings, ever washing away the fetid passions.  
Ever dwelling in the mansions of heaven, O most wise ones, through the grace of 
the Almighty ye ever show your tabernacle to be a well-spring of healings.  
Curbing the passions of the flesh with the reins of abstinence, ye have most 
abundantly received spiritual radiance, whereby, ye enrich the world with healings.  
Theotokion: God chose thee as the most beautiful among women, O pure one, 
and He Who resteth in His saints was well pleased to be born in the flesh from thee.  
Troparion of the holy unmercenaries, in Tone VIII: 
O holy unmercenaries and wonder-workers Cosmas and Damian, visit our 
infirmities. ** Freely have ye received, freely give unto us.  
Kontakion of the holy unmercenaries, in Tone II: 
Having received the grace of healings, * ye extend health to those in need, * O 
most glorious physicians and wonder-workers. * By your visitation cast down the 
audacity of the enemy, ** healing the world with miracles.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken. 
 
 EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, § 153 (I COR. 12: 27-13: 8) 
Brethren: Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And God hath set 
some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that 
miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. Are all 
apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles? Have all the 
gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? But covet earnestly the 
best gifts: and yet show I unto you a more excellent way. Though I speak with the 
tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, 
or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all 
mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove 
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to 
feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it 

--- PAGE 11 ---
profiteth me nothing. Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity 
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her 
own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in 
the truth; Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. 
Charity never faileth.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Behold, what is so good or so joyous as for brethren to 
dwell together in unity?  
Verse: For there the Lord commanded the blessing, life for evermore.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 34, (MT. 10: 1, 5-8) 
At that time, when Jesus had called unto Him His twelve disciples, He gave them 
power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and 
all manner of disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them saying: 
“Go not into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: 
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying: 
“The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, 
cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.”  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
