--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 3rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR HYACINTH 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
The chosen Head Cornerstone * hath been set up in Sion, * the immovable 
Foundation * whereon the ranks of the martyrs have founded themselves. * With 
them doth the victorious Hyacinth * shine with heavenly luster. * O Thine ineffable 
loving-kindness, O Master! * Thereby, O Christ, save Thou our souls, ** in that Thou 
alone art merciful.  
Thou didst pass through Jerusalem, * the splendid city of God, * like a stone dyed 
with blood, * clad in the purple robe of suffering, * and now manifestly praying, * 
dancing and rejoicing, * do thou, by thy supplications, * save those who celebrate ** 
thy most glorious and sacred memory, O most blessed one.  
Possessed of right acceptable boldness * before Christ the Master, * as an 
invincible martyr, * and His well-given ear * as a lawful spiritual athlete, * cease not in 
thine entreaties, O right wondrous one, * to deliver from temptations and evil 
circumstances * those who, keep thy memory, ** and hymn thee faithfully.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
The pre-eternal God, * taking flesh from thy blood, * hath shown thee forth, O 
pure one, * as an intercessor for all mankind. * Wherefore, deliver thy servants * from 
all misfortune and every evil circumstance, * and grant that all who glorify * and bow 
down before thee ** be deemed worthy of the splendor of the elect.  
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all? * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Hyacinth O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS 
Canon of the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I hymn thee as brilliant stone, O martyr”, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Upon thee, the precious stone of the Church of God, who shone with the 
splendor of martyrdom, do I now call to help me sing thy praises.  
Forsaking earthly glory, thou didst inherit the glory of heaven, O glorious and 
crowned martyr, who art ever with the Master of all.  
Valiantly opposing deception, O martyred spiritual athlete, thou didst display 
courage of mind for Christ, though thou wast young of age.  
Theotokion: The Creator of all, making His abode within thy womb, O Mother of 
God, became incarnate for the salvation of mankind, assuming human nature for our 
sake.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Though a youth, O wise martyr of Christ, thou wast shown to possess the 
understanding of an elder and to be adorned with wisdom. (Twice) 
Speedily running the course of martyrdom, thou didst attain to the valor of the 
martyrs, and a crown of honor.  
Theotokion: By thy supplications, O joyous one, guide thou to the entrance of 
heaven those who piously confess thee to be the Theotokos.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Thou wast a precious stone of the Church laid up in the treasuries of heaven, O 
Hyacinth, denouncing those who worship stones, wherefore thou didst drain the cup 
of suffering, O glorious martyr. Entreat God, that He grant us great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence when He took flesh in thy 
womb, the one Lord remained God though He had become a man; and even after thy 
birthgiving He preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He grant us great mercy.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, desiring to redeem mankind from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Thou wast shown to be a lawful spiritual athlete, imbued with the pangs of piety, 
O most noetically rich martyr, and feared not the savagery of the tormenters.  
Receiving in heaven a crown studded with hyacinth stones, O divinely wise one, 
thou hast been deemed worthy to join chorus with the inhabitants of heaven, as one 
who art heavenly.  
With a courageous and pious mind thou didst preach the Word, and with 
invincible resolve thou didst denounce the tyrant, O all-blessed one.  
Theotokion: O divinely blessed one, who alone didst receive the almighty God 
within thyself, deliver those who hymn thee from every evil circumstance.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Thou didst denounce the raging tyrant, O spiritual athlete, having been invested by 
God with invincible power. (Twice) 
Accepting death voluntarily for Christ, O crowned one, thou didst acquire 
immortal piety.  
Theotokion: May we who honor thine ineffable birthgiving be delivered from the 
snares of the enemy by thy supplications, O most pure one.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Suffering the torments inflicted by the impious, the martyr rejoiced, strengthening 
his mind with the suffering of the Dispassionate One; and, undaunted by the 
mindless ones, he hath been led in to the Judge of the contest. (Twice) 
Like a brilliant hyacinth-stone thou hast given luster to the temple of God, and like 
a choice purple cloth, thou art dyed in the blood of thy suffering for the Church of 
the firstborn, O most glorious one.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: May we be delivered from evil transgressions by thy supplications, O 
pure Birthgiver of God, and may we receive the divine splendor of the Son of God 
Who became ineffably incarnate from thee.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone VI: 
Thy martyr, O Christ, having acquired Thy Faith * like a tree of life in the midst of 
his soul, * became more honorable than the Garden of Eden, * boldly destroying the 
tree of the serpent’s deception by his spirit; * and he was crowned with Thy glory, ** 
O greatly Merciful One.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Manifestly possessing a pious mind as the ruler of thy passions, O most blessed 
one, thou didst spew forth the food of the iniquitous; for thou wast nurtured by the 
divine word, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! (Twice)  
With purity of soul and radiance of mind, O wise one who art most dear to the 
Lord, thou didst offer thyself as a sacred sacrifice, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou.  
Theotokion: When the human race fell, O pure and blessed Virgin, thou didst 
pacify the God of our fathers, having conceived the Wellspring of immortality and 
Life incorruptible, for the sake of mortal corruption.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Through the endurance of vile imprisonment thou didst reach the vast and 
beauteous spaciousness of paradise, beholding the luminous splendors of the saints 
and gazing upon the choirs of the angels; and standing earnestly before God, thou 
dost cry: Ye children, bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
With all thy heart didst thou love God, even to the shedding of thy blood, 
contending against sin and manifestly slaying the foe; and, adorned with wreaths of 
victory, thou dost cry out with zeal: Ye priests bless; ye people supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Like a magnificent ornament, like a jewel of surpassing brilliance, like a sacred robe 
of purple thou hast adorned the Church of heaven. And having adorned the holy of 
holies with the splendors of martyrdom, thou dost cry out unceasingly: Ye priests 
bless; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Ineffably didst thou give birth to the beginningless Word of God, 
unto the benefit of rational nature; and thereby we have been delivered from the 
corruption of death, and received the life-creating Spirit. Wherefore, we glorify thee 
as the true Theotokos, O Virgin, throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: With never ceasing praises we magnify thee, * the Mother of God Most 
High, * who art higher than the most pure hosts, * and who beyond 
comprehension knew not wedlock, * yet hath truly given birth to God.  
By thy supplications render the Master merciful to all who with faith hymn thine 
invincible suffering, whereby thou didst abolish the delusion of idolatry, and made 
clear the words of piety.  
Appearing to the army of the angels as most comely, O Hyacinth, stained with 
blood as with heavenly dye, thou wast adorned with the crown of thy martyrdom for 
thy confession and faith in Christ.  
Thou wast wholly a most sacred dwelling place of God and didst dedicate thy 
body and soul to untiring opposition to the warfare of the iniquitous tyrant. 
Wherefore, we all call thee blessed.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, slay thou the sin which liveth within me; and 
transform into life the spiritual death of those who piously magnify thee, through the 
activity of the true Life which was born from thy womb in His ineffable loving-
kindness.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Hyacinth O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone VI: 
Thy martyr, O Christ, having acquired Thy Faith * like a tree of life in the midst of 
his soul, * became more honorable than the Garden of Eden, * boldly destroying the 
tree of the serpent’s deception by his spirit; * and he was crowned with Thy glory, ** 
O greatly Merciful One.  
 
