--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 4th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS ANDREW THE 
JERUSALEMITE, ARCHBISHOP OF CRETE. 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE MOTHER MARTHA, 
MOTHER OF THE HOLY SYMEON OF THE WONDROUS MOUNTAIN. 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 for the holy hierarch, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Hating the earthly authority of the body, * with pure temperament and a simple 
heart * thou didst cleave unto the Lord, O wise father, * and wast shown to be * a 
divinely inspired instrument of the Comforter, ** playing the psalmody of salvation 
for us.  
Finding the Mother of the Lord * to be the subject of great praise, O Andrew, * 
thou didst also hymn * with honeyed discourses * the sacred apostles and the 
company of the blessed martyrs. ** With them be thou mindful of us who honor 
thee.  
We know thee to be a pillar of Orthodoxy, * a model of chastity, an example of 
meekness, * and a godly hymnographer * illumining the Church of Christ, * O father 
Andrew, initiate of sacred mysteries. ** Wherefore, we celebrate thy solemn feast.  
And 3 for the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Through fasting and tears thou didst set thyself apart * for painful ascetic 
endeavor and courageous battle * against the hordes of the enemy * who have 
crippled human nature, * sparing not thy flesh * for the sake of God’s love. * 
Wherefore, thou didst undertake godly struggles, * casting down the mind of the ad-
versary, ** O honored and most glorious Martha. (Twice)  
Thou didst spurn transitory things, * and avoid the love of what is corruptible, * 
and having desired the heavenly portion * which is everlasting, * and meet for the 
righteous and incorrupt, * inherited never-ending life, O pure one. * Wherefore, 
celebrating thy radiant and splendid memory with faith, * O glorious Martha, ** we 
honor thee with divine hymns.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Relieving ailments with the grace of the Spirit, thou dost drive away evil spirits, 
heal sufferings and enlighten the faithful with the radiance of thy miracles, O all-
glorious Martha. Wherefore with unceasing hymnody, we hymn thy splendid, radiant 
and right wondrous memory today.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
We honor thee, O Andrew our father, as the instructor of a multitude of monks; 
for through thee we have truly come to know how to walk thy path aright. Blessed art 
thou who, laboring for Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O converser 
with the angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. Pray thou with them 
to the Lord, that our souls find mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
The unblemished heifer, beholding her Bullock * willingly nailed upon the Tree, * 
cried out aloud, * lamenting piteously: * “Woe is me, O my most beloved Child! * 
How hath the ungrateful assembly * of the Jews rewarded Thee, * desiring to leave 
me childless and bereft of Thee, ** O my most beloved Child?”  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Andrew our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
In thee, O mother, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, 
thou didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Martha.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone VIII: 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia;  
And two canons for the saints, with 8 Troparia. 
ODE I 
Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: 
 “Let us weave manly hymns for Andrew”, in Tone V: 
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath 
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they 
chanted a song of victory. 
Casting off sleep from thine eyelids, by virtue thou didst splendidly prepare thyself 
as a habitation and place of divine rest for the Master, O venerable one who hast 
been revealed by God.  
Moving thy harp to play melodiously, thou didst adorn the Church of Christ with 
thy hymnody, O wondrous Andrew, instructed by the divine grace of the Holy Spirit.  
Wisely submitting to the law written by God, with fasting thou didst mortify the 
bodily passions; and elevate thy mind with mighty desire, chanting hymns to God, O 
most wise one.  
Theotokion: Thy Son and God is all desire, most pure delight, the fulfillment of 
good things, O all-immaculate one. Him do thou beseech, that He deliver those who 
now have recourse unto thee with faith.  
Canon of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Unto Him Who overthrew the tyranny of Pharaoh in the sea * and led 
Israel over dry land, * let us chant unto Christ our God, * for He hath been 
glorified throughout the ages. 
Wounded with divine desire for eternal good things, thou didst despise corruptible 
food and glory. Wherefore, in a godly manner thou didst live an angelic life, O 
venerable one.  
Aflame with divine zeal, and having lived a godly and manly life, thou hast given 
birth to a beacon and rampart for the faithful, a second Samuel, O beauteous 
offspring of the desert.  
Thou hast been shown to be a scion of abstinence shining forth upon us a sun of 
great splendor, the great and most wise healer Symeon, the intercessor and bulwark of 
the lands of the East.  
Theotokion: We, the children of the earth, having become children of God 
through divine grace and thine ineffable birthgiving, hymn thee earnestly, the sole 
cause of our salvation.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing * and 
suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * who alone art good * 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Thou didst direct thy life with virtue, O venerable one, uniting thyself unto God 
with divine desire; and wast shown to be a reason-endowed instrument, illumining the 
whole world with hymns and drawing forth divine treasures.  
Thou wast full of heavenly wisdom; for, opening the mouth of thy spirit, O 
venerable one, thou didst manifestly receive all the brilliant radiance of the effulgence 
of the threefold Sun, in that thou art a sacred minister.  
Making firm the powers of thy soul and restraining thy flesh by abstinence, O 
venerable one, thou didst wholly become a most radiant star, adorning the Church 
with thine Orthodox teachings and melodious hymnody.  
Theotokion: Now do I beseech thee, O most immaculate Mother of God, to 
deliver me from the captivity of the passions and to cleanse all the wounds of my 
sins, for thou didst most gloriously give birth to Him Who taketh away the sin of the 
world.  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as our God, 
* Whom the whole of creation doth hymn: * There is none more righteous 
than Thee, O Lord. 
Offering the all-honored fruit of thy womb to the Master, O Martha, thou didst 
offer thyself art as a perfect sacrifice on the fire of abstinence, chanting hymns unto 
Him.   
To thine immortal Christ thou didst offer a right acceptable sacrifice, him who 
sprung forth from thy womb, O venerable God-bearer, thou confirmation, bulwark 
and rampart of the faithful. 
Thou didst give wings to both soul and body to fly to the heights of heaven, and 
made thine abode there with the wise virgins, and art a divine model for those who 
with faith have recourse unto God.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, establish the ascents of my soul upon the rock of 
my hope which remaineth ever immovable, that I may praise and glorify thee, mine 
only helper.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “In prayers ...”: 
Standing before the Lord and the most pure Virgin Theotokos in prayer, * and 
offering up hymnody and praises, O honored Martha, * thou hast given birth to a 
sacred child, * the all-wondrous Symeon, the beacon of the whole world. ** With him 
do thou ever pray for us all.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Adorning the crown of the Church with thy discourses as with precious stones, O 
most wise Andrew, thou wast a sacred minister. Wherefore, after manifold labors in 
this life, thou hast received glory and the kingdom which ageth not. Therein, O 
father, be thou mindful of those who commemorate thee.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Keeping ceaseless vigil in prayer, pleasing God with almsgiving, going often to the 
divine churches, and praying with tears, faith and fasting, O all-famed Martha, thou 
didst receive a sacred child. With him pray thou, that we who honor thee with love be 
saved from misfortunes.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
O all-immaculate Virgin who hast given birth to the transcendent God: do thou 
unceasingly entreat Him with the incorporeal ones, that He grant forgiveness of trans-
gressions and correction of life before the end, to us who, as is meet, hymn thee with 
faith and love, O thou who alone art all-hymned.  
Stavrotheotokion: O all-immaculate Virgin Mother of God, a sword passed 
through thy most holy soul when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of His 
own will. Cease not to beseech Him, O blessed one, that He grant us forgiveness of 
our transgressions.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying, O 
Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the salvation 
of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed Ones. 
Openly proclaiming the glory of the supremely hymned Trinity, thy discourse 
adorned by thy manner of life, O wondrous one, wast shown to be an excellent 
standard of theology.  
O wise and divinely eloquent Andrew, showing forth an ascent of vision through 
activity, by thy manner of life thou wast like unto one clothed in divine vision.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Fighting like a shepherd, as a most noetically rich hierarch of God, thou didst repel 
the attacks of lions from the Church, O Andrew, namesake of manliness.  
Finding the Theotokos to be a great subject of laudation, thou didst show forth 
redoubled zeal, O wise one, honoring her who is above praise with many and varied 
praises.  
Theotokion: Without a physical union thou didst conceive within thy womb 
without corruption, and hast given birth without pain; and, giving birth to God in the 
flesh, thou wast preserved a virgin even after child-birth.  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Having Christ ever in thy mind, thou didst spurn the love and desire of things 
corruptible; wherefore, glorifying Him, O Martha, thou hast been deemed worthy of 
spiritual gifts.  
Utterly quelling the threefold waves of the passions, O Martha, thou didst put 
down the assaults of wild beasts; thereby eluding the complex snares of the noetic 
Amalek.  
Thou hast been a rampart and bulwark for the faithful who honor thee with pure 
love and keep thy holy memory, O godly blessed one, thou helper of the faithful.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be a noetic cloud, O Theotokos, bearing 
the very Sun of glory in the flesh, Who illumineth all creation with the light of divine 
grace.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise 
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O Christ, 
* in that Thou alone art compassionate!  
We who are now adorned with thy teachings and in a sacred manner delight in thy 
divinely inspired hymns, honor thy memory, O all-blessed Andrew.  
Manifestly illumined by the splendor of the Spirit, in a most holy manner thou 
didst praise the choirs of the saints; and with them dost now rejoice, O all-blessed 
Andrew.  
Thou now beholdest things divine, not with the senses or a corruptible body, nor 
in illusions, but noetically O most wise one, uniting thyself to higher things by the 
actions of thy soul.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: With tears I fall down before thee, praying intensely, that I may now 
be delivered from mine offenses, O all-immaculate one, and be deemed worthy of 
everlasting joy.  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
Beholding thine offspring uplifted toward heaven on a pillar by his divine 
activities, O Martha, thou didst hymn Christ Most High.  
Thou didst manifestly receive an answer from heaven, O Martha, and according to 
the revelation of God, didst conceive His great servant.  
O venerable one, the city of Antioch setteth thine offspring forth as a fervent 
intercessor, a rampart and refuge for those who are in tribulation.  
Theotokion: We who place our trust in thee, O Bride of God, having thee as a 
staff of power, vanquish the hordes of the adversary.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its soul-
destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou art 
compassionate. 
With thy splendid mouth thou didst denounce the ungodly rhetors; for thou didst 
truly explain the veneration of the precious icons, O initiate of sacred mysteries.  
In a sacred manner thou didst adorn thy life, O glorious father; for thou didst quell 
the tumult of the passions and hasten to the life of dispassion.  
All the faithful rejoice, piously delighting in the beauties of thy discourses and 
teachings, vanquishing the blasphemies of the heretics.  
Theotokion: By His incarnation from thee, O most immaculate Bride of God, He 
Who shone forth without beginning from the Father hath entered into full fellowship 
with me.  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Desiring the Queen of all with all thy soul, thou didst adorn thyself with purity, O 
Martha, and for her sake hast received spiritual gifts.  
The angels marveled at thy mature wisdom, O honored one, and mankind doth 
hymn the Creator of all Who hath glorified thee.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou didst adorn thyself like a beautiful and well-planted tree, and thou wast a 
clear mirror reflecting the manifestation of the Holy Spirit.  
Theotokion: Ever looking to thee as the calm in the midst of the tempest of 
passions and misfortunes, O Sovereign Lady, I hasten to the haven of salvation.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Manifestly trumpeting forth hymns of divine sweetness, * thou wast shown to be a 
most radiant beacon for the world, * shining with the light of the Trinity, O venerable 
Andrew. * Wherefore, we all cry out to thee: ** Cease thou never to pray for us all.  
Ikos: Wretch though I am, I desire to praise thy life, O father; and now made 
aware because of thy corrections, I seek to receive the praises of thine adornments as 
gifts, O Andrew, and to weave a wreath of praise for thee, whom even the angels 
hold in honor; and I cry aloud: Cease thou never to pray on behalf of us all!  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, * and 
bedewed the Youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed art Thou! 
That thou mightest behold the splendor of the saints, O venerable one, with the 
splendor of thy works thou didst illumine thy life, crying aloud: O God, blessed art 
Thou!  
Clad in a body, thou didst emulate the ranks of the incorporeal ones, O venerable 
one, and, rejoicing together with them, thou criest aloud: O God, blessed art Thou!  
Jerusalem now rejoiceth in splendor, having shone thee forth upon the world as a 
beacon of great radiance, O blessed one, crying aloud: O God, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: He Who before was incorporeal becameth incarnate of thy holy 
womb in His boundless tender compassion, O most pure one. To Him do we all 
chant: O God, blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: O Thou who in the beginning founded the earth * and by Thy word 
made the heavens firm, * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * O Lord God 
of our Fathers. 
Shedding the robe of the passions, thou didst array thyself in the garment of 
dispassion, O venerable one; and in purity didst betroth thyself to Christ, and wast 
pleasing unto Him.  
O honored Martha, thine offspring was shown to be a pillar of fire illumining the 
world and cleansing those in the world of dark ignorance and all wrath.  
Thou didst extinguish the uprisings of the flesh, despising the machinations of the 
noetic foe, O venerable Martha, and didst cast their snares down to the ground.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: O thou who art full of the grace of God, pray thou earnestly, that we 
who hymn and desire thee may behold the glory of thy Son and enjoy it in purity.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace chanted a 
hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
O father, thou didst manifestly gladden the Church of the new ark, and didst form 
choirs, crying: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
In holiness thou didst utter new hymnody to the Creator in the Church: Hymn the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Laboring in godly manner with virtue, thou didst hymn the sufferings of all the 
saints who of old were made wondrous and perfect by Christ throughout all ages, O 
most wise Andrew.  
Theotokion: Come ye, let us hymn the divine Maiden with divine hymns, saying: 
Rejoice, O most blessed Virgin, for whose sake joy hath been given to human nature!  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the mystery of the 
Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning bush: * praise ye and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Through poverty in transitory things thou didst acquire eternal riches and glory, O 
Martha; wherefore, thou didst cry out with love: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Knowing thy heart and desire, O venerable Martha, with heartfelt faith God 
divinely crowned him to whom thou hast given birth, and who crieth out to Him with 
faith throughout all ages.  
The radiant day of thy festival illumineth the minds of the faithful, enlightening all 
the world like the morning star, shining even unto the ends of the earth.  
Theotokion: He Who fashioned our nature, O Theotokos, having clad Himself 
therein through thee, doth transform and restore those who truly hymn and glorify 
thee as the Theotokos, in that He is the Lover of mankind.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and man; * and 
Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
The proclamation of thy words, and the beauty and splendor of thy doctrines have 
passed throughout all the world, O blessed Andrew. Wherefore, Christ, the King of 
all, hath crowned thee with a crown of magnificence.  
Enjoying the thrice-radiant light through a higher union, O Andrew, initiate of 
supra-natural mysteries, by thy supplications preserve now from tribulations those 
who in a sacred manner lovingly keep thy holy memory.  
With the incorporeal ranks thou dost now rejoice in the heavens; for, living thy life 
on earth, O divinely eloquent and right wondrous one, thou wast shown to be an 
excellent preacher of the Orthodox Faith.  
Theotokion: Having truly given birth in a manner past understanding to 
everlasting Life in the flesh, thou hast halted the unremitting onslaught of death; and, 
smiting its mouth, thou didst abolish bitter hell, O most holy Virgin Mother.  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: We magnify thee O Mother of God, * and We glorify thee, O Virgin 
Theotokos, * for thou hast given birth to Christ the Savior of our souls. 
Joining chorus with thy Son, O Martha, entreat Christ our God on behalf of those 
who honor thee.  
Having lived piously amid toil, thou didst struggle manfully: hence thou hast 
uncovered heavenly riches.  
We venerate the shrine of thy relics, O most honored Martha, from whence we 
draw forth waters of healing.  
Theotokion: Thy prayer, emitting rays which surpass those of the sun, illumine 
those who magnify thee, O most pure one.  
Exapostilarion Canon of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”: 
Desiring the life of the angels, O venerable one, thou didst therefore manfully 
subdue the carnal passions, becoming angelic, O God-bearing father.  
Theotokion: All of us sinners have thee as an intercessor, O most holy Virgin. By 
thy supplications move thy Son to clemency.  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O venerable father Andrew, word of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the 
earth; wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, hast 
destroyed hordes of the demons and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life 
thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, beg peace 
for our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
 
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: “Pondering Thy seedless conception and ineffable birthgiving, I 
marvel greatly: How is it that it is Thy good pleasure to die thus as a malefactor, O my 
Son?”, the most pure one exclaimed, weeping.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Andrew our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
In thee, O mother, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, 
thou didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Martha.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Standing before the Lord and the most pure Virgin Theotokos in prayer, * and 
offering up hymnody and praises, O honored Martha, * thou hast given birth to a 
sacred child, * the all-wondrous Symeon, the beacon of the whole world. ** With him 
do thou ever pray for us all.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: 
Manifestly trumpeting forth hymns of divine sweetness, * thou wast shown to be a 
most radiant beacon for the world, * shining with the light of the Trinity, O venerable 
Andrew. * Wherefore, we all cry out to thee: ** Cease thou never to pray for us all.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The saints shall boast in glory, * and they shall 
rejoice upon their beds.  
Verse: Sing unto the Lord a new song; sing unto the Lord all the earth. 
 EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 318 (HEB. 8: 3-6) 
Brethren: Every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore it 
is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer. For if he were on earth, he 
should not be a priest, seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to the 
law: Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was 
admonished of God when he was about to make the tabernacle: for, See, saith he, 
that thou make all things according to the pattern shewed to thee in the mount. But 
now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator 
of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse : For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation 
for Himself.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §21 (7: 12-21) 
The Lord said: All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do 
ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets. Enter ye in at the strait gate: 
for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there 
be which go in thereat: Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth 
unto life, and few there be that find it. Beware of false prophets, which come to you 
in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by 
their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good 
tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree 
cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every 
tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore 
by their fruits ye shall know them. Not everyone that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall 
enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in 
heaven.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
