--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 8th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY GREATMARTYR PROCOPIUS 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy martyr; 3 in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Thy name was given to thee from heaven * as to a preacher to the nations, * O all-
glorious Procopius; * and, illumined in mind, * thou didst forsake the darkness of 
idolatry * and didst become a lamp for the faithful, * illumining the ends of the earth 
* with the divine radiance of thine honored struggles, ** O glory and boast of the 
martyrs.  
Having first subdued the uprisings of the flesh * with abstinence, * thou didst later 
set thyself apart for the contest * with manly mind, through the power of the Spirit, * 
O all-blessed Procopius, * not sparing thy flesh. * Wherefore, thou didst endure * all 
manner of tortures, ** and, crowned, hast ascended to the choirs on high.  
As an invincible commander, * armed with the Cross, * thou didst drown all the 
power of the adversary * in the streams of thy blood, * richly pouring forth showers 
of healing * from the well-springs of salvation, * O right wondrous one, * watering all 
those held fast in the flame of the passions, ** O thou who art divinely inspired.  
And 3 Stichera in the same tone: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Like Paul of old, * thou wast called from heaven by Jesus the Truth, * O most 
glorious Procopius; * and, believing on Him, with all thy soul, O blessed one, * thou 
didst forsake the delusion of the ungodly lies * bequeathed to thee by thine ancestors, 
* and, rejoicing, didst set thyself apart for painful labors, * enlightened by the thought 
** of perfect suffering.  
Lacerated with a trident, * burned with fire, and imprisoned in a dungeon, * thou 
didst remain steadfast, * looking forward with enlightened mind * to the divine 
rewards which lay before thee, * O much suffering martyr. * Wherefore, Christ, the 
Bestower of crowns, hath crowned thee, O Procopius, * who manfully completed thy 
struggles ** and preserved the Faith.  
Truly desiring the beauties * of thy divine soul, O Procopius, Jesus pursued thee * 
with the image of the suffering * which He endured in the flesh; * and thine enemies 
marveled * at thy patience and splendor. * Wherefore, O glorious one, * we call thee 
and those who suffered with thee blessed. ** With them ask remission of sins for 
those who hymn thee.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Thy glorious memorial hath shone forth today, O much-suffering Procopius, 
summoning us, who love the feasts of the Church, to the goodly praise and glory of 
Christ our God. Wherefore, hastening to the shrine of thy relics, we receive gifts of 
healings, and we forever hymn Christ the Savior, Who hath crowned thee, glorifying 
Him unceasingly.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: When, of old, the unblemished ewe-lamb and immaculate 
Sovereign Lady, * beheld her Lamb * upon the tree of the Cross, * she exclaimed 
maternally, and marveling cried aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new 
and most strange sight I see? * How hath the thankless synagogue * betrayed Thee to 
the judgment-seat of Pilate * and condemned Thee to death, * Who art the Life of 
all? * Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, ** O Word!”  
On the Aposticha: Glory ..., the composition of Procopius, in Tone VIII: 
Illumined with the mystic effulgence of the most radiant Trinity, O martyr 
Procopius of valiant mind, thou didst become a god by adoption, deified by 
communion. Wherefore, by thy supplications save from multifarious perils those who 
with faith celebrate thy luminous festival.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician * and healer of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Procopius O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without the martyrica;  
And that of the holy martyr, with 6 Troparia, in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Drenched with the rich effulgence of the Spirit, O martyr Procopius, as one 
enlightened, do thou deliver from the darkness of the passions and from dangers 
those who honor thine honorable festival.  
Thy calling came not from men, O Procopius; rather Christ pursued thee from 
heaven, as He had Paul of old, making thee a true witness to His sufferings.  
As one sensible, O most wise Procopius, thou didst trade a corrupt army for one 
which is everlasting, and a mortal king for One Who is immortal, Who granteth thee 
an incorruptible kingdom.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned Theotokos, thou hast given birth to the Creator of 
nature, Who hath deified us by a true union which surpasseth understanding. Him do 
thou beseech, that He enlighten those who hymn thee.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Christ appeared to thee most gloriously in the midst of the Cross, manifestly 
teaching thee of His condescension toward us, and summoning thee to suffering.  
Breathing forth zeal for God, thou didst raise thyself up as a temple and tower for 
the divine Spirit, casting down the demons’ temples and the graven images which are 
bereft of soul, O martyr Procopius.  
Thou wast stripped of the garments of thy skin through flaying, but didst put on 
the vesture of incorruption, O Procopius; stripping naked the greatly crafty one, O 
martyr.  
Theotokion: From every assault of the adverse serpent deliver me, O pure Mother 
and Virgin, and enlighten the heart of me who glorify thee with faith, O most 
immaculate one.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb ...”: 
Like Paul of old, Christ called thee to faith from heaven, O wise Procopius, 
perceiving the divine beauty of thy heart. Wherefore, thou didst suffer manfully, 
proclaiming His sufferings and condescension toward men, O most blessed one. 
(Twice)  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O pure Virgin Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, thou sole intercessor and 
protection of the faithful: from tribulations, sorrows and cruel circumstances deliver 
all who place their trust in thee, O Maiden, and save our souls by thy divine 
supplications.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O Christ, 
Thine all-immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the 
Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, wherewith Thou hast 
saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
By thy divine visions thou didst cut down the prideful tyrant, who was arrogant in 
the might of his ungodliness, crying out to the Master: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
The Redeemer appeared to thee when thou wast imprisoned in a dungeon, O 
Procopius, filling thee with boldness, illumining thee with radiance, and imparting a 
twofold calling to thy going forth.  
Those who were enshrouded in the gloom of unbelief, seeing thy countenance 
illumined by divine grace, received the light of faith at the behest of God.  
Theotokion: O Lady, by thy tireless supplications wake me for the dawn of repen-
tance, who am weighted down with the sleep of despondency, and save me, O thou 
who alone hast given birth to the Savior.  
ODE V  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
By the light of thy words thou didst lead a godly army to Christ, and through the 
blood of martyrdom it hath, with thee, inherited the everlasting kingdom, O 
Procopius.  
The women of senatorial rank became participants in the assembly on high, and, 
renouncing the splendor of their rank, they elected to die for Thee, O immortal 
Word.  
Aflame with divine zeal, the souls which desired Thy kingdom, O greatly Merciful 
One, disdained their bodies, which were mercilessly burned and consumed.  
Theotokion: Conceiving God, thou hast given birth to Emmanuel, Who became a 
man for the restoration of mankind, O most pure one. Him do thou ever entreat, that 
He save our souls.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Thy honeyed tongue, exuding sweet teachings, hath truly delivered from the bit-
terness of ungodliness those who submit themselves and have recourse to thee, O 
martyr Procopius.  
Having acquired piety as thy mother, O martyr, thou didst divest thyself of impiety 
and through thy martyrdom didst lead thine honored mother in the flesh to the 
heavenly Father.  
Though he pierced thy cheeks with an iron rod, O martyr, the tyrant could not 
shake the firmness of thy mind, which was fixed steadfastly by the love of Him Who 
endured suffering in the flesh.  
Theotokion: Ineffably didst thou give birth, O most holy Virgin, to the Holy of 
holies, Who doth ever sanctify the faithful and unite the choirs of the martyrs with 
those of the angels.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Set afire by divine zeal for Christ, * and protected by the might of the Cross, * O 
Procopius, thou didst cast down the audacity and boldness of the foe, * and raise up 
an honorable church, ** excelling in faith and enlightening us.  
Ikos: O beginningless Word, grant me a mouth of understanding that I may hymn 
Thy warrior Procopius, for Thy judgments are an abyss, and incalculable wealth of 
loving kindness O my Christ, that purified of darkness of soul, and having been 
washed of all defilement of mind, I may become, through Thy godly works, a temple 
of sanctity, and may chant worthy hymns to the martyr, who excelled in faith and 
hath enlightened us.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Though thy neck was crushed with lead weights, O martyr, thou didst not feel it, 
for thou didst desire to bear upon thy neck the light yoke of Him Who, in His tender 
compassion, assumed our nature.  
Receiving the grace of healings from on high, thou dost dispel infirmities, O 
martyr, and drive away evil spirits, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our 
fathers!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sustaining multifarious wounds at the hands of the enemy and burned with fire, O 
blessed one, thou didst steadily burn up ungodliness, crying aloud: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: From an incorrupt Virgin the Word was supra-naturally born, Who 
by His word created all things, desiring to deliver from irrationality those who glorify 
His voluntary condescension.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Cruelly burned with torches, pierced with sharp blades, and convulsed with 
repeated wounding, O martyr, suffering exceedingly thou didst cry aloud: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
With thy right hand thou didst smite the dark visages of the demons, O blessed 
one; for thou didst set it against burning embers, that it might be consumed, O 
glorious one, opposing the iniquitous tyrant and crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
Having Christ, the immovable Rock, as thy foundation, O all-blessed and glorious 
Procopius, cruelly weighted down with stones thou didst rejoice, and He eased thy 
burden, that thou mightest attain joy, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord!  
Theotokion: As thou didst foretell, O Maiden, behold! all generations call thee 
blessed, who hast given birth to the blessed God Who maketh blessed those who 
faithfully follow His precepts and cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
When thou didst receive the end thou didst desire, thou didst most wisely bow thy 
head before God; and, struck by the sword, didst mount thy blood as it were a 
chariot, and hastened to Him, O martyr.  
As a well-spring of miracles, thou pourest forth rivers of healings, and puttest an 
end to the flame of the passions, drowning hordes of the demons by the almighty 
divine power of the Spirit, O right wondrous one.  
O Procopius, by thy sacred entreaties to God the Creator, save those who joyously 
keep thine all-holy memory from every threat, every illness and every misfortune.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: From thy light-bearing womb, O Lady, thou hast shone forth upon 
us the Light, the Fashioner of the sun and the stars and all creation. Him do thou 
earnestly beseech, that He enlighten those who hymn thee.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyr: 
Like Paul, thy calling was from heaven, O Procopius, and progressing thereto, in 
accordance with thy name, thou didst lead choirs of martyrs to the Lord, and with 
them prayest for those who praise thee.  
Theotokion: O Ever-virgin Virgin Mother, who gavest birth to the Light from the 
unbegotten Light, cease thou never to guide those who hymn thee by thy tireless 
supplications to the never-waning Light.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy martyr: 
The composition of Byzantius, in Tone II: As one proceeding unto God, O 
passion-bearer, and possessing boldness before Him, ever standing before His throne 
in divinely excellent paths, in the divine works of those who are well-pleasing to Him 
and bless Him: pray for all, that they may progress therein.  
The composition of Germanus, in Tone III: Struggling in the age of thy youth, like 
the most divine Paul, thou didst receive a divine gift from on high; and with the Cross 
as thy weapon, didst cast down the audacity of the cruel foe. O passion-bearer 
Procopius, boast of the martyrs, pray to the Lord for us, that He save our souls.  
The composition of Cyprian, in Tone IV: Praises are offered up to God by lips of 
clay on the divine day of thy commemoration, O much suffering Procopius; for thou 
didst show thyself to be an excellent warrior of the word of Faith, vanquishing the 
faces of the idols in thy labors. And now thou hast been made brilliant by the light of 
the Trinity, illumining our minds by thy supplications.  
In Tone V: Arrayed today in thy might, O martyr of Christ, the Church rejoiceth; 
and, rendering thee honor, it right laudably crieth out thy most excellent memorial as 
is meet: Rejoice, thou who didst emulate Paul and, taking up the Cross of Christ, 
crushed the snares of the alien! Rejoice, O much-suffering Procopius, thou boast of 
the martyrs and dominion of kings! Cease not to pray for us to the Lord, in that thou 
hast boldness, O adornment of spiritual athletes!  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
The Church of God, having adorned itself in the robe of thy martyrdom 
empurpled with thy blood, emitteth sun-like rays, O much-suffering Procopius; for 
having armed thyself with the Cross, and valiantly desiring to follow Christ in death, 
thou didst take thy stand against the array of the alien, and, putting to shame the plots 
of the iniquitous, thou wast shown to be a victorious warrior of Christ. Wherefore, 

--- PAGE 8 ---
we entreat thee: as thou hast boldness before Him, O adornment of the martyrs, pray 
that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of mankind, 
crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What is this, O my 
Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou 
hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** I 
marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  
On the Aposticha, this Sticheron, in Tone VI 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Come, all ye ends of the earth, and let us form a spiritual choir, and, taking up the 
voice of the trumpet in our hymnody, let us offer songs of thanksgiving, saying: 
Rejoice, O warrior of Christ, O blessed martyr Procopius, for thou didst suffer for 
the love of Him! Rejoice, thou who gavest thy body over to cruel tortures for the sake 
of a truly everlasting and blessed life! Rejoice, thou whose insatiable soul hath found 
constant nourishment as a guest of Christ our God! Wherefore, pray thou for those 
who keep thy glorious memory with faith; that we be delivered from all wrath, 
corruption and torment.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Having like Paul received thy calling from God, O martyr Procopius, and excelling 
in God through thy desire for the Cross, thou didst manfully put to shame all the 
ungodliness and torments of the tyrants. Wherefore, thou didst stand forth against sin 
even to the shedding of thy blood, struggling against the invisible foe, prayest 
unceasingly to God the Redeemer, that He grant peace to the whole world and great 
mercy to our souls!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O martyrs of the Lord ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: ‘I cannot bear O my child, to behold Thee, * Who dost grant 
life and health unto all, * hung upon the Tree; * for of old those who were lulled into 
the sleep of death * by the fruit of the transgression * have been awakened * and 
granted divine and salvific life and health by Thee’, * thus said the Virgin weeping, ** 
whom we magnify. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos; and 4 from ODE III of the 
canon of the holy martyr.  
Christ appeared to thee most gloriously in the midst of the Cross, manifestly 
teaching thee of His condescension toward us, and summoning thee to suffering.  
Breathing forth zeal for God, thou didst raise thyself up as a temple and tower for 
the divine Spirit, casting down the demons’ temples and the graven images which are 
bereft of soul, O martyr Procopius.  
Thou wast stripped of the garments of thy skin through flaying, but didst put on 
the vesture of incorruption, O Procopius; stripping naked the greatly crafty one, O 
martyr.  
Theotokion: From every assault of the adverse serpent deliver me, O pure Mother 
and Virgin, and enlighten the heart of me who glorify thee with faith, O most 
immaculate one.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Procopius O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II:  
Set afire by divine zeal for Christ, * and protected by the might of the Cross, * O 
Procopius, thou didst cast down the audacity and boldness of the foe, * and raise up 
an honorable church, ** excelling in faith and enlightening us.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
 
EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY, § 292 (II TIM. 2: 1-10) 
Timothy my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things 
that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful 
men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a 
good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs 
of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man 
also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The 
husbandman that laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; 
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the 

--- PAGE 10 ---
seed of David was raised from the dead, according to my gospel: wherein I suffer 
trouble, as an evildoer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. 
Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sake, that they may also obtain the 
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, and like 
a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God 
they shall blossom forth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 39 (MT. 10: 37-42) 
The Lord said: He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: 
and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. And he that 
taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me. He that findeth his 
life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it. He that receiveth 
you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me. He that 
receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet’s reward; and he 
that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a 
righteous man’s reward. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little 
ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall 
in no wise lose his reward.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
