--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 1st DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER NICODEMUS OF THE HOLY 
MOUNTAIN 
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Come, ye monks of Athos, * that in gladness of heart * we may celebrate the yearly 
memorial of our teacher, * the blessed Nicodemus, * who in his words and deeds * 
doth guide us to the path of the virtues. * For, having lived righteously, * he hath 
shown himself to be for us ** a higher model and a splendid example for all.  
Resplendent in discourse and true wisdom, * and in thine honored life, * O 
divinely wise father, * in these latter days thou hast been shown to be * a most 
glorious luminary of the Spirit, * enlightening all with rays of godly writings, * O 
Nicodemus, * thou divinely inspired minister of Christ, ** who moveth the minds of 
the faithful to love.  
Thou didst leave to the Church of Christ * the multitude of thy writings * as a 
spiritual treasury * of heavenly riches, O father, * as the odor of the recognition * and 
sweet savor of the Holy Spirit; * and unceasingly delighting therein, * O venerable 
Nicodemus, ** we celebrate thine eternal memory.  
Gazing upon thy precious head, * and venerating it in compunction of soul, * as if 
looking upon thy radiant countenance, * which is full of grace * and which calmly 
uttereth words of life * with its holy mouth, * granting peace to thy children * and 
sending forth paternal instruction unto us ** who love thee.  
Glory ..., in Tone I:  
Having illumined thy heart with divine light, thou wast shown to have received 
God in thy life, O divinely wise Nicodemus; for, living for Christ thy Lord, and 
writing and speaking of Him, thou wast shown to be a treasury of spiritual thoughts 
and a God-bearing teacher of the Church. As thou didst fight the good fight, 
strengthen us also therein by thy venerable supplications, that we may be well-
pleasing unto God, we pray.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Accepting the entreaties of the sinful, and disdaining not the sighs of the 
sorrowful, O most holy Virgin, beseech Him Who issued forth from thy holy womb, 
that we may be saved.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
O venerable Nicodemus, * thou hast been shown to be * a vessel of holiness * and 
a godly orator of piety ** furnished with wings by the Holy Spirit.  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of my heart shall be 
of understanding.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Enriched by thy discourses, * as with an accurate scale, * unto the acquisition * of 
what is higher, O divinely wise one, ** we hymn thy godly transcendence.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
The city of monastics, * unceasingly enlightened * by thy teachings, * doth 
celebrate, O Nicodemus, ** thy sacred memory.  
Glory ..., Triadicon, in the same melody:  
The godly Nicodemus * hath been deemed worthy * of Thy glory, * rightly 
theologizing Thee, ** the three-Sunned Godhead, with a mouth of piety.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in the same melody:  
Hymning thee, O Virgin, * with hymns most sweet, * the godly Nicodemus * cried 
out to thee in spirit: ** Rejoice, O pure Virgin!  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
O ye faithful, let us honor Nicodemus, * the beacon of Athos and scion of Naxos, 
* the divinely inspired teacher of the whole Church, * who was full of divine wisdom; 
* for he poureth forth abundant * heavenly doctrines upon those who cry: * Glory to 
Christ Who hath glorified thee! * Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to 
Him Who granteth help unto us through thee!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, * the Master of all became 
incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, * at his cry, as the righteous David said. 
Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, * having borne thy Creator. 
* Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! * Glory to Him Who came forth 
from thee! ** Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy birthgiving. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the venerable one: 3 in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
As is meet, let us hymn * the divinely eloquent Nicodemus, * the dwelling-place of 
grace, * the divinely inspired interpreter * who was guided by the Holy Spirit, * the 
trumpet blown by God, * announcing the word of grace in the world, * the ineffable 
glory of God ** and immaterial gifts of life.  
O Nicodemus, * whose heart was enlightened by the divine Spirit, * from thy 
mouth thou didst pour forth * a sea of doctrines upon the Church, * and thereby 
abundantly irrigate its meadows * with the discourse of the grace given thee, O father, 
* as David hath said, * bringing joy to the assemblies of the pious ** by thy wisdom.  
Celebrating * thy most holy memory, O Nicodemus, * we hymn thee as a new and 
radiant lamp * illumining the Church with thy divine words, * as a teacher of piety, * 
as a divinely wise mouth * of miraculous virtues, * as a preacher of the higher life ** 
and a harp of most sweet hymns.  
And 3 Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
The abundant grace of the most holy Spirit * dwelt within thy soul, O wise one; * 
and having first cleansed it * with the rewards of the virtues, * it made thee a divine 
vessel * and a divinely inspired word. * O thine all-wise teachings, * O Nicodemus, ** 
whereby we are all ever taught the loftier life! (Twice)  
Like a noetic wellspring * thou hast poured forth torrents of doctrines, * 
sweetening the hearts of the faithful * more than honey, O Nicodemus; * and by 
thine understandings and works * thou hast been revealed to be * a divinely effulgent 
coffer and treasury of supreme wisdom, * imparting correction unto all ** who 
piously follow thy teaching, O Father.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Today the memorial of Nicodemus, the venerable and heavenly minded teacher, 
hath shone forth for us like a morning star, enlightening the Church. Come, 
therefore, ye who love his words, and in spirit and truth let us celebrate, crying out to 
him: Rejoice, thou who madest thy mind a habitation of the Holy Spirit by thy 
virtuous life! Rejoice, divinely inspired treasury of wisdom, wherein lieth an inex-
haustible wealth of the most divers wisdom! Rejoice, godly scion of Naxos, 
adornment of the Holy Mountain, and divinely wise instructor of the whole Church! 
O father, intercede, we pray, on behalf of our souls!  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time, for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera:  
In Tone I: Rejoice in the Lord, O glorious Athos, thou chosen portion of the 
Mother of God! For, lo! within thee, like a pillar of light reaching up to the heavens, 
the divinely wise Nicodemus hath been revealed, who is pleasing unto God in 
wisdom and godly in virtues; for by his blameless life he inherited the splendor of life 
on high, and, emitting everywhere the rays of the gifts of the Spirit, he guideth to 
deeds of light those who in compunction cry aloud unto God: O Lord, glory be to 
Thee!  
In Tone II: Living an ascetic life, thou didst make what is lower subject to that 
which is higher, O Nicodemus, uniting thyself unto God with ever-flowing prayer, 
and from this blessed bond straightway learning that which is divine, and, like the 
godly Paul, thou didst hear ineffable words, setting forth in writing what thou didst 
master through thine activity. Wherefore, like divine light thy words shine forth from 
the rising of the sun even unto its setting, unto the enlightenment of those who cry: 
O Lord, glory be to Thee!  
In Tone III: Pouring forth philosophy, thou wast shown to be an instrument of 
theology and a most excellent recorder of the mysteries of the spiritual life; for having 
done so, thou didst teach the way of the fathers, as saith Isaiah, which in diverse 
manners thou didst reveal by the power of active discourse and the beauty of God-
given wisdom, O greatly wise Nicodemus. For divine grace poured forth from thy 
mouth and revealed thee to be a book of all that is ineffable, unto the salvation of 
those who cry: O Lord, glory be to Thee!  
In Tone IV: Like lilies of the Spirit thy divinely inspired books emit the fragrance 
of the life which issueth forth from Eden, O most blessed Nicodemus; for in thy pure 
life the perfume of Christ was made manifest, and with the blossoming of thy words 
the fetor of the passions was dispelled: for like phials of sweet fragrance thy mouth 
filleth us abundantly with thy writings, enabling us to recognize the virtues and the 
treasury of divine dogmas, unto the salvation of those who cry: O Lord, glory be to 
Thee!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
O ye multitudes of the pious, as is fitting let us bless the great Nicodemus, most 
wise among the venerable and venerable among the learned: for, having sanctified 
himself by asceticism, he became the mouth of the Comforter, and, as David hath 
said, he mystically proclaimed divine wisdom in the midst of the Church, wherewith 
he hath raised the souls of the Orthodox to understand and seek that which is higher; 
and thundering against the assemblies of the heretics, his sound hath gone forth into 
all the earth, unto the glory of Christ God, the Savior of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Preserve thou thy servants from all misfortunes, * O blessed Theotokos, * that we 
all may glorify thee, ** the hope of our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Rejoice, thou comeliness of monks, excellent scion of the Island of Naxos, goodly 
adornment of Athos, thou radiant eye, thou tongue most sweet, uttering godly words 
in the divine Spirit, speaking and recording doctrines, making plain unto all the 
meaning of unapproachable sounds of heaven, and opening the understanding of 
ineffable contemplations to the breadth of higher comprehension, O father 
Nicodemus, thou treasury of inspired understanding given by God!  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of my heart shall be 
of understanding.  
Rejoice, O vessel of wisdom, treasury of true theology, glory of the Orthodox, 
who hath wisely vanquished the thoughts of the heretics, sweet-sounding harp of the 
dogmas of the Faith, God-pleasing husbandman of blameless morals, teacher of the 
gifts of piety, summit of divine understanding, depth of comprehension of the 
thoughts of the Spirit, unfathomable ocean! O father Nicodemus, shine forth divine 
effulgence on all!  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Rejoice, new and most radiant star of the Church of Christ, mouth of theologians, 
ardent lover of piety, revealer of the Traditions and Scriptures, elucidation of 
ineffable things, who healest the sickness and perdition of souls by the word of grace, 
melodious lyre and sweet-sounding harp of divine hymns and songs! O venerable 
father Nicodemus, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sin unto those who 
honor thee.  
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Having cultivated well the discourse of doctrines, thou dost produce the fruit of 
immortal life for the Church, O divinely eloquent Nicodemus; for like fruitful trees by 
the springs of the waters of grace thy godly books ever produce salvific understanding 
for us, like the sweetness of heaven, whereby we are delivered from the bitterness of 
the passions, receiving from Christ peace and great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * Mother of 
God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, * 
granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting now our supplications, 
** pray thou that we all be saved. 
At the Blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
O ye faithful, let us honor Nicodemus, * the beacon of Athos and scion of Naxos, 
* the divinely inspired teacher of the whole Church, * who was full of divine wisdom; 
* for he poureth forth abundant * heavenly doctrines upon those who cry: * Glory to 
Christ Who hath glorified thee! * Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to 
Him Who granteth help unto us through thee! (Twice)  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
When Gabriel announced to thee, "Rejoice!", O Virgin, * the Master of all became 
incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, * at his cry, as the righteous David said. 
Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, * having borne thy Creator. 
* Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! * Glory to Him Who came forth 
from thee! ** Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy birthgiving. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
O ye faithful, let us honor Nicodemus, * the beacon of Athos and scion of Naxos, 
* the divinely inspired teacher of the whole Church, * who was full of divine wisdom; 
* for he poureth forth abundant * heavenly doctrines upon those who cry: * Glory to 
Christ Who hath glorified thee! * Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to 
Him Who granteth help unto us through thee! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, * the Master of all became 
incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, * at his cry, as the righteous David said. 
Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, * having borne thy Creator. 
* Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! * Glory to Him Who came forth 
from thee! ** Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy birthgiving. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The assembly of angels ...”: 
Piously have the multitudes of monastics assembled eagerly to celebrate thy holy 
memory, O Nicodemus, teacher of piety. With thine immaterial concern bless those 
who with faith venerate thy most precious head, O divinely wise one.  
Glory ..., in Tone I:  
Illumined with rays of divine wisdom, O venerable Nicodemus, teacher of piety, 
thou didst acquire the treasure of divine words, wherewith thou dost ever direct us to 
ascend unto the life and effulgence which are in Christ, O most blessed one.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Hymning the great magnitude of thy glory in melodious songs, O pure one, the 
venerable Nicodemus exclaimed unto thee like David: Rejoice, O blessed Mary who 
knewest not wedlock, thou bridge leading the world to God the Savior and help of 
Athos!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before ...”:  
O Nicodemus, by thy pure life thou hast been shown to be a fragrant meadow of 
divinely inspired writings, and a God-pleasing initiate of the divine mysteries; for, 
delighting in the study thereof, thou didst receive the sweet savor of the transcendent 
knowledge of heaven, O father, wherewith thou dost gladden those who call thee 
blessed.  
Glory ..., in the same melody:  
Thou didst live righteously and virtuously, O all-wise and venerable Nicodemus, 
astonishing all with thy wisdom, and gladdening the assemblies of the Orthodox with 
thy words, for thou didst set at naught the mindless learning of the heterodox. 
Wherefore, we celebrate thine annual memorial. 
  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
Thou didst seedlessly conceive the Creator of all, and without being subject to 
corruption and from thine own blood didst give birth to Christ our God. Wherefore, 
having acquired thee as the beginning of our salvation, we hymn thee, O Theotokos, 
as our intercession, and with faith we magnify thy glory, O most pure one.  
Polyeleos, and magnification: We bless thee, O venerable father Nicodemus, 
and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the 
angels.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Enriched with divine wisdom, thou didst acquire the spiritual wealth of all 
knowledge, O blessed one, and hast been shown to provide for all from the treasure 
of thy heart, nurturing the souls and minds of the pious with the discourse of grace. 
Wherefore, setting aright the morals of the people, thou hast shown unto all the 
splendor of salvation, O God-bearing Nicodemus. Entreat Christ God, that He grant 
remission of sins unto those who celebrate thy holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Having supra-naturally and immutably provided flesh for Christ our God of thy 
pure blood, O most pure Virgin, in the tender compassion of thy goodness thou hast 
led us to our ancient life, slaying the serpent by thy birthgiving. Wherefore, with a 
proper understanding we ever offer thee hymns of thanksgiving, receiving grace from 
thee. Entreat thy Son and God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with 
love have recourse to thy protection, O Sovereign Lady.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he 
greatly delight.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 43 (MT. 11: 27-30)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: 
and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, 
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye 

--- PAGE 10 ---
who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and 
learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 
For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
 Nicodemus who received God within himself, the newly revealed ray of the 
Church, the godly teacher of monastics, having completed the highest path of the 
virtues, ascended to the mansions of heaven, and he giveth his paternal blessing unto 
those who celebrate his honored memory, and asketh great mercy for all.  
ODE I  
Canon of the Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is “Rejoice, O Virgin, thou cause of 
our joy”, the composition of the monk Gerasimus, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O Lady, thou treasury and unfathomable sea of mercies, let fall a drop of 
understanding upon me, that with the angel I may cry out to thee “Rejoice!” with the 
trumpet of hymnody.  
Rejoice, O all-immaculate Lady Bride of God, thou annulment of the curse and 
redemption of the world! Rejoice, thou who hast poured forth eternal Life! Rejoice, 
thou who by thy birthgiving hast put Hades to death!  
Rejoice, O most pure one, thou palace of the Power of the Father! Rejoice, O 
undefiled bridal-chamber of Him Who hast created all things! Rejoice, O most 
resplendent chamber of the glory of the incarnation of God!  
Rejoice, O thou who knewest not wedlock, O thou who hast given rise to the 
Planter of all creation! Rejoice, O vine who hath put forth the beautiful Branch which 
poureth forth the wine of understanding!  
Canon I of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is “I hymn the holy Nicodemus”, 
the composition of the monk Gerasimus, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O consubstantial Trinity - Father, Son and Holy Spirit, - grant me wisdom, that 
with splendor I may hymn the holy Nicodemus, who by his words, teachings and 
works hath glorified Thee, O Lord.  
The divine Nicodemus, the heavenly intelligence, the phial of the Spirit, calleth us 
all to keep his annual memorial. Let us all, therefore, come, rendering him honor.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Mortifying the mind of thy flesh, O father Nicodemus, through the struggle of 
divine philosophy thou didst make that which is lower subject to that which is higher, 
and hast been shown to be a priceless vessel of grace.  
Theotokion: Acquiring power, confirmation and enlightenment by thy good 
pleasure, O Lady, the godly Nicodemus, divinely inspired and wholly God-bearing, 
appeared on Athos in these latter days.  
Canon II of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is “I celebrate the grace of 
Nicodemus”, the composition of Gerasimus, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Enlighten my mind with Thine effulgence, O Lord, Bestower of light, and grant 
me discourse, O Word, that with my mouth I may chant splendid hymnody worthy of 
Nicodemus, Thy divine and wondrous servant.  
Thy pure way of life revealed thee on Athos as a habitation of light, O venerable 
one, a most radiant pillar, and a most luminous beacon shining forth the doctrines of 
immortality in the world, O divinely eloquent father Nicodemus.  
Disclosing the law of God, O venerable father, with thy God-pleasing tongue thou 
didst rain down upon the Church divinely inspired discourse, a sea of understanding 
and a wealth of divine knowledge with all manner of wisdom, as it were manna from 
heaven.  
Theotokion: O Lady, thou stream of divine and spiritually nourishing things, thou 
inexhaustible wellspring: pour forth upon my soul the water which gusheth forth unto 
life everlasting, that thou mayest quench the burning coal of sin, O Virgin, that I may 
become full to overflowing with immaterial effulgence.  
ODE III  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Rejoice, O pure Mother and Virgin, the wholly overshadowed and divine 
mountain, from whence the King of creation hath issued forth and found Adam in 
the mountains of perdition.  
Rejoice, thou who hast rained a torrent of healings in abundance upon thy people! 
Rejoice, inexhaustible wellspring from whence the Water hastening toward eternal 
salvation hath flowed forth upon us!  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Rejoice O Virgin, thou golden jar, who without seed hast given rise to the Bread 
of life for the whole world, like manna from heaven! Rejoice, O most luminous lamp 
of the Effulgence of the Father!  
Let us hymn the tablet of the New Covenant, whereon the Master of all was 
written in a body; and let us cry aloud: Rejoice, fulfillment of the law and voice of the 
prophets!  
Canon I of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Thou wast filled with the light of heaven, O Nicodemus, having purified thy mind, 
and like a lamp of many lights didst shine forth within the Church in the latter times, 
unto the salvation of the pious.  
The grace of thy divine words hath shone forth throughout the whole world like 
lightning from heaven, purifying the morals of men’s souls and guiding them to the 
light of the precepts of Him Who hath created all things.  
With divine songs let the divinely chosen Nicodemus be hymned today as is meet: 
the lamp of divine understanding, the right laudable trumpet of God, the divinely 
eloquent tongue.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be the luminous temple and throne of 
God, Whom thou didst conceive in the flesh, O blessed Lady. Wherefore, illumine 
me with the splendor of thy glory.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Cleansing thy soul and body of the defilement of every passion by ardent 
asceticism, O divinely wise Nicodemus, thou didst cultivate the grace of dispassion, 
and by thy words dost call all to acquire it.  
O blessed Nicodemus, thou hast been revealed to us to be a God-bearing initiate 
of the hidden life in Christ, adorned with the virtues, and leading our souls to divine 
ascents.  
Thy mind, illumined with the glory of the Comforter, O father Nicodemus, and 
thy hand, moved by Him, have set forth heavenly doctrines for us in a multitude of 
holy books.  
Theotokion: O most glorious Mary, Virgin Queen of all, who hast ineffably given 
birth unto God: heal thou my soul, which hath grown corrupt through the passions, 
and grant me a swift and salvific conversion.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
Let the divinely wise Nicodemus, the divinely inspired mouth of the divine Spirit, 
the melodious harp of heavenly hymns, the adornment of the monks of Athos, the 
God-bearing scribe of the wisdom of God, be praised with joy as a true servant of 
Christ.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
O Virgin Theotokos, help of the world, in time of need grant aid to those who 
ever fervently have recourse unto thine intercession; and from all harm preserve thou 
thine honored portion, for it ever hasteneth to thine aid, O Lady.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Rejoice, O Virgin, thou luminous lamp shining forth the unapproachable Light 
upon those who sit in the image of death, revealing the never-waning Dawn, the Sun 
of righteousness!  
Thou hast been shown to be a portal of salvation for those who cry aloud: Rejoice! 
Rejoice, O phial, who didst conceive Christ the Word, Who granteth the fragrance of 
incorruption unto those who have cultivated death through disobedience!  
Rejoice, O life-gushing wealth of heavenly gifts! Rejoice, dwelling-place of the 
goodness of the Godhead, vessel of divine fragrance! Rejoice, thou who hast not 
known wedlock, through whom corruption hath vanished!  
Shining forth from thy womb, the Effulgence of the Father, showed thee to be a 
divine cloud of immortality, O Virgin, overshadowing those who cry to thee: Rejoice, 
O habitation of the King of creation!  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Having studied the teachings of the law of God and the words of the Spirit day 
and night, O Nicodemus, thou wast shown to be a most fruitful tree planted by the 
waters of divine grace, bearing as fruit a higher knowledge.  
Tranquil of character, meek in appearance and sweet in discourse, O father, thou 
wast revealed to be divinely wise in thine admonitions to those who had recourse 
unto thee, O holy one, imparting the doctrines of salvation unto all.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
The height and depth, the length and breadth, and the grace-bearing riches of thy 
wisdom strike the minds of the faithful, O venerable father; for thou hast been 
revealed to be a great abyss of knowledge.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be heaven on earth, transcending the 
heavens, O most holy Virgin, who held in thine arms as a babe the Creator of heaven 
and earth, Who in His mercy doth lead us up to life in heaven.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
The mellifluous, most sweet and divinely eloquent instrument of thy tongue, 
inspired by God, O Nicodemus, hymned the glorious struggles of the venerable ones, 
gladdening the hearts of the pious with the sweetest of sounds and melodious hymns.  
O Nicodemus, initiate of the mysteries of heaven, thy discourse giveth rise to the 
manna of life, to honey divinely flowing from a rock, to the divine dew descending 
upon the earth through the Holy Spirit, nurturing, gladdening and bedewing the 
hearts of those who with faith search through thy books.  
The sweetness of divine grace, which poured forth from thy mouth through thine 
immaculate heart, O venerable Nicodemus, was preserved in thy holy books, 
sweetening and bringing joy to all who with faith study thy writings.  
Theotokion: O only Ever-virgin Theotokos, ever entreat Him Who issued forth 
from thy pure womb on our behalf, that He be merciful to the people He hath 
fashioned, and that He grant unto us all remission of sins and a share in eternal light.  
ODE V  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Delivered from the ancient curse by thy birthgiving, we joyously cry to thee 
“Rejoice!” Rejoice, O Virgin who hast reconciled with our God, the King of all, those 
who were beguiled by the serpent.  
O most pure one, thou divinely planted field which hath given rise to the 
beauteous and sweet-smelling Blossom Who hath adorned the earth with noetic 
flowers, thou hast filled with divine and sweet savor those who cry out to thee: 
Rejoice, O divine fragrance! 
  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Rejoice, O Sovereign Lady and Virgin, thou city of the great King, thou Sion of 
many names, of whom it is manifestly strange to speak! Rejoice, thou who hast 
opened unto us the gates of heaven and joy which fadeth not away!  
Rejoice, O pure Virgin, thou bush which was not consumed! Rejoice, thou who 
hast slain Hades, in that thou hast given birth unto the Author of life Who by His 
death and sufferings hath poured forth dispassion and life upon all!  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
O Nicodemus, thou hast poured forth divine doctrines like a river of the living 
God, and as a torrent of joy thou dost ever gladden the whole Orthodox Church of 
Christ with the streams of thy discourses.  
Thou didst live peaceably, O Nicodemus, learning vigilance of mind and 
asceticism, and studying the divinely inspired Scriptures; and hast therefore been 
noetically borne up to the heavenly effulgence of the Spirit.  
Thou didst hymn the labors of the martyrs and the struggles and valor of the 
venerable, whom thou didst follow by leading an angelic life on earth, and with whom 
thou hast been glorified, O venerable one.  
Theotokion: O gracious Theotokos, thou most splendid habitation of the 
Almighty God, enlighten my darkened soul, and show it to be a pure vessel of Him 
Who shone forth from thee, O Mother of God.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
In thy holy books thou didst splendidly set forth the excellence of the virtues, the 
mastery of spiritual struggles, and the divine scriptures, and as is meet thou didst 
name it in accordance with these works.  
With the cultivation of thy discourse thou didst sever the roots of the passions, O 
Nicodemus, wisely planting the salvific seed of the commandments of God in the 
fields of thy soul, as a most divine husbandman of God, O father.  
Thou dost reveal the ways of invisible warfare against the princes of darkness, O 
Nicodemus, as one who triumphed therein, and with thine active counsels, set before 
us the struggle against the passions and the demons, O divinely inspired one.  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Theotokion: O Mother, Virgin and Daughter, who ineffably conceived God the 
Word, preserve thy flock on the glorious Mount Athos, and with thy beauty protect it 
from all need and from destruction as thou hast promised.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Rejoice, O pure one, who hast given birth to the Myrrh of heaven, thou phial of 
grace, who hast filled the whole world with sweet fragrance! Rejoice, divine vessel of 
alabaster, full of incorruption!  
O most pure one, thou hast been shown to be an animate palace and an ark of the 
sanctity of the Almighty. Wherefore, we chant to thee: Rejoice, O most honored 
temple of the glory of God!  
Rejoice, river full of the waters of the Spirit, whereby the whole world is bedewed 
with divinely flowing streams, crying out to thee: Rejoice!  
Rejoice, O adornment of the angels, boast of the prophets and confirmation of the 
venerable! Rejoice, crown of martyrs and refuge of the despairing!  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Thou hast been shown to be a newly revealed sun of the Church of Christ, O 
Nicodemus, ever enlightening the council of the Orthodox with the rays of the words 
of thine instructions.  
Thou hast been shown to be a great teacher, O Nicodemus, for thou didst fulfill 
the will of God and teach others to fulfill it. Wherefore, thou hast been deemed 
worthy of great honor by the Lord Who hath glorified thee.  
Divinely inspired in the virtues and divinely wise in discourse and wisdom, thou 
wast shown forth on Athos as a mystic guide for the minds of monks, full of divine 
understanding.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O Ever-virgin, thou most radiant lamp of the Light of the 
Godhead, illumining with mystic effulgence those who piously cry out to thee: 
Rejoice!  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Having reached the end of thy life with patience, tranquility of mind and divine 
purification, O Nicodemus, thou wast shown to be a habitation of the writings of the 
fathers and the mouth of their doctrine.  
Strengthened by the power of love for God, O venerable father Nicodemus, thou 
didst lay waste to the weakness of the flesh, setting down teachings in writing for the 
sake of the salvation of thy neighbor.  
O father Nicodemus, our thoughts are ever bedewed by the flow of words 
abundantly pouring forth from thy mouth, rendering us a fruitful ground for virtuous 
works.  
Theotokion: O only pure and blessed Ever-virgin, joy of the angels and helper of 
mankind, ever help us in our needs amid every evil circumstance.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”:  
The Church doth celebrate thee as a most excellent initiate of the mysteries * of 
the life of virtue and piety, O God-bearing teacher of Orthodoxy; * for receiving gifts 
from heaven, with thy divine writings thou dost illumine those who cry to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O father Nicodemus!  
Ikos: O Nicodemus, on Athos thou wast shown to be an angel in character, great 
in understanding; for, possessed of an angelic life, with an angelic voice thou didst 
elucidate the writings of the fathers, whereby thou enlightenest those who cry: 
Rejoice, goodly adornment of Naxos! Rejoice, illumination of Athos! Rejoice, 
revelation of the dogmas of the fathers! Rejoice, explanation of the sayings of the 
saints! Rejoice, height of understanding and river of wisdom! Rejoice, abyss of divine 
knowledge and treasury of love! Rejoice, for thou hast been shown to be a God-
bearing scribe! Rejoice, divinely eloquent interpreter! Rejoice, beacon of moral purity! 
Rejoice, fire of heavenly radiance! Rejoice, thou by whom the faithful are made 
steadfast! Rejoice, thou before whom enemies tremble! Rejoice, O father Nicodemus!  
ODE VII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Knowing thee to be an abundant stream of healings, we cry out to thee with faith: 
Rejoice, O wellspring all of gold, pouring forth the water of immortality which 
floweth unto life everlasting!  
Rejoice, Let us hymn the most precious tongs who held the burning Coal of love 
in her most pure arms, saying: Rejoice, O Mother of God, the divinely chosen golden 
censer of the sweetly fragrant Word!  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Rejoice, O ineffable robe of purple, wherein the beginningless Word was woven, 
O thou robe of His incarnation not wrought by the hands of mortals! Rejoice, O 
Sovereign Lady, who hath clothed Adam in the vesture of incorruption!  
O Virgin, thou hast been shown to be an uncultivated field which hath produced 
Christ, the life of heaven, O pure Virgin, the Source of good things, Who hath 
granted redemption unto all who cry out to thee: Rejoice, O divine land proclaimed 
beforehand by Joel!  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
O venerable Nicodemus, by the ladder of thy discourses, which thou hast set up, 
thou dost lead those who with faith have recourse to thy book to ascend the steps of 
the life of light. This book thou hast called the New Ladder.  
O father Nicodemus, with the plough of thy divinely eloquent tongue thou hast 
shown thy divinely inspired book, which thou callest the Garden of Grace, to be a 
fragrant meadow of the divine Spirit, a garden of the life of grace.  
Having enriched thy divine tongue and thy God-pleasing mind, O venerable 
Nicodemus, thou wast revealed to be a sacred instructor of the words of faith in these 
latter times, calling all to acquire that which is higher.  
Theotokion: With divine inspiration the sacred Nicodemus praised thy mighty 
works, O truly wondrous and all-hymned Virgin; and thou didst glorify him with 
mystic manifestations of thy good will, as thy divine minister.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The assemblies of the wordly-wise were in nowise able to withstand the mighty 
and truly abundant outpouring of thy divine words, thy radiance and heavenly grace, 
O father Nicodemus; wherefore, they were vanquished by thee.  
Thou didst cleanse soul, body, senses and thoughts of all defilement, O father 
Nicodemus; wherefore, by thy wise teaching thou leadest us up to purity and the 
preservation of our mind.  
With purity of mind and strength of thought thou didst explain the divinely 
eloquent words of the holy fathers, O father, leaving thy divine books to the Church 
of Christ as a spiritually profitable treasure.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
 
Theotokion: Grant me heavenly serenity and a compunctionate character, O Virgin 
Theotokos, and a light unto the feet of my soul, that I may walk the paths which lead 
well unto the life in heaven, O pure Virgin. 
ODE VIII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Rejoice, O Virgin, thou noetic ladder! Rejoice, thou through whom the most 
Perfect One descended unto mankind and as God raised fallen Adam up to his 
former glory, who crieth out to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin, thou luminous tabernacle of 
Him Who hath created all things out of nothing!  
Thou hast been shown to be a haven unassailed by storms, O thou who hast given 
birth to the Helmsman of the world; wherefore, lead me up from the billows of 
perdition unto the harbor of salvation, that I may cry to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin, thou 
protection and help of those who hymn thy glory!  
Following after divine love, with faith we call thee the lamp-stand and table of 
heaven, the chariot of many names, and the splendid bower; and we cry out to thee: 
Rejoice, O cause of our joy! Rejoice, thou who hast delivered us from the pain of 
Eve!  
O thou who alone wast a virgin before birthgiving, during birthgiving and after 
giving birth, in that thou hast given birth to the Unapproachable One in the flesh: 
with thy divine glory heal thou our ailments of soul and body, that in thanksgiving we 
may cry out to thee: Rejoice!  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
O holy one, thy divine discourse, which shineth heavenly light upon those who 
reverently have recourse unto it, ever imparteth purification of the sin of the passions, 
healing for suffering souls, redemption from grief, and the radiance of holy life.  
Thou wast shown to be guileless and meek, and adorned with all justice, O 
venerable Nicodemus; and, revealing the splendor of righteousness in thy person, 
thou wast merciful unto all, in that thou wast full to overflowing with divine radiance. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Having made plain the strictness of Orthodox dogmas with thine all-wise mouth, 
O venerable Nicodemus, thou didst amaze those who came to thee from the West, 
and by the torrent of thy divine speech didst show them truly to be like fish, devoid 
of speech O father.  
Theotokion: Heal thou my ailing soul, which is enflamed by sinful passions and 
unclean and defiled thoughts, O most pure one, and illumine my heart with the light 
of repentance, for, wretch that I am, I flee unto thee. Despise not my prayer, O 
Virgin!  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
On Athos thou wast gloriously adorned with discourse and wisdom, O 
Nicodemus, and in the splendor of thy way of life thou wast shown to be a model 
and a saving guide for all monks to the acquisition of the virtues, crying out unceas-
ingly: Ye priests, bless; ye people, supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
Armed about with the word of God as with a heavenly sword, and arrayed in the 
grace of the Spirit as in a breast-plate, O father, thou didst put to flight heretics and 
evil spirits, crying aloud in gladness: Ye priests, bless; ye people, supremely exalt 
Christ throughout all ages!  
Thy head is seen to be a treasure of holiness, pouring forth divine fragrance; for 
thy mouth wast shown to be a vessel of perfume, O venerable one, as Wisdom hath 
said, ever imparting unto us the odor of immortality and food of gladness, which is 
dispassion.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, in the flesh thou didst conceive the incorporeal Lord, Who 
is in the bosom of the Father - the Word - Who with the Father and the Spirit is 
equally without beginning, and Who without corruption hath restored the world: 
through true repentance restore my soul, which hath become corrupt through the evil 
of the flesh.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
O all-immaculate Lady, thou art the bridge which God hath traversed; for through 
thee the Word, visiting the rejected, hath led forth from death to never-ending light 
those who cry: Rejoice, O most blessed Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Rejoice, O thou who knewest not wedlock, thou holy land from whence Christ 
formed Himself into a man! Rejoice, thou rock which letteth fall life-giving Honey for 
those who wander in the wilderness of life, and are saved by thy goodness, O 
Sovereign Lady!  
Rejoice, O Bride of God, who hath rained down Manna upon us! Rejoice, O thou 
who bringest life unto those who once died through eating of the tree! Rejoice, thou 
who openest the gates of Eden unto those who cry: Rejoice, O most blessed 
Theotokos, pure Ever-virgin!  
O most hymned one, thou art a true Mother, and even after giving birth wast 
preserved an incorrupt Virgin. Who, then, will not manifestly hymn thy mighty 
works? Accept my hymnody, which I have offered unto thee from mine ardent heart.  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Through splendor of mind thou didst become a steadfast initiate of the mysteries 
of the Spirit and of the ancient fathers, O venerable Nicodemus, imparting to the 
faithful radiant blossoms by thy sacred works, and a fragrant understanding of their 
words.  
Thou didst offer thy whole life, from thy youth, unto the Word, the Bestower of 
life, like incense and an unblemished sacrifice, following in His steps, O venerable 
one; wherefore, in sanctity Christ hath crowned thee with a crown of wisdom.  
Sanctified by thy grace, O most wise Nicodemus, with sacred hymns we celebrate 
thy holy memory. As a right acceptable gift, O father, receive thou the praise of all of 
us who fervently venerate thee as our father and teacher.  
Theotokion: O most blessed one, who alone didst ineffably conceive the Most 
High God, Who in His goodness hath led us up from Hades: Do thou lead me up to 
the heights of a pure life, for I have fallen into the abyss of the passions, O 
Theotokos, our hope.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Having parted from thy flesh, O venerable Nicodemus, thou wast deemed worthy 
to behold the light and grace of the thrice-radiant Godhead, of Whom thou wast also 
an heir and partaker, in that thou didst live a divinely inspired life in all things, O 
divinely eloquent one.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Thy precious discourses pour forth perfume like the fragrant flowers of spring; for 
unto all thou didst show forth the sweet savor of God from the meadows of doctrine, 
O divinely wise father Nicodemus, thou beacon of the Church and adornment of the 
Orthodox.  
Having received heavenly delight from God, O God-bearing Nicodemus, and 
come to enjoy invincible life, by thy supplications preserve and protect those who 
celebrate thee with love, and with thine enlightenment illumine me who earnestly 
hymn thee, O father.  
Theotokion: O pure one, thou exceedingly radiant lamp of the Effulgence of the 
Father, O throne of God, about Whom the hosts of heaven stand with great fear, O 
only Ever-virgin Mary: enlighten my mind with the light of the precepts of Him Who 
shone forth from thy womb.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Nourished with the love of divine philosophy, O divinely wise father Nicodemus, 
thou didst delight in heavenly wisdom, living with the instruments of theology and 
the righteous. With them cease thou never to pray for us, O God-bearer.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Having given flesh to the transcendent God, O Virgin, by thy birthgiving thou 
didst annul the condemnation of Eve, pouring forth a spring of blessing upon those 
who glorify thee and piously proclaim thee to be the most pure Ever-virgin 
Theotokos.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
With love let us celebrate * the luminous memorial of our teacher, the sacred 
Nicodemus; * for, living in holiness and the virtues, * he was well-pleasing unto 
Christ, * and hath been revealed by the divine Spirit ** as a bestower of holy 
doctrines.  
Let all Athos join chorus, * rejoicing and glorifying the divine Nicodemus, * wise 
among the venerable; * for, illumined with abundant gifts and mystic lamps, * like a 
radiant beacon ** he casteth light upon the whole world.  
Soaring above the fields of the divine Scriptures * with upright mind, O father, * 
like a bee thou didst gather sweetness * and the honey of grace there, * and thou 
bringest joy unto our souls ** with divinely inspired understandings.  
Standing about thy most precious * and most holy head with faith, O most blessed 
Nicodemus, * we venerate it with love * and draw forth divine grace therefrom; * and 
in the Spirit we find the gift of life ** which ageth not.  
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
Let us sound the trumpet of hymnody! Let us join chorus in celebration and holy 
festival, rejoicing in the luminous memorial of our teacher! Let priests and monks 
hasten forth, and let them praise in hymns the God-bearer who poureth forth sacred 

--- PAGE 23 ---
springs of doctrine upon the world, which issue forth upon all as from Eden. Ye 
councils of the Orthodox, assembling let us hymn the newly shining beacon of 
Orthodoxy, the treasury of wisdom, the receptacle of the virtues, the mouth of the 
Comforter, the pillar of honorable morals, the tongue of divinely eloquent 
theologians, the divinely radiant lamp of abstinence, the harp of right dogmas, the 
divinely inspired guide of all the pious; and praising him with divinely eloquent 
hymns, let us say thus: O divinely wise Nicodemus, instruct us with thy teaching, and 
ever mediate before the Trinity on behalf of those who honor thee.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Let us sound the trumpet of hymnody! For the Queen of all, who is both Mother 
and Virgin, hath been revealed from on high, and with blessings crowneth those who 
hymn her. Let those who exercise dominion assemble and in hymns praise the Queen 
who hath given birth unto the King Who before was well-pleased, in His love for 
mankind, to deliver those held fast by death. Ye pastors and teachers, assembling, let 
us praise the most pure Mother of the good Shepherd, the golden lamp-stand, the 
Light-bearing cloud, her who is more spacious than the heavens, the animate ark, the 
fiery throne of the Master, the golden jar which received the Manna, the gate of the 
Word which was shut, the refuge of all Christians; and praising her with divinely 
eloquent hymns, let us say thus: O palace of the Word, vouchsafe the kingdom of 
heaven unto us, the lowly, for naught is impossible for thy mediation.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. First Hour. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I of the venerable 
one, and 4 from ODE VI of Canon II of the venerable one.  
Thou wast filled with the light of heaven, O Nicodemus, having purified thy mind, 
and like a lamp of many lights didst shine forth within the Church in the latter times, 
unto the salvation of the pious. (Twice) 
The grace of thy divine words hath shone forth throughout the whole world like 
lightning from heaven, purifying the morals of men’s souls and guiding them to the 
light of the precepts of Him Who hath created all things.  
With divine songs let the divinely chosen Nicodemus be hymned today as is meet: 
the lamp of divine understanding, the right laudable trumpet of God, the divinely 
eloquent tongue.  
Having reached the end of thy life with patience, tranquility of mind and divine 
purification, O Nicodemus, thou wast shown to be a habitation of the writings of the 
fathers and the mouth of their doctrine.  
Strengthened by the power of love for God, O venerable father Nicodemus, thou 
didst lay waste to the weakness of the flesh, setting down teachings in writing for the 
sake of the salvation of thy neighbor.  
O father Nicodemus, our thoughts are ever bedewed by the flow of words 
abundantly pouring forth from thy mouth, rendering us a fruitful ground for virtuous 
works.  
Theotokion: O only pure and blessed Ever-virgin, joy of the angels and helper of 
mankind, ever help us in our needs amid every evil circumstance.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
O ye faithful, let us honor Nicodemus, * the beacon of Athos and scion of Naxos, 
* the divinely inspired teacher of the whole Church, * who was full of divine wisdom; 
* for he poureth forth abundant * heavenly doctrines upon those who cry: * Glory to 
Christ Who hath glorified thee! * Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to 
Him Who granteth help unto us through thee!  
 Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
The Church doth celebrate thee as a most excellent initiate of the mysteries * of 
the life of virtue and piety, O God-bearing teacher of Orthodoxy; * for receiving gifts 
from heaven, with thy divine writings thou dost illumine those who cry to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O father Nicodemus!  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  

--- PAGE 25 ---
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 335 (HEB. 13: 17-21) 
Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they 
watch for your souls, as those who must give account, that they may do it with joy , 
and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, Who 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work 
to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (LK. 6: 17-23)  
At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre 
and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who 
were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude 
sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He 
lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the 
kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye 
who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when 
they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your 
name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, 
behold, your reward is great in heaven.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
