--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 5th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY VENERABLE MARTYR, THE GRAND DUCHESS 
ELIZABETH  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the venerable martyr: 3 in Tone IV: 
O divinely wise Elizabeth, having acquired boldness before God, pray for us, thy 
sinful servants, for Him to open our unworthy mouths, that we may chant a hymn of 
praise unto thee.  
Having loved the Creator of the heavens from thy youth, thou didst take care to 
exercise thyself in prayer and contemplation of God even before thou didst learn to 
know the true, Orthodox Faith; and, though reared by thy family in a heterodox 
doctrine, thou didst richly bedew thy soul with the word of God, and didst remain 
utterly faithful to Christ God.  
Having opened thy bodily eyes in the land of Germany, thou wast raised in the 
erroneous religion of thy family; but the sensibility of thy soul led thee with thy 
husband to Orthodox Russia, where thy spiritual eyes were opened, and thou didst 
find the true Faith.  
And three Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
In Russia, O venerable martyr Elizabeth, thou didst discover the priceless pearl, 
the pure Orthodox Faith, which thou didst accept with all thy heart and spirit; and 
standing now before God in the heavens, pray to Him for us, who are sinful and 
useless.  
From thy youth faith in Almighty God prepared thee for the struggle of love and 
tender compassion; wherefore, thou didst forgive the slayer of thy husband, and gave 
thyself over to the monastic life.  
We do homage to thy struggle and thy compassionate tender compassion, O 
divinely wise Elizabeth, praising thy courage in the face of the torments and Thy 
fervent love for thy neighbors even in the midst of suffering.  
And two Stichera, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “O the great power of Thy Cross ...”:  
Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us offer praise to the venerable 
martyr Elizabeth in Darmstadt, her native city; and let us hymn her in the church of 
Saint Mary Magdalene, the peer of the apostles. Here the little flock of Orthodox 
Christians offereth thee a hymn of victory. 
  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Now doth the city of Moscow repent, wherein thy holy convent existed, for it did 
not oppose its destruction. But Martha and Mary rejoice in the heavens, having found 
thee and thy faithful nun Barbara to be fervent fellow advocates with them.  
Glory ..., Idiomelon, in Tone II: 
Thou didst offer thy blood to Christ, thy Bridegroom, like costly myrrh, O holy 
passion-bearer Elizabeth, and hast received an imperishable crown from Him as thy 
reward. O right wondrous one, pray that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone II: 
The shadow of the law hath passed now that grace hath come, * for as the Bush 
wrapped in flame was not consumed, * so didst thou bear a Child O Virgin * and 
remained a Virgin; * in place of a pillar of fire, the Sun of righteousness hath dawned, 
* instead of Moses, Christ is come, ** the salvation of our souls. 
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: all the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be 
gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things 
from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let 
them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith 
the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, 
and understand that I am He; before Me there was no other God, and after Me there 
shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have 
saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My 
witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that 
can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the 
Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 

--- PAGE 3 ---
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with His right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of an 
helmet. He shall take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall he 
sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then 
shall the right aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-
drawn bow, shall they fly to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out 
of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall 
cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm 
shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill-dealing 
shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear therefore, O ye kings, and 
understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the 
people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord, and 
sovereignty from the Highest, Who shall try your works, and search out your 
counsels.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera of the venerable martyr, in 
Tone VIII:  
O divinely wise Elizabeth, having received in thy heart the words of truth - Love 
your enemies, do good to those who hate you - thou didst visit the slayer of thy 
husband in prison, and with a most perfect forgiveness didst forgive him the sin of 
murder.  
Having forsaken thine own land in thy youth, thou didst come to love the land of 
Russia, where thou didst find the pearl of the One, Apostolic, Orthodox Church; and 
when thou wast deprived of an earthly bridegroom, thou didst not turn away from 
the Russian people, but didst embrace the Cross of Christ and walk the narrow path 
to salvation.  
The brilliant splendor of the royal court did not delude thee with its pernicious 
beauty; wherefore, forsaking all such things and holding them to be as dung, thou 
didst follow Abraham the forefather; and leaving the house of thy father and thy 
native German land, thou didst go to the land of Russia, and didst find Christ, the 
never-waning Light.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Thy venerable martyr Elizabeth, O Lord, gave no more thought to her earthly life, 
paying no heed to bodily torments for the sake of the life which is to come, and hath 
been shown to be an heir thereto; wherefore, she rejoiceth with the angels. At her 
supplications grant us great mercy.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O most 
pure one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign 
Lady, ** the intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 
Aposticha Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! * For a star from the West * the venerable martyr 
Elizabeth * hath shown forth upon us; * and having received the monastic habit, * 
she became a standard of the virtues, * the confirmation of monastics * and 
adornment of ascetics. ** Wherefore, we honor thy memory, O right wondrous one.  
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
O most glorious Princess Elizabeth, * loving Christ thou didst minister unto Him 
* and those close to thee; * and having set aside thy worldly vesture * and received 
the angelic habit, * thou didst summon God-loving women * to the bridal-chamber 
of thy heavenly Bridegroom. * Wherefore, we hymn thy memory, ** O right laudable 
one.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, * the Lord from the well-springs of 
Israel.  
The crown of martyrdom adorneth * the Grand Duchess, * the goodly leader of 
monastics, * who wholly forgave the malefactor * and renounced this world. * Let us 
adorn her with a wreath * intricately woven of our hymns and songs, * and, emulating 
her, let us offer mercy and ascetic feats ** as a gift to Christ, the Judge of our contest.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
We honor thee as an instructress of monastics and layfolk, O venerable martyr 
Elizabeth, for by thy path have we learned how to walk aright. Thou didst teach us to 
emulate Martha and Mary, and to walk with love for God and tender compassion 
toward our neighbor. Having completed thy course, guide us thereto by thy heavenly 
aid.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * Mother of 
God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, * 
granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting now our supplications, 
** pray thou that we all be saved. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
At the blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Causing meekness, humility and love to dwell in thy soul, * thou didst earnestly 
serve the suffering, * O holy passion-bearer Princess Elizabeth; * wherefore, with 
faith thou didst endure sufferings and death for Christ. ** With the martyr Barbara 
pray for all who with love honor you. (Twice) 
Then: “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ... “, (Once). 
But if Vigil is not celebrated, after the Troparion, we chant:  
 Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
Then the Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: 
Causing meekness, humility and love to dwell in thy soul, * thou didst earnestly 
serve the suffering, * O holy passion-bearer Princess Elizabeth; * wherefore, with 
faith thou didst endure sufferings and death for Christ. ** With the martyr Barbara 
pray for all who with love honor you. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Thou didst love Christ from thy youth, and didst forsake thine earthly land, 
bringing thyself to the living God as a sacrifice, O venerable martyr Elizabeth; 
wherefore, we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins 
unto those who honor thy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Lady, most holy Theotokos, beseech thy Son and Creator, that, in that He alone 
is Compassionate, He accept the entreaties of our race for the sake of our repentance 
over the evils we have committed.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Gaining control over the carnal passions, thou didst achieve queen-ship through 
the life-creating Passions, dying the vesture of incorruption in thy blood, O honored 
one; wherefore, thou wast shown to be the bride of the King of all. And now, having 
acquired boldness in heaven, pray that He give cleansing of sins unto those who with 
faith praise thy holy memory. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
By thy divine birthgiving thou didst restore the dead essence of mortals, which had 
become corrupt in the passions, and didst raise us up from death unto life. 
Wherefore, we all bless thee as is meet, O all-immaculate Virgin.  
Polyeleos, and this Magnification: We magnify thee, O venerable passion-bearer 
Elizabeth, and we reverence thine honored sufferings, which thou didst endure 
for Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Our God is refuge and strength, a helper in afflictions which mightily befall 
us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  

--- PAGE 7 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Having buried all the uprisings of the passions with love for Christ, the King of all, 
O venerable martyr Elizabeth, thou didst receive endless life after thy grievous death 
at the hands of the ungodly; wherefore, today the Church of Christ doth celebrate thy 
right wondrous memorial. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Unto the path of repentance do thou guide us who are inclined toward wicked 
deeds, O blessed Virgin who knewest not wedlock, thou refuge of those who pray 
unto thee.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 62 (MT. 15: 21-28)  
At that time, Jesus went into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon. And, behold, a woman 
of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto Him, saying: “Have mercy on 
me, O Lord, Thou Son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil.” But 
He answered her not a word. And His disciples came and besought Him, saying: 
“Send her away; for she crieth after us.” But He answered and said: “I am not sent 
but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” Then came she and fell down before 
Him, saying: “Lord, help me.” But He answered and said: “It is not meet to take the 
children’s bread, and to cast it to dogs.” And she said: “Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat 
of the crumbs which fall from their masters’ table.” Then Jesus answered and said 
unto her: “O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt.” And her 
daughter was made whole from that very hour.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Great faith and wondrous love for thine enemies didst thou acquire, O venerable 
martyr Elizabeth, trusting in God amid tribulations and not judging thy tormentors 
amid thy sufferings, but helping those close to thee. Wherefore, on our behalf entreat 
God most good, that He grant us remission of sins and great mercy.  
Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6, including the Irmos; 
and 2 canons of the venerable martyr, with 8, the composition of Mark:  
ODE I  
Canon I, in Tone II  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Open Thou my lips, O Christ, that I may hymn the struggles of Thy favored one, 
the venerable martyr Elizabeth, that by her supplications she may dispel the cloud of 
mine Ignorance.  
Loving God with all thy soul, from thy youth thou didst serve Him all the days of 
thy life, O venerable martyr; wherefore, He hath glorified thee, for the Lord knoweth 
how to glorify those who glorify Him.  
Dwelling now with the choirs of the prophets and apostles, the martyrs and the 
venerable, in the light of the Holy Trinity, O venerable martyr Elizabeth, be thou 
mindful of thy children who keep thy memorial with faith.  
Theotokion: Thou didst conceive the Word of the Father, Who joined Himself to 
the flesh through thee without forsaking the divine Hypostasis, O pure Mother; and 
the venerable Elizabeth, desiring Him, acquired the glory of martyrdom.  
Canon II, in Tone IV  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Having made thy mind steadfast with goodly desires, O venerable martyr 
Elizabeth, thou wast borne up to God, away from things which last but a short time, 
as thou didst abide in prayer and labors within thy convent.  
I approach thee with love, O honored and venerable martyr: By thine entreaties 
save me from the vanity of life and calm the turmoil of my passions.  
Thy mind enlightened by wisdom and grace, strengthened by divine power thou 
didst remain undaunted by the threats of the tormentors, O holy and venerable 
martyr Elizabeth.  
Theotokion: Him Who became incarnate of thee and accepted the Cross and 
death, O Bride of God, have we come to know as Lord; and, blessing thee, we hymn 
Him as the Redeemer of our race.  
Katavasia: I will open my mouth ...,  
ODE III  
Canon I  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath been broken * by Thy might, O Christ, * 
and the enfeebled * have girded themselves with power.  
Thou didst spend the beginning of thine earthly life in the city of Darmstadt, 
where the pious martyred Tsar built a church to the holy Mary Magdalene, equal of 
the apostles.  
Thou didst find everlasting peace in the holy convent of that same saint, in the 
holy city of Jerusalem, near the church of the Dormition of the Most holy Theotokos, 
whom thou didst love with all thine heart.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
There now, in Holy Gethsemane, are thy holy relics preserved, before which we, 
thine unworthy and useless servants, bow down in piety.   
Theotokion: In thy womb thou didst receive the one, infinite God, O most pure 
Theotokos; wherefore, all of us, the faithful, bless thee with hymns.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Renouncing the world and carnal-mindedness, through tender compassion and la-
bors amid prayers thou didst acquire Christ in the convent of Martha and Mary, with 
the sisters entrusted to thee by God.  
Thou didst stand like an unshakable pillar amid grievous evil circumstances, 
forgiving the murderer and praying for thy tormentors, O most blessed princess.  
Neither fire, nor the sword, nor abasement, nor the cruel pit, nor the savagery of 
the tormentors were able to separate thee from the love of God.  
Theotokion: Having been purified beforehand by the Spirit, O pure one, thou hast 
given birth to the Word of the Father, unto the salvation of our perishing race.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable martyr, in Tone VII: 
O passion-bearer, holy Princess Elizabeth when they cast thee down, alive, into the 
pit at Alapaevsk with the holy martyrs of royal blood - Princes Sergius, John, 
Constantine, Igor and Vladimir - as well as the martyr Barbara and the holy martyr 
Theodore, ye suffered long from your wounds, though thou wast barely alive, thou 
didst ease the sufferings of the dying, chanting sacred hymns, which were heard by 
those who passed by. Wherefore, we entreat thee: Beseech Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of transgressions unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VII: 
When I must needs stand before the face of my Creator on the day of His 
righteous judgment, O Lady, be thou a mediatress before Him for me, delivering me 
from everlasting torments, lest I descend into Hades. Save me by thine aid, O most 
holy Theotokos.  
ODE IV 
Canon I 
Irmos: I have heard report O Lord, * of Thy glorious dispensation, * and I 
have glorified, Thine unapproachable power, * O Lover of mankind.  
Having set thy feet upon the rock of the pure Orthodox Faith, thou didst remain 
unshaken by the temptations and assaults of thine ungodly persecutors.  
From the time of thy widowhood thou didst love to abide in the house of the 
Lord, founding a convent in the royal city of Moscow wherein to serve thy neighbor.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Thou didst withdraw from this vain world to the holy convent of Martha and 
Mary, that with unceasing hymnody and prayers thou mightest set at naught all the 
carnal passions, that with the company of women of like mind with thee thou 
mightest serve God and neighbor.  
Theotokion: Thou art the boast of the faithful, O Theotokos who knewest not 
wedlock thou art the intercessor and refuge of Christians. Entreat thy Son also for us 
who have recourse to thy protection.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
Girded about with the fear of God thou didst serve God, humbling thy body with 
fasting and thirst, and making thy soul radiant through pure prayer.  
Thy relics lie before us like a precious pearl, imparting divers healings unto those 
who approach them and pray to thee with faith.  
At the time when darkness beset the land of Russia, the Lord summoned thee to 
the feat of martyrdom, and thou wast faithful to Him to the end.  
Theotokion: O undefiled and pure one, by thy supplications raise up unto prayer 
my heart, which hath been defiled by thoughts of cowardliness and slothfulness.  
ODE V  
Canon I  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Crowned by an all-splendid wreath, thou standest before the throne of the King of 
all; wherefore, pray thou, O venerable martyr Elizabeth, for those who with faith and 
love celebrate thy holy memory.  
Submitting to the laws of God, thou didst turn utterly away from sinful laws, and 
didst consider the beauties of this present life to be as dung, that thou mightest 
acquire Christ; wherefore, thou didst labor well, O crowned one of great renown.  
Thou didst open mind and heart to the habitation of grace, didst receive the one 
Master, and didst obtain a crown of incorruption, which shineth with radiant 
splendors and rich gifts.  
Theotokion: We wield thee, O pure Theotokos, as an invincible sword against the 
enemy; and we have acquired thee as the confirmation and hope of our salvation.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Truly magnificent was thy way of life: it hath been shown to be beloved of mortals 
and angels and incomprehensible to the savagery of the minions of Satan.  
Having struggled on earth with thy sisters in God, and endured transitory pangs, 
O most noetically rich martyr, thou hast now received rewards with the angels in 
heaven, O invincible martyr.  
Spurning the magnificence of this world, thou didst show thyself to be a guide for 
the lost and a sure haven for those being saved; and with thy blood thou didst dye a 
robe of great price, and clad therein dost stand now before the Bridegroom.  
Theotokion: In a manner transcending nature thou hast given birth to God in the 
flesh, O Virgin, as He Himself desired; wherefore, we, the faithful, entreat thee, that 
we may be delivered from everlasting torment by thine Offspring.  
ODE VI  
Canon I  
Irmos: O Master, hearkening unto the sound of entreaties * from a soul in 
pain, * do Thou deliver me from my grievous sins, * for Thou alone art the 
Cause of our salvation.  
When bodily wounds were inflicted on thee by the godless murderers, in thy 
humble wisdom thou didst deal a grievous wound to the enemy who hath given birth 
to death.  
When thou wast led to the slaughter with thy faithful nun Barbara and the Grand 
Dukes, thou didst maintain strength of spirit, refusing to renounce Christ God, 
Whom thou hadst truly served.  
O thou who didst hearken to the groans of the wounded in the pit of Alapaevsk 
and didst lovingly bind up their bodily wounds, come thou to the aid of us who are 
wounded by pride and boastfulness, and bind up the cruel sores of our souls.  
Theotokion: On behalf of us who piously bless thee, ever entreat Him Who 
became incarnate of thee, O Virgin Mother, that we may be delivered from 
misfortunes, from the soul-destroying passions and from everlasting torment.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Thou wast shown to be a precious vessel of the divine Spirit, bearing divine 
perfume in thy heart, and sweetening the hearts of those who keep thy memory with 
faith.  
Thou didst break the jaws of the noetic wolves with the power of the Spirit, O 
venerable martyr Elizabeth. Shining forth never-waning radiance, guide us also in the 
paths of unshakable love for God.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Having traversed all of Siberia in thy martyred body, and visited far-flung lands in 
thy relics, thou didst arrive in the holy city, in the convent which thou hadst loved 
from of old.  
Theotokion: Thou wast obedient to the words of God, O most pure Theotokos, 
and hast given birth in the flesh to the beginningless Word Who hath delivered us 
from irrational things.  
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV:  
Taking up the Cross of Christ, * thou didst pass from royal glory to the glory of 
heaven, * praying for thine enemies, * O holy martyred Princess Elizabeth; * and with 
the martyr Barbara * thou didst find everlasting joy. ** Therefore, pray ye on behalf 
of our souls.  
Ikos: Loving the commandments of Christ, and hating the delights of this world, 
O venerable martyr, thou didst hasten eagerly to the Lord; and illumining the land of 
Russia with spiritual radiance, thou didst bring to Him a flock of virgins who were 
instructed by thee in the love of God. Enlighten the eyes of our hearts, that we may 
hymn thy struggles, asceticism, vigils, tears, pangs and compassion, for the sake of the 
everlasting life which thou now enjoyest, and pray thou unceasingly for our souls.  
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Having ascended to the never-waning Light, like the sun thou dost illumine the 
whole world, for thou didst do the works of light; wherefore, enlighten us also, the 
unworthy ones, who now cry out: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Resting thy soul and mind on God alone, thou didst tread the narrow path; 
wherefore, thou hast received the delight of the heavenly kingdom, and now criest 
aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Shining with rays of grace, O venerable martyr Elizabeth, ask remission of sins for 
us who keep thy splendid feast and chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: “Rejoice, O most pure, most blessed one!”, we cry to thee with 
Gabriel. Beseech thy Son, that by thy supplications He save our souls.  
Canon II  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
The unapproachable Light hath worthily enlightened thy soul, O venerable martyr 
Elizabeth, and with radiant lamps hath illumined those who chant: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Having traversed the thorny path of this earthly life, O venerable mother, thou 
didst attain unto heavenly delight; and thou now joinest chorus with the angels, 
chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Loving Christ with all thy heart, thou madest thine abode in the most splendid 
chamber of the Bridegroom, O thou who art blessed of God; and as an invincible 
martyr thou criest out to Him: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: As thou art a temple of sanctity, O all-immaculate one, thou hast 
given birth unto the most holy God Who resteth in the Holy of holies, Who 
sanctifieth all and delivereth from evils.  
ODE VIII 
Canon I  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Today hath thy most radiant memorial shone forth, O venerable martyr Elizabeth, 
holy Princess, summoning us to a celebration, that we may glorify the endurance 
wherewith thou, with the other martyrs, didst struggle in the pit of Alapaevsk, and 
that we may cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Like light hath thy feast shone forth out of the darkness of cruel godlessness, O 
venerable martyr revealed by heaven. With the light of thy love do thou also enlighten 
us who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Forsaking royal palaces, thou didst attain unto the heavenly bridal-chamber 
prepared for thee by Christ, thy beloved Bridegroom, Whom seeing, thou criest out: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Because of thee, O most pure Bride of God, grief hath ceased, the 
curse hath truly died away through barrenness, and blessing hath blossomed forth for 
the faithful forever.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Thou didst safely sail over the sea roiled by the assaults of the persecutions raised 
by the godless tyrants against the Faith of Christ, and didst reach the haven of 
paradise, crying out: Ye priests, hymn, ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  
Shining forth like a lamp of righteousness, thou didst dispel the darkness of 
godlessness, O divinely wise Elizabeth, and didst lead to Christ a multitude of God-
loving women, who cry: Ye priests, hymn, ye people, supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Divine grace most gloriously glorified thee, O Princess Elizabeth, with the nun 
Barbara and the many other new martyrs, teaching us to cry out with splendor: Ye 
priests, hymn, ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, the divinely flowing Drop, which was born of 
thee and sanctifieth the world, hath poured forth upon us a drop of mercy, which 
sanctifieth our souls and thoughts.  
ODE IX 
Canon I  
Irmos: Thou art all desire, Thou art all sweetness, * O Word of God, Son of the 
Virgin, * God of gods, most holy Lord of the saints. * Wherefore, we magnify 
Thee * and her who hath given birth to Thee.  
Hastening wholly to the heavenly Jerusalem, O venerable martyr Elizabeth, thou 
didst leave thy holy relics in the Gethsemane below, where in the monastic life thy 
pious sisters continually glorify God Who hath glorified thee.  
Thou didst eagerly acquire everlasting life, O martyr of Christ, who shinest forth 
from afar in the blood of thy martyrdom; wherefore, thou also callest us to thy feast, 
O instructress of monastics, holy Elizabeth.  
By thy supplications, O divinely chosen bride of Christ, break thou the bonds of 
mine offenses, and dispel the gloom of my passions.  
Theotokion: Through thy birthgiving the light of radiance hath shone forth and 
illumined the whole world, destroying the prince of darkness, O most pure 
Theotokos, for all who praise thee with never-ceasing voices.  
Canon II  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Adorned with many virtues, thou didst destroy many of the snares of the hater of 
mankind, cleaving unto Christ with love and leading a multitude of Christ-loving 
women unto God.  
Having joined the choirs of the incorporeal beings and the assemblies of martyrs, 
O glorious one, entreat Christ God on behalf of those who have fallen away and who 
hate Him.  
Thou didst pass through divers countries during thy lifetime, and now dost 
illumine with the splendors of the Spirit all those who glorify thee in many cities and 
monasteries.  
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: All of us cry out to thee the cry of the angel, O Virgin, thou palace 
and throne of God: Rejoice, thou through whom we have been deemed worthy of the 
kingdom of heaven, we who were rejected through corruption and mindlessly 
destroyed our primal beauty.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable martyr:  
Strengthened by the Cross of thy Lord, O venerable martyr Elizabeth, suffering 
bravely thou didst destroy the pride of the tormentors, and received from Christ a 
crown of honor, praying for us who honor thee with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The divinely wise virgins standing round about thee as the Queen of our race, O 
Theotokos Mary, have been led to thy Son, as to the King of all, O most pure one. 
Him do thou beseech on our behalf, O Virgin Mother.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the venerable martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Making thyself steadfast * in the confession of God, * as upon a firm rock, * O 
holy Elizabeth, * with Barbara thou didst suffer in the pit of Alapaevsk; * wherefore, 
thou didst drown * the noetic murderer * and enemy in the abyss, ** and hast 
received the crown of victory as is meet.  
We celebrate thy sacred memorial, * for thou didst accept the love of Christ * and 
His precepts, O venerable martyr, * and didst proclaim the salvation of the souls of 
mortals. * Wherefore, we venerate with faith * the shrine of thy relics, O Elizabeth, * 
which poureth forth grace in abundance * upon those who have recourse unto it ** 
with faith and love.  
Blessed is the holy city and the convent of Gethsemane, * unto which ye attained, 
* O venerable martyr Elizabeth and Barbara the nun; * and the temple which received 
your bodies * hath been adorned as with a royal crown. * O right pleasing protectors, 
* who frighten away the enemy, * driving them far from your convent and city, ** 
pray ye that our souls be saved.  
Having begun thy journey in the princely city of Darmstadt, * thou didst reach the 
royal city of Moscow; * and directing thy gaze with heart and mind toward the 
heavenly Jerusalem, * thou didst organize the Convent of Martha and Mary. * And 
when in thy lifeless body * thou didst take another path through Siberia and China, * 
thy relics were borne to the earthly Jerusalem * and laid in the Convent of Mary 
Magdalene, O ever-memorable Elizabeth, ** thou glory and boast of the martyrs!  
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Glory ..., in Tone III: 
Assembling today, O ye assemblies of those who love the feasts of the Church, 
with joyful countenance and a pure heart let us spiritually form a choir, praising Christ 
our God Who glorifieth His holy passion-bearers: the Grand Duchess Elizabeth and 
the nun Barbara, the right wondrous venerable martyrs who offered their own blood 
to Christ, their Bridegroom, as most costly myrrh, and have received the crown of 
incorruption from Him as a reward.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Without seed didst thou conceive of the Holy Spirit; and glorifying thee, we chant: 
Rejoice, O most holy Virgin!  
Great Doxology, Troparia, litanies, dismissal, First Hour.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I, and 4 from ODE 
VI of Canon II of the venerable martyr.  
Thou didst spend the beginning of thine earthly life in the city of Darmstadt, 
where the pious martyred Tsar built a church to the holy Mary Magdalene, equal of 
the apostles. (Twice) 
Thou didst find everlasting peace in the holy convent of that same saint, in the 
holy city of Jerusalem, near the church of the Dormition of the Most holy Theotokos, 
whom thou didst love with all thine heart.  
There now, in Holy Gethsemane, are thy holy relics preserved, before which we, 
thine unworthy and useless servants, bow down in piety.   
Thou wast shown to be a precious vessel of the divine Spirit, bearing divine 
perfume in thy heart, and sweetening the hearts of those who keep thy memory with 
faith.  
Thou didst break the jaws of the noetic wolves with the power of the Spirit, O 
venerable martyr Elizabeth. Shining forth never-waning radiance, guide us also in the 
paths of unshakable love for God.  
Having traversed all of Siberia in thy martyred body, and visited far-flung lands in 
thy relics, thou didst arrive in the holy city, in the convent which thou hadst loved 
from of old.  
Theotokion: Thou wast obedient to the words of God, O most pure Theotokos, 
and hast given birth in the flesh to the beginningless Word Who hath delivered us 
from irrational things.  
Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: 
Causing meekness, humility and love to dwell in thy soul, * thou didst earnestly 
serve the suffering, * O holy passion-bearer Princess Elizabeth; * wherefore, with 
faith thou didst endure sufferings and death for Christ. ** With the martyr Barbara 
pray for all who with love honor you.  
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV:  
Taking up the Cross of Christ, * thou didst pass from royal glory to the glory of 
heaven, * praying for thine enemies, * O holy martyred Princess Elizabeth; * and with 
the martyr Barbara * thou didst find everlasting joy. ** Therefore, pray ye on behalf 
of our souls.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: For Thy sake, O Lord, * are we slain all the day 
long.  
Verse: We are counted as sheep for the slaughter.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS, §99 (ROM. 8: 28-39)  
Brethren: We know that all things work together for good to those who love God, 
to those who are the called according to His purpose. For whom He did foreknow, 
He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be 
the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom He did predestinate, those He 
also called: and whom He called, those He also justified: and whom He justified, 
those He also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who 
can be against us? He Who spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, 
how shall He not with Him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay any thing to 
the charge of God’s elect? Shall God Who justifieth? Who is he who condemneth? It 
is Christ Who died, yea rather, Who is risen again, Who is even at the right hand of 
God, Who also maketh intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of 
Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, 
or sword? As it is written: For Thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are 
accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than 
conquerors through Him Who loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor 
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, 
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the 
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: Our God is refuge and strength, a helper in afflictions which 
mightily befall us.  
Verse: O Lord, save the king, and hearken unto us in the day when we call 
upon Thee.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, §52 (JN. 15:17-16:2) 
The Lord said to His disciples: “These things I command you, that ye love one 
another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated Me before it hated you. If ye 
were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, 
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember 
the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have 
persecuted Me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept My saying, they will 
keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for My name’s sake, 
because they know not Him Who sent Me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, 
they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin. He that hateth Me 
hateth My Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other 
man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both Me and 
My Father. But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in 
their law, They hated Me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, Whom I 

--- PAGE 19 ---
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, Who proceedeth from 
the Father, He shall testify of Me: and ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been 
with Me from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not 
be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that 
whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
 
 
