--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, JUVENAL, 
PATRIARCH OF JERUSALEM 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: 
With hymns let us honor the all-praised Juvenal, who was young in soul, but an 
elder in understanding, a pastor and teacher, the impregnable rampart of Orthodoxy, 
the all radiant star of the Church, the father and patriarch of the mother of the 
Churches.  
Thou didst proclaim unto the world the three-Sunned light of Orthodoxy, and 
thundering greatly against the heretics, thou didst suffer for the sake of the truth, O 
divinely wise Juvenal; wherefore, we praise thee as is meet.  
Having honed the sword of the Word of God to sharpness, thou didst put to 
shame the impiety of Nestorius, didst denounce the false teaching of Eusebius, and 
didst make clear the dogmas of Orthodoxy, O most sacred father Juvenal; wherefore, 
make us steadfast in the apostolic Faith.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
When the winds of contrary doctrines blew and storms of heresies rose up against 
the Church, thou wast like an unshakable pillar, O wondrous Juvenal; for, rejecting 
the false teaching of Eutyches, thou didst confess Christ to be the true God-man, and 
putting the impiety of Nestorius to shame, thou didst declare unto the world that the 
Ever-virgin Mary is the true Theotokos. Wherefore, instructed by thee, we cry out 
unceasingly unto God: Through the Theotokos, have mercy upon us!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: When, of old, the unblemished ewe-lamb and immaculate 
Sovereign Lady, * beheld her Lamb * upon the tree of the Cross, * she exclaimed 
maternally, and marveling cried aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new 
and most strange sight I see? * How hath the thankless synagogue * betrayed Thee to 
the judgment-seat of Pilate * and condemned Thee to death, * Who art the Life of 
all? * Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, ** O Word!”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, then: 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
O heir to the apostle and brother of the Lord, thou didst shepherd well his flock, 
O Juvenal, holy hierarch of Christ; and having armed thyself against the heretics, the 
cruel wolves, with the divine fathers, thou didst set at naught their convoluted 
reasoning, and didst proclaim the Truth to the whole world, showing thyself to be a 
new Athanasius in discourse and writing. Wherefore, having been deprived like him 
of thy hierarchal see, rejoicing, thou didst accept disgrace for Christ’s sake, and didst 

--- PAGE 2 ---
cry out to Him: “O Christ, Thou King of all, shine forth Thy Truth upon mankind, 
burning up the thoughts of the impious with the Spirit of Thy mouth!”  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician and healer * of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Juvenal our father, ** entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise the wondrous champion 
of Orthodoxy”, the composition of Valeria, in Tone II: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Come, glorify your patriarch and father, O children of the city of God, and with us 
chant hymns of divine beauty, celebrating now his annual commemoration!  
Aflame with apostolic zeal, thou didst thunder forth against the heretics in thy 
discourse, O Juvenal, as a fellow initiate of the mysteries and a converser with the 
God-bearing fathers, who confessed the Son of God in an Orthodox manner.  
As heir to the apostle and brother of the Lord, thou didst shepherd his flock well, 
O holy hierarch; and, receiving the blessedness of those who are persecuted for the 
Truth, thou hast proclaimed the dogmas of Orthodoxy to all the world.  
Theotokion: Today, in Blachernae, a precious treasure is enshrined, thy robe O 
most pure Mother of God, wherewith do thou mercifully overshadow and protect us, 
preserving us from all misfortunes and perils.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
O glorious Juvenal, thou companion of the God-bearing fathers, denouncer of the 
false wisdom of the heretics, golden trumpet proclaiming the Truth unto the world: 
establish us in the Orthodox Faith.  
O sacred head of Sion, the mother of Churches, opposing the impiety of Nestorius 
thou didst cry out to the Theotokos: O Virgin, stop thou the mouths of the ungodly, 
for there is none besides thee who hath contained God!  
Thou didst utterly reject the artfully contrived reasoning of false understanding, O 
holy hierarch, and expound the divine Truth both to the most wise and to children, 
who chant together: There is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!  
Theotokion: O righteous Anna, join chorus now with us, for thou hast given birth 
to her who is more glorious than the seraphim and more spacious than the heavens, 
whose sacred robe we reverently kiss today, which is more precious than the purple 
vesture of kings, in-woven with gold, and is the protection and bulwark of the 
Christian people.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone V: 
O Juvenal, thou sacred intercessor for the earthly Jerusalem, blessed dweller in the 
heavenly Jerusalem, partake of life which waxeth not old: instruct thou the young and 
the old, that they may preserve the dogmas of Orthodoxy unadulterated, and stand, 
even unto death, for the Faith of their fathers, piously honoring and calling the Ever-
virgin Mary the Theotokos. To her do thou now pray on behalf of our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
O pure Ever-virgin, thou fervent and invincible intercessor, excellent and 
unashamed hope, rampart, protection and refuge of those who have recourse unto 
thee: with the angels entreat thy Son and God, that He grant peace, salvation and 
great mercy to the world.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee suspended on the Cross between two thieves 
of Thine own will, O Christ, Thy Mother, her womb rent asunder maternally, said: 
“O my sinless Son, how is it that Thou art unjustly nailed to the Cross like a 
malefactor, desiring to give life to the human race, in that Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
In the city of David thou didst make thy flock steadfast in the apostolic Faith, in 
Ephesus thou didst denounce the teachings of the heretics, and in Chalcedon thou 
didst proclaim the truth to the whole world, like thunder, O holy hierarch Juvenal. 
Wherefore, thou dost now minister to the Truth Himself in heaven.  
O most sacred hierarch Juvenal, contending for the Truth thou didst suffer 
manfully, and thou didst receive the blessedness of those who are persecuted for 
Christ, and deprived for a time of thy hierarchical throne, thou hast been seated on a 
throne of incorruption in the Jerusalem on high.  
Openly didst thou proclaim the Truth, preaching the dogmas of Orthodoxy from 
the rooftops, O father Juvenal, and fasting and making supplication day and night, 
thou didst cry out in the inner chamber of thy soul: Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Theotokion: We now enshrine thy robe in a church of the Imperial City, and we 
celebrate with splendor, O Sovereign Lady. On thee alone do we set our hope of 
salvation, for thou hast set the Christian race as a seal upon thine all-merciful heart, 
stretching forth thy most pure hands unceasingly to thy Son. To Him do we cry: 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE V  
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
O holy hierarch, thou didst preach to the world Christ the Savior, God the Word 
Who was begotten by God, and came forth, a perfect Man, from the divine Maiden 
Mary. Wherefore, through thee do we cry out to Him: We know none other God and 
God-man than Thee!  
The divinely wise Juvenal commandeth us to call the Ever-virgin Mary the true 
Theotokos, and with him we cry out unceasingly: We know none other Mother of the 
Most High than thee!  
Keep the eye of thine understanding pure and the Faith unadulterated, O brethren, 
in nowise allowing yourselves to be buffeted by the winds of adverse teachings, lest 
darkness be found within you instead of light, thus did the great Patriarch Juvenal 
command.  
Theotokion: Grant unto us a robe of salvation, and array us in the vesture of 
gladness, O Theotokos, for we zealously honor the deposition of thy robe, and fall 
down before thee, crying out: We know none other fervent helper than thee, O 
Virgin!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Taught by thee, O wise Juvenal, in an Orthodox manner we confess there to be 
two natures in Christ the Lord, uncommingled, immutable, indivisible and 
inseparable.  
The voice which issued forth from Ephesus like thunder proclaimeth to the whole 
world, in an Orthodox manner: Understand that the pure Theotokos gave birth to 
Christ without corruption, wherefore be ye saved by her intercession!  
Taking thy cross upon thy shoulder, thou didst follow after Christ the Master, 
enduring persecutions and tribulations for His sake, and by thy supplications, O good 
shepherd, lead up from the abyss of sins, us, who lack endurance and are inclined 
toward vanity.  
Theotokion: The insatiable maw of hell already gapeth wide to swallow us who are 
besotted with sin; but do thou, O most hymned Theotokos, stretch forth thy robe 
over it and, closing off the entrance to the abyss, grant us time to repent.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: 
Assembling now, with hymns let us honor Juvenal, * the boast of Jerusalem, * the 
namesake of youth, * who today hast been translated to the life which waxeth not old, 
* the heir of the apostles, * fellow initiate of the mysteries with the God-bearing 
fathers, * expounder of the dogmas of Orthodoxy, * denouncer of false doctrines, ** 
the universal teacher of the Truth.  
Ikos: Thou didst not emulate Pilate, who asked: “What is truth?”, O holy hierarch 
Juvenal; rather, thou didst clearly proclaim to the whole world that Christ, the God-
man, is Truth and Life, commanding all to honor His most pure Mother as the true 
Theotokos. Wherefore, having assembled today, we honor thee with hymns, as the 
opponent of false teachings and the champion of the Truth.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
With thee, O Juvenal, we honor two natures in Christ the Savior, Who is 
immutably God and perfect man, crying out unceasingly: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  
O Juvenal, faithful servant of the Lord, thou didst command that we honor the 
Ever-virgin Mary as the true Theotokos; wherefore, adorned by her and joining 
chorus, we chant: Blessed art Thou, O most pure Sovereign Lady!  
Thou didst fight fearlessly for the Truth, O most blessed father, O true mouth of 
Chalcedon and radiant voice of Ephesus, rejoicing in the three-Sunned light of 
Orthodoxy, and crying aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Thine incorrupt body, which had contained God, O Virgin, didst 
thou cover with thy robe. Thereby do thou defend us who cry out to thee with love: 
Most blessed art Thou, O Theotokos Mary!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
In the heavenly Sion thou, with many others, standest now in glory before the 
Lamb of God, having the name of the heavenly Father written upon thy forehead, O 
hierarch of God, chanting a new hymn before His throne, rejoicing throughout all 
ages.  
Thou wast a venerator and faithful custodian of the tomb of the Lord, O holy 
hierarch father Juvenal, and in the church of Gethsemane thou didst unceasingly send 
up prayers to the Theotokos on behalf of all the world, emulating her glory in thy life.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
By thy word and life thou didst command all to confess the Father, the Son and 
the Holy Spirit, O most blessed one; wherefore, standing now before the life-creating 
Trinity, thou dost glorify God throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, as the apple of our eye we cherish thy robe, 
wherewith thou didst cover thy most pure body which contained God, and we 
enshrine it now with honor in the church, crying: Protect us therewith from mis-
fortunes and perils, throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Thou didst do battle steadfastly for the Faith, O Juvenal, and the peace of God 
which surpasseth all understanding thou didst preserve in thy heart; and now thou 
hast been crowned by the hand of the Almighty. Wherefore we all earnestly magnify 
thee.  
Thou didst tend the lambs and sheep of the flock of Christ exceedingly well, and 
didst wound the cruel wolves with the sword of thy discourses, O beacon of 
Orthodoxy and truly good shepherd; wherefore, the whole world doth honor thee.  
We who celebrate thy memory with love, O holy hierarch of Christ, ask thine aid 
before the throne of the King of glory; we learn righteousness in thy discourses, and 
magnify thee as the friend of God.  
Theotokion: The Theotokos and Mother of the Beginningless One, whom thou 
wast zealous to glorify as is meet, O Juvenal, do thou unceasingly entreat on behalf of 
those who honor thy memory with faith, that we may fervently magnify thine 
intercession.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch: 
O pastor of the city of God, with the pipes of thy discourse and writings call thou 
thy sheep together, that, following after thee, they may attain unto the fold of the 
Lord.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Come, ye faithful, and with the most sacred Juvenal let us honor the Mother of 
God as the Theotokos, for her most precious robe is enshrined today in Blachernae 
and within the hearts of those who piously set their hope of salvation on her sure 
intercession.  
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Juvenal our father, ** entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: 
Assembling now, with hymns let us honor Juvenal, * the boast of Jerusalem, * the 
namesake of youth, * who today hast been translated to the life which waxeth not old, 
* the heir of the apostles, * fellow initiate of the mysteries with the God-bearing 
fathers, * expounder of the dogmas of Orthodoxy, * denouncer of false doctrines, ** 
the universal teacher of the Truth.  
 
