--- PAGE 1 ---
THE SUNDAY ON OR AFTER THE 13th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY FATHERS 
OF THE FIRST SIX ECUMENICAL COUNCILS 
Be it known that if the sixteenth day of July fall on a Sunday, this service of the 
Holy Fathers is chanted on that very day; but if the sixteenth fall on a Monday, 
Tuesday or Wednesday, the service is chanted on the preceding Sunday; and if 
the sixteenth fall on a Thursday, Friday or Saturday, it is chanted on the 
following Sunday. We celebrate the memory of the six holy ecumenical 
councils, and transfer the service of the saint of the day to Compline. 
AT LITTLE VESPERS 
We chant the Stichera of the Resurrection and to the Theotokos, as usual. 
AT GREAT VESPERS 
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,”  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 of the Resurrection, and 6 of the fathers, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel: “The wretched ...”: 
Before the morning star from the womb Thou wast begotten from the Father 
motherless before the ages, though Arius held Thou wast created and thus not God, 
boldly and mindlessly identifying thee, the Creator, with things created, thus storing 
up fuel for the eternal fire. But the Council gathered in Nicaea proclaimed that Thou, 
O Lord, art truly the Son of God, one in rank with the Father and the Spirit. (Twice)  
Wisely did ye mend the robe of Christ which had been rent and torn by the jaws of 
dogs, O honored fathers, unable to endure the sight of His nakedness, as of old Shem 
and Japheth could not bear to see their father’s nakedness. And ye put to shame the 
mindlessness of those of like mind with Arius, the namesake of wrath. (Twice)  
The Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutychians and Dioscorans, the Appollinarians, 
Sabellians and Severians, savage wolves who came clad in sheep skins, did ye, as true 
pastors, drive far away from the flock of the Savior, stripping the thrice-wretched 
ones in particular of their sheep’s clothing. Wherefore, we call you blessed. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Let us acclaim today * those mystical trumpets of the Spirit, * the God-bearing 
Fathers, who, in the midst of the Church, * sang a harmonious song of theology, * 
teaching that the Trinity is one, unchanging in essence and Godhead; * they are the 
refuters of Arius, * and the foremost warriors of the Orthodox. ** And they ever 
intercede with the Lord that our souls find mercy.  
Both now ..., the Dogmatic Theotokion in the tone of the week.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons: 

--- PAGE 2 ---
READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (14:14-20) 
And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained 
servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto 
Dan. And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote 
them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus. And he 
brought back all the goods, and also brought back again his brother Lot, and his 
goods, and the women also, and the people. And the king of Sodom went out to meet 
him, after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlomer and of the kings that were 
with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which is the king’s dale. And Melchizedek king of 
Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the most high God. 
And he blessed him, and said: Blessed be Abram of the most high God, possessor of 
heaven and earth: and blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine 
enemies into thy hand.  
READING FROM BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY (1:8-17) 
In those days, Moses said unto the sons of Israel: Behold, I have set the land 
before you: go in and possess the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers, 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob to give unto them and to their seed after them. And I 
spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you myself alone: the Lord 
your God hath multiplied you, and, behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for 
multitude. (The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many more 
as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promised you!) How can I myself alone bear your 
cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife? Take you wise men, and understanding, 
and known among your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you. And ye 
answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast spoken is good for us to do. So I 
took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made them heads over you, 
captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, and captains over fifties, and 
captains over tens, and officers among your tribes. And I charged your judges at that 
time, saying, Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously between 
every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him. Ye shall not respect 
persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the small as well as the great; ye shall not be 
afraid of the face of man; for the judgment is God’s. 
READING FROM BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY (10:14-21). 
In those days, Moses said unto the sons of Israel: Behold, the heaven and the 
heaven of heavens is the Lord’s thy God, the earth also, with all that therein is. Only 
the Lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, 
even you above all people, as it is this day. Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your 
heart, and be no more stiff necked. For the Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord 
of Lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor 
taketh reward: he doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth 
the stranger, in giving him food and raiment. Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye 

--- PAGE 3 ---
were strangers in the land of Egypt. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God; him shalt thou 
serve, and to him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name. He is thy praise, and he is 
thy God, that hath done for thee these great and terrible things, which thine eyes have 
seen.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple; and, Glory ..., in Tone III: 
Ye have become exact keepers of the apostolic traditions, * O Holy Fathers; * for 
in setting forth in council the dogma of the consubstantiality * of the Holy Trinity in 
Orthodox fashion, * ye cast down the blasphemy of Arius. * Then, after censuring 
Macedonius, the enemy of the Holy Spirit, * ye condemned Nestorius, Eutyches, 
Dioscorus, * Sabellius, and Severus the headless. * Wherefore we pray, make ye 
entreaty that we be delivered from their error, ** and that our life be preserved 
blameless in the Faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
By the will of the Father and without seed * thou didst conceive through the 
divine Spirit the Son of God * Who hath existed from the Father without a mother 
from before the ages, * and Who for our sake came forth from Thee in the flesh 
without a father, * and Him hast thou suckled as a babe. * Wherefore, cease not to 
beseech Him, ** that our souls be delivered from tribulations. 
The Aposticha from the Oktoechos; and, Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
O ye assemblies of the Orthodox, * let us celebrate today with faith and piety * 
the annual memorial of the God-bearing Fathers * who, in the illustrious city of 
Nicaea, * came together from the whole inhabited world. * For with pious mind they 
refuted the godless dogma of the grievous Arius, * and by synodal decree banished 
him from the Orthodox Catholic Church. * And they instructed all to openly confess 
the consubstantial and co-eternal Son of God, * Who existed before the ages. * This, 
in exactness and piety, did they set forth in the Symbol of Faith. * Wherefore, 
following their divine doctrines and believing with assurance, ** we worship, in One 
Godhead, the Father, Son and all-holy Spirit, the Trinity one in essence.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to 
thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of 
our souls! 
At the Blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Twice); 
and that of the fathers, in Tone VIII:  

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
Troparion of the holy fathers, in Tone VIII:  
Most glorious art Thou, O Christ our God, * Thou hast established our Holy 
Fathers as luminaries upon the earth * and through them hath instructed us all in the 
true faith. ** O Most merciful One, glory be to Thee. (Once) 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Resurrection, (Twice);  
Glory ..., the Troparion of the holy fathers, in Tone VIII:  
Most glorious art Thou, O Christ our God, * Thou hast established our Holy 
Fathers as luminaries upon the earth * and through them hath instructed us all in the 
true faith. ** O Most merciful One, glory be to Thee!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
After the Kathismata, the Sessional Hymns from the Oktoechos.  
Canon of the Resurrection, with 4 Troparia, including the Irmos; canon of the 
Theotokos, with two Troparia; and two canons of the holy fathers, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon I of the holy fathers, the composition of Germanus II, sacred and ecumenical 
Patriarch, in Tone VI:  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
With sacred words let the fathers be honored who from Nicaea. as it were from 
the sky, thundered forth the Word of the living God everywhere, showing forth His 
enemies slain by their thunder.  
With the Holy Spirit Christ hath driven the evil spirit of the Spirit-haters far from 
His Church, unifying the Church by the activity of the Second Council. 
Cyril, the leader of the Council, who clearly confessed the Virgin Mary to be the 
pure Mother and Theotokos, dispelled the deception of Nestorius the Christ-hater.  
Theotokion: O pure one, thou hast given birth unto Christ, One of the uncreated 
Trinity, in two natures and volitions, Who for thy sake hath accomplished the uniting 
of men and angels.  
Canon II of the holy fathers, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
The pious council of the fathers, which once assembled against Eutyches, truly 
preached the Savior in two inseparable natures, manifestly walking and abiding 
according to the doctrine of the godly father Cyril.  
The six hundred and thirty pious men, having cast down the deception of 
Eutyches and the heresy of Severus, attained unto this hymn: We preach Christ in 
two natures, walking according to the pronouncement of the blessed Cyril.  
Let him that doth not confess Christ, the Word of the Father, to be in two natures 
and activities, fall under our anathema! For the Fourth Council of the holy fathers 
unanimously preached thus. Let us all, therefore, call them blessed.  
Theotokion: Most glorious things have been spoken of thee amid generations of 
generations, O Mary Theotokos, who contained God the Word within thy womb, and 
remained pure. Wherefore, we all honor thee, after God, as our intercessor.  
ODE III  
Canon I  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
The mindless Arius, showing himself to be a servant of a created being, and 
Macedonius, likewise revealed as abominable, are equally tormented in the fire of 
Gehenna with the Hellenes.  
With the seven sacred councils of the holy fathers thou didst adorn the honored 
Church, O Christ, driving far away the darkness of deception as with the light of the 
seven beacons.  
The multifarious plague of the heretics destroyeth Thy flock, O Word; but the 
shepherds of Thy noetic sheep have changed this by their doctrine.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, thou hast given birth unto One of the uncreated 
Trinity, Who is dual in nature and volition, and Whose image we worship, filled with 
grace.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Those who have foolishly inclined towards the words of Severus, which are full of 
dreadful poison, are ever put to shame, cut off from the Church like predatory wolves 
and dogs.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
O ye faithful who join chorus together, we honor the Savior and Creator of all in 
two indivisible natures, two wills and activities. Wherefore, we utterly reject the 
deception of Severus.  
Come ye, and let us openly spurn the deception of the pernicious Severus and 
Jacob, and with them Theodosius and Dioscorus; but let us praise the Fourth Council 
of the pious fathers with divine hymns.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to be more exalted than the cherubim and 
the seraphim, O Theotokos; for thou alone hast received the uncontainable God in 
thy womb, O immaculate one. Wherefore, all we the faithful bless thee with hymns, 
O pure one.  
Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection; Sessional Hymn of the fathers, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Ye have been revealed to the world as most radiant beacons of the truth of Christ 
on earth, O truly exceedingly blessed and divinely eloquent fathers, having desiccated 
the heresies of the blasphemous confusion of tongues and quenched the flaming 
tumults of those who are of a false faith. Wherefore, as holy hierarchs of Christ, pray 
ye that we be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
exceedingly glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
ODE IV 
 Canon I  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Thine enemies raised a great tumult, O Savior, and they that hate Thee lifted up 
their heads but a little; yet straightway they have fallen, unable to endure the blare of 
Thy spiritual trumpets.  
The suns of the Sun have with twofold radiance made clear that the Son and the 
Spirit are from the Father, uncreated, co-beginningless. The Father is confessed to be 
the sole cause of both.  
Seven are the spirits which rested on Christ, Isaiah said; and Christ, with the 
Father and the divine Spirit, rested on the seven councils.  
Theotokion: From thy precious blood thou hast given birth unto God Who was 
clothed in flesh, O pure Maiden; Him have the fathers professed to be in two natures, 
but a single Hypostasis.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
O mindless and vain Severus, tell us: is the Word, the Son of the Father of lights, a 
single essence, commingled, and beginningless? For if thou sayest so, thou dost 
postulate a different essence; for the flesh and the Word are not a single essence, but 
are two, O wretched one!  
To speak of the Word as being of a single nature confuses His incarnate nature 
which is without change and commingling, with His human nature; wherefore the 
teacher and primate of the Alexandrians hath clearly taught two natures and wills to 
those who wish to reason in an Orthodox fashion.  
The two uncommingled natures of Christ do we all proclaim, O ye faithful, 
trampling underfoot all the impiety of Eutyches and the mindless Dioscorus, 
wherefore we follow the limits set down by the holy fathers through the discourse of 
the divine Cyril.  
Theotokion: Thou art the chariot of the cherubim, O pure Mother of God; thou 
art the habitation, the dwelling-place of God the Word of the Father, Who clothed 
Himself in flesh from thy most pure womb. Wherefore, worshipping Him Who 
became incarnate from thee in two natures, we unceasingly glorify Him.  
ODE V 
 Canon I  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
The divine grapevine of Christ which was brought from Egypt was once 
consumed by the wild beasts of the accursed destroyer; but they have been driven far 
away with the sling of the holy fathers.  
Illumining their minds with thrice-radiant divine splendor, the honored fathers 
professed the Lord Christ to be One of the honorable Trinity, and dual in nature and 
activity.  
Trinitarian: O Trinity, among material things the Church hath been made heavenly 
by the wise fathers as though among the seraphim; and ever chanting unto Thee the 
thrice-holy hymn, it uniteth Thy threefold nature into One.  
Theotokion: Thou wast the Mother and handmaiden of thy Son, O pure one; for 
He Who came forth from thee existed before thee as thy Creator. Him do we know 
to be in two natures, but united in the hypostatic Word.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
O Severus! Mingle not wickedly the natures of Christ, O iniquitous one; for all the 
priests and most blessed teachers, professing that in the one Person of Christ there 
are two natures, have thus expounded this to all.  
Desiring to take pity on us who were perishing’ the Beginningless One, the Word 
of the Father, as the Lover of mankind, manifestly assumed human nature. 
Wherefore, I profess Him in two natures and wills.  
The Fourth Council, having set at naught Severus and Dioscorus, who blaspheme 
Christ, read aloud the Tome of Leo, the primate of Rome, right well showing forth 
the natures of the Savior as dual in number, without separation.  
Theotokion: Possessed of maternal boldness before thy Son, O most pure one, 
spurn not the thought of us as kin, we pray; for thee alone do we Christians set 
before the Master as our merciful purification.  
ODE VI 
Canon I  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Once David, chanting, said: The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath 
called them from the ends of all the earth, from the rising of the sun and even unto 
the setting thereof, signifying the ecumenical councils of the fathers.  
The wisdom of God hath founded seven pillars, Thy Church, O Master, which is 
maintained unshaken by all heresies, through the councils of the sacred fathers, seven 
in number.  
May shame cover the countenances of Eutyches and Dioscorus, who spake 
foolishly of a commingling of the natures of Christ; for He received the nature of a 
mortal not only in appearance, but in His divinity.  
Theotokion: Let Nestorius be admitted to the darkened councils of the Jews and 
let his blasphemous tongue be cut out; for the Virgin Mary gave birth to God Who 
became incarnate for our sake.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
The two epistles of Cyril which were once sent to the prefect who held authority 
over the East, denounce all the deception of Severus, piously proclaiming Christ.  
Cyril preached Christ in two natures and two activities, cutting off the heresy of 
the senseless Severus. Wherefore, let us all remain in his doctrines.  
Theotokion: We, the pious, proclaim thee truly to be the pure and most glorious 
Virgin, O Mary, Birthgiver of God, shutting the impudent mouth of Nestorius and 
the evil mind of Dioscorus.  
Kontakion of the holy fathers, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “As the first-fruits ...”: 
The preaching of the Apostles and the doctrines of the Fathers confirmed the one 
Faith in the Church. * And wearing the garment of truth woven from the theology on 
high, ** she rightly divideth and glorifieth the great mystery of piety.  
Ikos: In the lofty preaching of the Church of God, let us hearken as she crieth: he 
that thirsteth, let him come and drink. The cup which I bear is the cup of wisdom. Its 
drink have I mixed with the word of truth. I pour forth the water, not of contention, 
but of confession. As Israel doth now drink thereof, it beholdeth God, Who saith: 
See, see, that I am He, and have not changed. I am God, I am first, and I am 
hereafter, and besides Me there is none other. Hence, they that partake shall be filled, 
and shall praise the great mystery of piety.  
ODE VII 
 Canon I  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Once Daniel destroyed the dragon of Babylon; and by the prayers of the fathers 
hath Arius, the cruel serpent of Egypt, which devoureth the flock of Christ, been 
manifestly broken asunder.  
With unforgivable impiety the wolf Macedonius showed his disdain, striking out 
against the Spirit Who deifieth mortals and restoreth all the faithful to their pristine 
goodness with the laver of baptism.  
Dioscorus, Eutyches and Severus the Leviathan, the three who have commingled 
and admixed the natures of Christ with mental confusion, have struck out with 
audacity against the adored Trinity.  
Theotokion: With reverence we venerate the image of the countenance of thine 
incarnation, O Master, and that of Thy Mother and of all the saints, knowing with 
right thought that the veneration passeth through to the Prototype.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Confessing Christ to be in two natures and activities, without commingling, and 
immutable, we vanquish the deception of Severus. Wherefore, we cry out to Him 
Who, in assuming flesh, endured suffering: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
We understand that it was One Who was on the Tree, yet, as God in the highest, 
was in the bosom of the Father, and Who was in the tomb in that He was joined to 
the flesh. To Him do we chant, crying out together: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Despising the enemies of the Trinity, the emptiness and division of Arius who 
belittled God, and the like-mindedness of Sabellius, let us cry out to the Trinity, O ye 
faithful: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Trinitarian: Theologizing in an Orthodox manner, we declare Thee to be the Lord 
of all, the one and, more precisely, only-begotten Son of the Father, knowing Thine 
only proceeding Spirit to be right, equally united and ever existent with Thee.  
ODE VIII  
Canon I  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
The Son and the Spirit shone forth as divinely planted shoots from a single Root; 
for the Father is the sole Cause, is timeless and of equal honor with the other timeless 
Hypostases.  
Thou didst timelessly shine forth from an immaterial womb, O Word Who art of 
one essence with the Father and the Spirit; yet for our sake Thou didst make Thine 
abode in the material womb of the only Theotokos.  
Darts ablaze with the fire of the Spirit, the seven councils of the godly fathers 
pierced the shameful hearts of the heretical enemies and sent them to their death.  
Theotokion: Not in more than one Person do we glorify the one Christ, nor do we 
unite Him by commingling His essences; for He is one and the same Person, thy Son 
and Creator, O Virgin, distinguished by being dual in nature.  
Canon II  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Let those who do not profess the one Son in two natures, indivisible, immutable 
and uncommingled, be put to shame, and let their mouths be stopped; for we, the 
pious, render glory, believing that Christ acteth and willeth not in accordance with 
different hypostases, but in two natures.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
O ye who bear the name of Jacob the ragged and ascribe his name to yourselves, 
tell us: were ye baptized in his name of old? Wherefore, because of them, ye who yet 
willingly cleave unto shamelessness with that liar have fallen away from the grace of 
Christ.  
In Chalcedon, the Fourth council set at naught Dioscorus, Eutyches and Severus, 
and utterly cut off from the Church of Christ the Master the thorns of their heresy, 
which confused the natures of the Savior. With the Church we who are Orthodox 
hold them in derision.  
Trinitarian: The one, thrice-luminous splendor of the Godhead which shineth 
forth from the one essence in three Hypostases: the beginningless Father, the 
consubstantial Word of the Father, and the equally reigning consubstantial Spirit, ye 
children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O most pure Birthgiver of God, cleanse thou the wounds of my soul 
and the bruises of sin, washing them with the stream which sprang forth from the 
side of thy Son in flowing streams; for to thee do I cry, to thee do I flee, and thee, 
who art full of the grace of God, do I invoke.  
ODE IX 
 Canon I  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
One must not add or subtract ought from sacred Tradition, our Orthodox Faith; 
for therein have we faithfully been baptized. And they that add ought to this Faith 
shall be rightly given over to the ban of anathema.  
Let us all leap up in joy of heart, uniting in one feast the memory of the sacred 
councils of the fathers, for their sake have we come to behold the light of Orthodoxy; 
for they have been revealed as beacons guiding all to find proper doctrines.  
Let us ask cleansing for our souls, and let us strive to live our life piously, that we 
may have a portion with the holy fathers who have disclosed the riches of right 
doctrine unto us their children.  
Theotokion: God shone forth from thy womb, O Mother of God, and deified the 
human race, deeming it worthy of His own glory; and He hath shown all who ever 
proclaim thee truly the Theotokos to be His heirs.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
 
The false Severus, having traversed the right glorious Church of Christ, rightly 
becameth the object of the vengeance of the council of the pious fathers because of 
his blasphemy and deceptive verbal pretense; and, condemned, he hath been cut off 
from the company of the teachers of the Church.  
O wretched Severus, why dost thou commingle the natures of Christ and 
introduce confusion and admixture into them, thus adding to the Godhead, which is 
devoid of passion, the suffering on the Cross and the burial of the only-begotten 
Word of God? Wherefore, we abominate thy great blasphemy.  
Theotokion: The pride and audacity of the foe and the counsels of those who utter 
blasphemy against the Creator hath He Who was born of the Virgin set at naught; 
and as God Who hath lifted up the horn of His people and strengthened them with 
faith He hath made the council of the faithful unshakable, that we may all magnify 
thee, O Theotokos.  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Celebrating the memory of the divine fathers today, by their supplications, O most 
Compassionate One, we entreat Thee: deliver Thy people, O Lord, from all the harm 
of heresies, and grant that all may glorify the Father, the Word and the all-holy Spirit.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, palace of God! Rejoice, mountain overshadowed! Rejoice, bush unburnt! 
Rejoice, throne of glory! Rejoice, divine table! Rejoice, golden candlestick! Rejoice, 
most radiant lamp! Rejoice, O Mary, Virgin and Mother, thou light cloud!  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the Resurrection, and 4 of the fathers, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Having combined their spiritual art, and reviewed the heavenly and precious 
Symbol of Faith through the divine Spirit, the honored fathers inscribed it with a 
divine writing, wherein the right glorious, most noetically rich and truly divine wise 
ones teach most clearly that the Word is co-beginningless and equally everlasting with 
Him who begot Him, thus following most carefully the teachings of the apostles. 
(Twice)  
Verse: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers, * and praised and 
glorified is Thy name unto the ages.  
Having received all the noetic radiance of the Holy Spirit, as preachers of Christ, 
the divine defenders of the teachings of the Gospel and the traditions of the pious, 
inspired by God, proclaimed their most supra-natural decision; and having manifestly 
received from on high the revelation thereof, and being illumined, they expounded 
the Faith taught by God.  
Verse: Gather together unto Him His holy ones * who have established His 
covenant upon sacrifices.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
 
Having mustered all their pastoral skill and then being moved to a most just wrath, 
as champions, as most true servants of Christ and the most sacred keepers of the 
mysteries of divine preaching, the divine pastors drove forth the savage and 
pernicious wolves, casting them out of the fullness of the Church; and they fell, as it 
were, to their deaths as ones afflicted incurably.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: the composition of George of Nicomedia: 
When the choir of the Holy Fathers * flocked from the ends of the inhabited 
world, * they proclaimed the doctrine of the One Essence * and One Nature of the 
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, * thereby delivering plainly to the Church the mystery of 
theology. * As we acclaim them in faith, we call them blessed, saying: * O divine 
array, ye God-proclaiming hoplites of the Lord’s company, * ye most brilliant stars of 
the spiritual firmament, * ye impregnable towers of the mystical Sion, * ye fragrant 
flowers of Paradise, ye all-golden mouths of the Word, * the boast of Nicaea and 
adornment of the whole world. ** Intercede ye fervently in behalf of our souls.  
 
Both now ..., the Theotokion “Most blessed art thou, O Virgin Theotokos ...” 
Great Doxology, and after the Trisagion, the Troparion of the Resurrection 
alone. Ektenias, and dismissal. Catechetical Discourse of St. Theodore the 
Studite.  
Departure to the narthex. Glory ..., Both now ..., Evangelical Sticheron. First 
Hour. Final dismissal.  
AT THE HOURS 
Troparion of the Resurrection; Glory ..., that of the fathers; Both now ..., Theotokion 
of the Hour. Kontakion of the Resurrection. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes: 10 Troparia, 6 for the Resurrection, and 4 for the holy 
fathers, from ODE III of their canon.  
The mindless Arius, showing himself to be a servant of a created being, and 
Macedonius, likewise revealed as abominable, are equally tormented in the fire of 
Gehenna with the Hellenes.  
With the seven sacred councils of the holy fathers thou didst adorn the honored 
Church, O Christ, driving far away the darkness of deception as with the light of the 
seven beacons.  
The multifarious plague of the heretics destroyeth Thy flock, O Word; but the 
shepherds of Thy noetic sheep have changed this by their doctrine.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, thou hast given birth unto One of the uncreated 
Trinity, Who is dual in nature and volition, and Whose image we worship, filled with 
grace.  
After the Entrance: Troparia of the Resurrection and of the fathers; in Tone VIII:  
Most glorious art Thou, O Christ our God, * Thou hast established our Holy 
Fathers as luminaries upon the earth * and through them hath instructed us all in the 
true faith. ** O Most merciful One, glory be to Thee! 
Kontakion of the Resurrection; Glory ..., of the fathers in Tone VIII:  
The preaching of the Apostles and the doctrines of the Fathers confirmed the one 
Faith in the Church. * And wearing the garment of truth woven from the theology on 
high, ** she rightly divideth and glorifieth the great mystery of piety.  
Both now ..., that of the temple, if it be dedicated to the Theotokos, or “Protectress 
of Christians that cannot be put to shame ...” 
Prokimena: first, that of the Resurrection; 
Then that of the holy fathers, in Tone IV: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of 
our fathers, * and praised and glorified is Thy name unto the ages.  
Verse: For righteous art Thou in all which Thou hast done for us.  
Epistles: first, of the Sunday, and then: 
THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (13:7-16). 
Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the 
word of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. Jesus 
Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. Be not carried about with divers 
and strange doctrines: for it is a good thing that the heart be established with grace; 
not with meats, which have not profited those who have been occupied therein. We 
have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle. For the 

--- PAGE 16 ---
bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest 
for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the 
people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth therefore unto 
him without the camp, bearing his reproach. For here have we no continuing city, but 
we seek one to come. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God con-
tinually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name. But to do good and to 
communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.  
Alleluia; first, of the Tone, and then of the fathers, in Tone I: The God of gods, 
the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath called the earth from the rising of the sun 
and unto the setting thereof.  
Verse: Gather together unto Him His holy ones who have established His 
covenant upon sacrifices.  
Gospels: first, of the Sunday, and then: 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (17:1-13) 
These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the 
hour is come: glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee: as thou hast given 
him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given 
him. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus 
Christ, whom thou hast sent. I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the 
work which thou gavest me to do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine 
own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. I have 
manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they 
were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy word. Now they have known 
that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee. For I have given unto them 
the words which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have known 
surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me. I 
pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for 
they are thine. And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them. 
And now I am no more in the world, but ye are in the world, and I come to thee. 
Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that 
they may be one, as we are. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy 
name: those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of 
perdition; that the Scripture might be fulfilled. And now come I to thee; and these 
things I speak in the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.  
Communion Verse for the Resurrection: Praise the Lord from the heavens, 
praise Him in the highest.  
Communion Verse for the saint: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is 
meet for the upright.  
