--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE IMAGE 
OF OUR MOST HOLY LADY, THE THEOTOKOS, KNOWN AS THE “ICON OF THE 
THREE HANDS”, WHICH IS ENSHRINED AT THE MONASTERY OF KHILANDAR 
ON HOLY MOUNT ATHOS 
AT LITTLE VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy icon, in Tone II: 
Thou didst show thyself to be a good comforter to thy faithful servant, the 
venerable John of Damascus. Grant consolation also unto us, thy servants, and save 
us by thy supplications.  
In the miraculous arrival of thine icon thou didst reveal to us thy good pleasure. 
Wherefore, Athos rejoiceth and the Monastery of Khilandar joineth chorus, and with 
them all the land of Serbia.  
Thou wast ever the protectress and helper of the land of Serbia, O Theotokos, and 
of the Monastery of Khilandar as well. Disdain not now the supplications of thy 
faithful servants, but defend all who praise thee.  
Thine icon “of the three hands”, O Theotokos, is spiritual healing for all the 
faithful; and having recourse thereto, we fall down before thee and pray: Do thou 
never forget us, O our loving Mother!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O joy of the ranks of heaven and gladness of all the faithful on earth, defender of 
the whole race of Serbia, which thou hast chosen for thyself as thy dwelling-place on 
earth, for thou didst twice choose a Serbian monastery as the habitation of thy 
precious icons: the Patriarchate of Pech for that which was first painted, and 
Khilandar for thine icon “of the three hands.” Wherefore, gazing upon thine icon, we 
bow down before thee and cry out to thee in thanksgiving: O gracious Mother, glory 
and praise be unto thee throughout all ages!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone III:  
We praise thee, O most pure Theotokos, for by the arrival of thy most precious 
icon “of the three hands” thou hast manifest thyself as the protectress of monastics 
and all Orthodox Christians.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness. 
By the arrival of thine icon, O all-immaculate one, are we filled with an abundance 
of grace; wherefore, we praise thee, O unwedded Mother.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
Through thy holy icon healings and cures are bestowed in abundance upon all who 
approach it with faith. Heal thou also my soul and body, O only all-hymned one.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Prepare thyself, O Monastery of Khilandar! Adorn thyself, O Holy Mount Athos! 
For, lo! the wondrous icon of the Mother of God hath traveled from Serbia, borne 
upon a donkey whom no one guided. And it hath arrived on Mount Athos, at the 
gates of the Monastery of Khilandar, emitting a light of ineffable brilliance, dispelling 
all darkness and illumining all with rays of her mercy.  
Troparion of the holy icon, in Tone IV: 
Shedding rays of light like a star, * thy most precious icon “of the three hands” * 
came miraculously from Serbia to Athos; * and the Monastery of Khilandar, 
reverently receiving it as a divine gift from on high, * doth glorify thee, O Sovereign 
Lady, * and crieth out with compunction: ** Deprive us not of thy mercy, but abide 
with us forever!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS 
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,”  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy icon: 4 in Tone II: 
Come, let us rejoice in the Ever-virgin for the sake of her goodness! Come, let us 
pay homage to our Queen, the Theotokos! Come, let us fall down before and kiss her 
icon “of the three hands”, which, through the will of the all-immaculate Virgin, was 
borne to the Monastery of Khilandar by a donkey whom no one guided! And making 
obeisance before her, let us pray with compunction: O our most merciful protectress 
and helper, help and protect us against all misfortunes of soul and body, and grant us 
a sinless life, that we may conceive and bear the fruits of repentance! (Twice)  
O Virgin Theotokos, Mother of tender compassion, speedy comfort for the sick 
and grieving: Show forth thy mercy even upon us who are in grief and who abide in 
sins. With goodly knowledge illumine our hearts, which are darkened by ignorance, 
and dispel the darkness of delusion.  
All the generations of mankind offer gifts of right goodly praise unto thee as the 
Queen and Mother of God. Hierarchs preach concerning thee, priests bless thee, 
monks and laymen offer thee reverence, as do people of every age and class; and we 
flee beneath thy protection. Protect and preserve us by thy supplications, and save 
our souls from misfortunes.  
And 4 Stichera, in Tone IV: 
O our most holy Lady Theotokos, while the heavens declare the glory of God they 
likewise proclaim thy glory: for by the most wondrous journey of thine icon “of the 
three hands” thou didst astonish the whole land of Serbia; through its miraculous 
appearance all of Athos hath been sanctified; and in its arrival the Monastery of 
Khilandar rejoiced greatly. Wherefore, we also cry aloud unto thee: O Mother, thou 
art our hope! Be thou our protection, help and aid! (Twice)  
O most pure Virgin, Mother of the Lord Most High, after God, who is like unto 
thee in heaven or on earth? For in glory and honor thou dost surpass the denizens of 
heaven and all mortals. In thy precious icon “of the three hands” thou didst come to 
the Monastery of Khilandar, where even now thou abidest and rulest as abbess. 
Remain with us forever, granting us great and rich mercy.  
O supremely good Virgin Theotokos, in thy loving presence the Monastery of 
Khilandar hath been revealed to be a city of heaven and an ever-radiant temple, 
wherein thy miraculous icon “of the three hands” is displayed as a great treasure; and, 
bowing down before it, we kiss it with joy and fear, and cry out to thee: Illumine us 
also with the radiance of the grace of thine aid! 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Today all the Christ-loving lands rejoice; the divinely praised Holy Mountain of 
Athos joineth chorus; and the honorable Monastery of Khilandar is gladdened: for 
the glory of the Mother of God hath shone forth upon all in the most glorious 
journey of her icon “of the three hands.” And, kissing it with love, we reverently gaze 
upon the Ever-virgin and cry out unto her: O most merciful Lady, thou didst once tell 
us: “My grace and power are with this icon.” And we truly believe what thou didst 
say, O Theotokos, for in this icon thou hast been with us to this day. ‘Wherefore, we 
cry aloud unto thee: Thy mercy is ineffable! Henceforth abide with us forever!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons: 
A READING FROM GENESIS 
Jacob went forth from the well of the oath, and departed unto Harran, and came to 
a certain place and slept there, for the sun had gone down; and he took one of the 
stones of the place, and put it at his head, and lay down to sleep in that place, and 
dreamed, and beheld a ladder fixed on the earth, whose top reached to heaven, and 
the angels of God ascended and descended on it. And the Lord stood upon it, and 
said, “I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac. Fear 
not; the land on which thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And thy seed 
shall be as the sand of the earth; and it shall spread abroad to the sea, and to the 
south, and to the north, and to the east; and in thee and in thy seed shall all the tribes 
of the earth be blessed. And behold, I am with thee to preserve thee continually in all 
the way wherein thou shalt go; and I will not desert thee, until I have done all that I 
have said to thee.” And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said, “The Lord is in this 
place, and I knew it not!” And he was afraid, and said, “How fearful is this place! This 
is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!”  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF EZEKIEL 
Thus saith the Lord: “It shall come to pass from the eighth day and onward, that 
the priests shall offer your wholeburnt-offerings on the altar, and your peace-
offerings; and I will accept you,” saith the Lord. Then He brought me back by way of 
the outer gate of the sanctuary that looketh eastward; and it was shut. And the Lord 
said to me, “This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no one shall pass 
through it; for the Lord God of Israel shall enter by it, and it shall be shut. For the 
Prince, He shall sit in it, to eat bread before the Lord; He shall go in by the way of the 
porch of the gate, and shall go forth by the way of the same.” And He brought me in 
by the way of the gate that looketh northward, in front of the house; and I looked, 
and, behold! the house was full of the glory of the Lord.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS 
Wisdom hath built a house for herself and set up seven pillars. She hath killed her 
beasts; she hath mingled her wine in a bowl and prepared her table. She hath sent 
forth her servants, calling with a loud proclamation to the feast, saying: “Whoso is 

--- PAGE 5 ---
foolish, let him turn aside to me.” And to those who want understanding, she saith: 
“Come, eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you. Leave folly, 
that ye may reign forever; and seek wisdom, and improve understanding by 
knowledge.” He that reproveth evil men shall get dishonor to himself; and he that 
rebuketh an ungodly man shall disgrace himself. Rebuke not evil men, lest they 
should hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. Give an opportunity to a 
wise man, and he will be wiser: instruct a just man, and he will receive more 
instruction. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the counsel of the 
law is the character of a sound mind. For in this way thou shalt live long, and years of 
thy life shall be added to thee.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera: 
In Tone I: Rejoice, O Mother of mercy, for thou dost inexhaustibly pour forth 
upon us sinners the gifts of thy grace. By thine intercession before thy beloved Son 
and our God thou healest the wounds of our sins. How many sinners who have called 
upon thee with tears hast thou mercifully rescued from the very depths of their fall 
and been rendered worthy to enter eternally into blessed joy? Wherefore, we cry aloud 
unto thee: Glory to thee, O most merciful Mother!  
The venerable John of Damascus, the earthly angel and heavenly man, possessed 
of fervent love for thee, O Virgin Theotokos, prayed with compunction before thine 
icon. Yet through the intrigues of the iniquitous iconoclastic emperor his right hand 
was cut off. But, asking it to be given back to him by the infidel tyrant, with tears he 
prayed to thee before thy precious icon, that it be healed, and thou didst speedily 
hearken unto his entreaty, and appearing to him in a dream, didst grant him the 
restoration of his severed hand.  
In Tone II: A great wonder was wrought through thine icon, O most hymned 
Mother of God, which no one can explain: How was the severed right hand of the 
venerable one healed in a single night and found to be whole, the only sign of its 
former wound being a red mark about his wrist? But knowing thee to be the 
comforter of the sorrowful and healer of souls and bodies, we are truly aware that 
naught is impossible for thee, and with all our soul we cry out to thee: Glory to thee, 
O Queen of heaven!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone III: 
Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth-born rejoice, for the Theotokos hath 
shown forth her mercy, healing the severed hand of the venerable one, setting her 
divine icon “of the three hands” in the abbot’s place of the holy Monastery of 
Khilandar, and revealing to one of the monks that in her precious icon she herself 
desireth to rule as abbess in that monastery, where it abideth to this day and by her 
omnipotent intercession unceasingly granteth great mercy to all.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone I: 
Together heaven and earth praise thee, O pure Theotokos, as the divine river of 
living waters, the opening of the doors of paradise, and the cleansing of the whole 
world.  
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation.  
All are filled with joy and gladness, glorifying the most glorious arrival of thy holy 
icon “of the three hands.” Accept thou the entreaties of all the monks of the 
Monastery of Khilandar, and fulfill their petitions.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
The ranks of the angels minister unto thee as servants, O Queen of all, and 
reverently honor thy holy icon. How can we hymn it fittingly, who are lowly and 
unworthy?  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Come, ye faithful, let us bow down before the image of the most pure Virgin; let 
us fall down before the icon “of the three hands”; let us fall prostrate before our 
Queen, the Theotokos, crying out with love: O kind-hearted one, ask thy Son, Christ 
our God, that He grant grace and mercy unto us, thy servants, and to all the Christ-
loving people of Serbia!  
At the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the holy icon, in Tone IV: 
Shedding rays of light like a star, * thy most precious icon “of the three hands” * 
came miraculously from Serbia to Athos; * and the Monastery of Khilandar, 
reverently receiving it as a divine gift from on high, * doth glorify thee, O Sovereign 
Lady, * and crieth out with compunction: ** Deprive us not of thy mercy, but abide 
with us forever! (Thrice) 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy icon, in Tone IV: 
Shedding rays of light like a star, * thy most precious icon “of the three hands” * 
came miraculously from Serbia to Athos; * and the Monastery of Khilandar, 
reverently receiving it as a divine gift from on high, * doth glorify thee, O Sovereign 
Lady, * and crieth out with compunction: ** Deprive us not of thy mercy, but abide 
with us forever! (Thrice) 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
We offer unto thee hymns of thanksgiving, O Theotokos, before thy holy icon “of 
the three hands”, which beareth witness to thine ineffable mercy toward our 
venerable father John of Damascus. Thereby save us also, and all who piously bow 
down before it.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
O most hymned Lady and Virgin, save all who place their trust in thee and have 
recourse to thy precious icon, which is a token of thy goodwill toward us. Kissing it, 
we cry out to thee: Forget us not, O our ever-wakeful preserver!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O most holy Virgin, 
divinely chosen Maiden, and we honor thy holy image, whereby thou pourest 
forth healings upon all who have recourse to it with faith.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: O God, give Thy judgment to the king, and Thy righteousness to the son of the 
king.  
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Illumine us with thy light, O most pure one, and grant us a helping hand, for we 
know and confess that it would be better for us that the sun be extinguished than to 
be deprived of thy mediation for us before God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation 
and generation.  
Verse: My heart hath poured forth a good word; I speak of my works to the 
king.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, §4 (LK. 1: 39-49, 56) 
In those days, Mary arose, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of 
Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came to 
pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; 
and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost: and she spake out with a loud voice, 
and said: “Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And 
whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo, as 
soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my 
womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of 
those things which were told her from the Lord.” And Mary said: “My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath re-
garded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all 
generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; 
and holy is His name.” And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned 
to her own house.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Falling down before thy precious image, O most pure Theotokos, we render thee 
homage; for thee alone do we all have as a refuge and bulwark, and we glorify thee 
without ceasing, O Mother who lovest thy children.  
Canon of the Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is “We flee beneath thy protection, O 
Theotokos”, the composition of Archpriest Mirko, in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: There is none likened unto Thee, * O exceedingly glorious Lord; * for 
by Thy mighty arm * Thou didst deliver the people * whom Thou hast ac-
quired, O Lover of mankind.  
Illumine my soul, mind and heart, O all-merciful Mother of God, and grant me the 
gift of hymning thee, the mighty intercessor, the mediatress of good things and sweet 
consolation amid sorrows.  
Unto the venerable John of Damascus thou didst show thyself to be a radiant 
cloud when thou didst hearken quickly to his supplication and restore his severed 
hand to health.  
Today all the ends of the earth celebrate as one, hymning thee together, the 
steadfast help and protectress of our life.  
Having acquired thy most precious and wonder-working icon “of the three 
hands”, the holy Monastery of Khilandar cried out to thee: Rejoice, O unbreakable 
rampart and mighty help of this monastery!  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth ..., 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE III  
Irmos: Holy art Thou, O Lord our God! * Make steadfast our hearts, that we 
may cry to Thee unceasingly: * There is none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord!  
The assemblies of the faithful have come together today for the glorification of thy 
tender compassion, which thou didst reveal to the venerable John of Damascus, by 
healing his severed hand.  
We direct the eyes of our hearts to thee, O Lady, when we gaze upon the 
miraculous icon “of the three hands.” Be thou a might and protection for us, and 
grant that we may have a share on high.  
We hymn thee, O most hymned Virgin whom the hosts of heaven glorify, save us 
from sinful exile and from all the sorrows which assail us.  
Entreat Him to Whom thou hast given birth, O unwedded Mother, on behalf of 
all who have recourse to thy precious icon, that He may defend and enlighten them.  
The Sessional Hymn of the holy icon, in Tone IV: 
When the monks of Khilandar beheld thine all-precious icon, O Lady, borne to the 
gates of their monastery on a donkey whom no one guided, they rejoiced with great 
joy and, bowing down before it, glorifying thy goodwill towards them.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
ODE IV  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord, * for Thou hast appeared upon 
the earth; * and I have glorified Thy power.  
O most pure Virgin, thou didst pour forth the ever-flowing Fountain Who 
watereth all the valleys. Drown thou also all our temptations, and utterly destroy 
them.  
Come, let us all hymn the ladder of Jacob, the fleece of Gideon, the mediatress of 
joy, the might and boast of all the faithful, saying: Rejoice, O pure Virgin!  
Kissing thy precious image, O most pure one, we flee to thy goodness and, 
bending our knees and weeping, we pray: Disdain not our sighs, but be thou a 
protection and helper for us on the day of judgment.  
O thou who hast given birth to the Word of God, visit us in thy grace, illumine our 
darkened souls and hearts, and grant us deliverance from misfortunes and forgiveness 
of all our sins.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Lord Who alone lovest mankind, * enlighten my heart I pray Thee, * 
with the law of Thy commandments, * and have mercy upon me.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Thy most honored icon “of the three hands” beareth clear witness unto all that 
thou art our might and strength; wherefore, we glorify thy maternal loving-kindness 
toward us.  
With tears the venerable John of Damascus prayed to thee before thy precious 
icon; and thou didst quickly hearken to his prayer, and didst grant healing to his 
severed hand.  
O mediatress of joy, accept the entreaties of thy servants, set at naught all the 
counsels of the adverse foe, preserve thy flock unharmed, and save us from all 
tribulations.  
Delivered from transgressions by thy holy supplications, O blessed Theotokos, we 
all wisely bless thee.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: At evening, in the morning, and at noon we praise Thee, * O Lord our 
God, * do Thou Hearken unto our supplication.  
We bless and glorify thee, O Virgin Theotokos who art full of grace, for thou dost 
ever overshadow us with thy grace, protecting and helping us, and delivering us from 
the wicked foe.  
He Who rideth upon the cherubim and is hymned by the seraphim appeared from 
thy womb, and all humanity was saved thereby; wherefore, we glorify thee as our 
helper unashamed.  
O ye people, come to the veneration of the Mother of God, for the grace of her 
light hath shone forth even upon us and taught us to chant: O thou who art full of 
grace, grant that we may receive a share on high.  
Thou art truly the joy of the angels and the gladness of all mankind, O Theotokos. 
Save the souls of all who hymn thee, O pure one.  
Kontakion of the holy icon, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Today the Virgin revealeth her goodwill toward us, * and Mount Athos offereth 
thanks unto her. * Angels and monks together give glory. * For the icon “of the three 
hands” * doth travel miraculously from Serbia, * and for our sake hath come and 
made its abode ** in the holy Monastery of Khilandar.  
Ikos: Behold a truly and most wondrous occurrence: thy most glorious icon “of 
the three hands”, which Savva, the primate of Serbia, brought as a priceless gift to the 
Serbian land from the holy Lavra of Savva the Sanctified with its blessing, is 
miraculously borne to Athos from Serbia on a dumb donkey, and hath arrived at the 
holy Monastery of Khilandar. And the monks of that monastery, joyously receiving it 
as a gift from heaven, placed it in the sanctuary of the cathedral of their monastery, 
for they understood that this was a clear manifestation of thy goodwill toward them. 
Wherefore, with joy and love they bowed down before thy most honored icon, 
kissing it and chanting unto thee: Rejoice, O speedy help of all the faithful, who hast 
given us thy holy icon as a token of thy mercy!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: O beginningless Word, the only-begotten Son, * Who existed in the 
beginning * with the Father and the Spirit: * blessed and supremely exalted art 
Thou, * O God of our fathers! 
The Creator of all found thee alone to be pure, and He dwelt within thee, as 
within a most comely temple; wherefore, we chant unto thee: O Mother of Christ our 
God, blessed art thou!  
With thy mercy thou dost enrich the whole world and enlightenest men’s souls, O 
thou who alone art all-hymned; wherefore, we chant unto thee: O Mother of Christ 
our God, blessed art thou!  
O Virgin who knewest not wedlock, thou hast been shown to be a tree bearing 
much fruit, nurturing all with heavenly food. Pour forth good works upon all, that we 
may all chant unto thee: O Mother of Christ our God, blessed art thou!  
By the arrival of thine image we are delivered from evils, and all who deal wickedly 
with thy servants are put to shame; wherefore, we cry aloud: O Mother of Christ our 
God, blessed art thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Christ God, Who appeared in the form of an Angel * in the fiery furnace 
* to those who sang therein, * ye children, hymn; ye people, bless * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Come, and with voices of supplication let us all hymn the pure Virgin. For, lo! 
gladness now approacheth and the faithful are saved. Let us cry aloud in gladness: 
Hymn ye and exalt the Theotokos throughout all ages!  
The depth which even the eyes of angels cannot plumb, the height which the 
thoughts of men cannot scale, hath come to us in the image “of the three hands”; 
wherefore, we bow down before the precious image and cry out: Hymn ye and exalt 
the Theotokos throughout all ages!  
Rejoicing, we approach thy precious image and, praying with compunction, cry out 
from the depths of our soul: Hymn ye and exalt the Theotokos throughout all ages!  
Mount Sinai burned with fire, for it could not endure the descent of the glory of 
God; and thou, without being consumed, didst bear within thy womb the Word of 
God, Who is wholly divine fire. Wherefore, we chant: Hymn ye and exalt the 
Theotokos throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: O undefiled Theotokos, * with never-silent hymns * we magnify thine 
Offspring born without seed, * Christ our God. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Today Orthodox Serbia and all of Mount Athos rejoiceth, and more especially the 
Monastery of Khilandar, for the most honored icon “of the three hands” hath come 
and made its abode within it, revealing the goodwill of the Mother of God toward us.  
Having thy holy icon “of the three hands” as its abbess, as was thy will, O 
Theotokos, the Monastery of Khilandar is filled with the sweet savor of holiness and 
doth unceasingly glorify thy name.  
O most comely flower who fillest all with sweet fragrance, repelling the assaults of 
the adversary and filling all with gladness: be thou for us a rampart, a wall of 
protection and a saving refuge.  
Thou hast given birth unto Him Whom the angels hymn, yet hast remained a 
virgin; wherefore, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O speedy aid and mighty helper of the 
whole world!  
Exapostilarion of the holy icon: 
Illumining all with the light of thy tender compassion, thou healest every sickness 
and infirmity. Forget not us, thy faithful servants, but let the light of thy countenance 
be signed upon us all the days of our life.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
May thy most wondrous icon, O Theotokos, be for us a pillar of fire guiding us to 
the heavenly inheritance, and let the light of thy countenance be signed upon us all 
the days of our life.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy icon, in Tone IV: 
Foreseeing thee from afar, the divinely inspired Prophet David said: The rich 
among the people shall entreat thy countenance. For, lo! today all the faithful fall 
down before thee, O blessed Theotokos, and venerate thy precious icon “of the three 
hands.” They are sanctified in both soul and body, and with all their soul and heart 
cry out to thee: Thou art our trust and hope! Abide with us throughout the ages!  
Possessing thy most precious icon “of the three hands” as a token of salvation, the 
Monastery of Khilandar rejoiceth today, O Theotokos, and crieth out to thee with 
faith and love: O most merciful one, preserve our monastery and homeland from the 
corrupting teachings of unbelief and superstition; increase love and oneness of mind; 
and grant, O most good one, that we may ever hymn thee.  
O supremely adorned Ever-virgin, who art blessed throughout all ages, disdain not 
the supplications of those who call upon thee, but hearken to the heartfelt sighing of 
those who gaze upon thee. And as thou didst quickly hasten to the aid of the 
venerable John, so hasten with meekness to our souls. Be for us a guide to the 
heavenly homeland, and enroll us among the blessed councils of the elect of God.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
O most holy and most blessed one, we know thee to be full of loving-kindness, for 
thine eyes look down upon the poor, and thy hands are extended to orphans. Behold, 
bending our knees before thy holy icon, we beseech thee: Forsake us not in our grief, 
but turn thou thy maternal face to our supplications. Be not mindful of our iniquities, 
but, in that thou art merciful, save our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Beholding thy most wondrous image, O Mother of tender compassion, we truly 
gaze upon thee thyself, who art the Theotokos, and hear thy melodious voice, which 
to thy first-painted icon said with authority: “My grace shall be with this.” This same 
grace truly abideth in similar images, and aboundeth in the icon “of the three hands”, 
which we honor, offering thanksgiving unto thee, saying: Rejoice, a thou who art full 
of grace! The Lord is with thee, and for thy sake is with us also, saving us throughout 
the ages!  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the most holy Theotokos.  
The assemblies of the faithful have come together today for the glorification of thy 
tender compassion, which thou didst reveal to the venerable John of Damascus, by 
healing his severed hand.  
We direct the eyes of our hearts to thee, O Lady, when we gaze upon the 
miraculous icon “of the three hands.” Be thou a might and protection for us, and 
grant that we may have a share on high.  
We hymn thee, O most hymned Virgin whom the hosts of heaven glorify, save us 
from sinful exile and from all the sorrows which assail us.  
Entreat Him to Whom thou hast given birth, O unwedded Mother, on behalf of 
all who have recourse to thy precious icon, that He may defend and enlighten them.  
We bless and glorify thee, O Virgin Theotokos who art full of grace, for thou dost 
ever overshadow us with thy grace, protecting and helping us, and delivering us from 
the wicked foe.  
He Who rideth upon the cherubim and is hymned by the seraphim appeared from 
thy womb, and all humanity was saved thereby; wherefore, we glorify thee as our 
helper unashamed.  
O ye people, come to the veneration of the Mother of God, for the grace of her 
light hath shone forth even upon us and taught us to chant: O thou who art full of 
grace, grant that we may receive a share on high.  
Thou art truly the joy of the angels and the gladness of all mankind, O Theotokos. 
Save the souls of all who hymn thee, O pure one.  
Troparion of the holy icon, in Tone IV: 
Shedding rays of light like a star, * thy most precious icon “of the three hands” * 
came miraculously from Serbia to Athos; * and the Monastery of Khilandar, 
reverently receiving it as a divine gift from on high, * doth glorify thee, O Sovereign 
Lady, * and crieth out with compunction: ** Deprive us not of thy mercy, but abide 
with us forever!  
Kontakion of the holy icon, in Tone III:  
Today the Virgin revealeth her goodwill toward us, * and Mount Athos offereth 
thanks unto her. * Angels and monks together give glory. * For the icon “of the three 
hands” * doth travel miraculously from Serbia, * and for our sake hath come and 
made its abode ** in the holy Monastery of Khilandar.  
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: the Song of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS, § 240 (PHIL. 2: 5-11) 
Brethren: Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: Who, being in 
the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made Himself of 
no reputation, and took upon Him the form of a servant, and was made in the 
likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, and 
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath 
highly exalted Him, and given Him a name which is above every name: that at the 
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and 
things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, 
to the glory of God the Father.  
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 54 (LK. 10: 38-42, 11: 27-28)  
In those days, Jesus entered into a certain village: and a certain woman named 
Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat 
at Jesus’ feet, and heard his word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and 
came to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve 
alone? bid her therefore that she help me. And Jesus answered and said unto her, 
Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: But one thing is 
needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from 
her. And it came to pass, as he spake these things, a certain woman of the company 
lifted up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the 
paps which thou hast sucked. But he said, Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the 
word of God, and keep it. 
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
 
 
