--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 10th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER ANTHONY OF THE CAVES OF 
KIEV, FIRST OF ALL THE MONKS OF RUSSIA  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
O father Anthony, thou didst follow in the footsteps * of the great fathers of the 
Holy Mountain; * and struggling in the flesh like an incorporeal being, * through 
virtue thou didst become a model for many. * Wherefore, thou hast been deemed 
worthy of gifts of miracles by Christ, ** to heal the divers ailments of all. Pray thou 
that our souls be. saved! (Twice)  
O father Anthony, thou wast a leader of monastics, * offering thyself unto God as 
an un-bloody sacrifice * through the ascetic endeavor of philosophy; * and by 
humility, exalted morals and countless struggles * thou didst put the enemy to shame, 
O venerable one. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved!  
O venerable father Anthony, * thy radiant memorial * hath been shown to be full 
of joy and gladness; * wherefore, we, thy sacred children, assembling, * hold spiritual 
festival and glorify the Lord ** Who hath truly glorified thee.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Today Mount Athos, which received thee as a new Abraham the sojourner, 
rejoiceth most gloriously, O father; and thy homeland, O blessed one, having thee 
living again within its bounds, is exceeding glad; and the cave wherein thou didst 
struggle is adorned by thee. The most splendid city of Kiev, celebrating thy memory, 
chanteth solemn hymns to the Lord, Who hath bestowed thee upon it as an impreg-
nable rampart. And we, thy children, instructed by thy teaching, now celebrate thy 
most glorious repose, and beseech thee: Pray thou that our souls be saved!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: * Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
O father, thou hast most gloriously passed * from earthly things to the heavenly 
abodes, * and there thou hast been deemed worthy of the honors of the venerable. * 
With them do thou pray ** that our souls be saved.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Through asceticism, O father, * thou didst mortify the senses of the body; * 
wherefore, thou didst dwell in a dark cave * as though in a most splendid bridal-
chamber, ** whither thou didst draw a multitude of disciples unto Christ.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Delivering from barbarian invasion * thy flock, which honoreth thee, * and who 
celebrateth thy repose, * O venerable one, ** pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Thou didst erect an all-honorable temple of the Mother of God, as she herself 
desired, and therein didst assemble a multitude of disciples, to hymn the Lady and 
Theotokos. Her do thou entreat, we pray thee, O venerable Anthony, that she not 
forsake thy sacred flock, as thou didst promise, delivering and saving it from 
incursions of adversaries, that we may all unceasingly honor thee with hymns as our 
caring father, asking that through thee we may receive great mercy from Christ.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Leaving behind the tumult of the world, * in accordance with the Gospel thou 
didst follow after Christ, rejecting the world; * and living an angelic life, thou didst 
attain unto the calm haven of Holy Mount Athos, * from whence, with the blessing 
of the fathers, thou didst go to Mount Kiev; * and living there an industrious life, 
thou didst enlighten thy homeland; * and showing a multitude of monastics the path 
which leadeth to the kingdom of heaven, * thou didst lead them unto Christ. * Him 
do thou beseech, O venerable Anthony, ** that He save our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the venerable one: 4 in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”:  
When divine desire * fell upon thee, O venerable one, * thou didst account 
passionate attachments to the world * to be harmful; * wherefore, forsaking thy 
homeland, * thou didst arrive on the Holy Mountain, * and there, in the midst of the 
fathers, * thou didst shine forth in virtue * like a beacon, O Anthony. * Entreat 
Christ, Whom thou didst serve from thy youth, ** that He save and enlighten our 
souls. (Twice)  
When thou wast set afire * by the love of Christ, O venerable one, * the wisdom 
and glory of this world * didst thou despise * as things which pass away; * wherefore, 
thou didst make for thyself a cave, * and therein didst struggle like an incorporeal 
being, * for which cause thou wast deemed worthy from on high * of the honors of 
the incorporeal ones. * Standing with them before the throne of Christ, ** pray thou 
that He save and enlighten our souls.  
When thou didst receive divine love * into thy heart, O father, * thou didst enter 
into a dark cave * as though it were a most splendid bridal-chamber, * and there thou 
wast enriched * with the understanding of ineffable things, * to behold the things of 
the future * as though they were present, * and to speak of them plainly unto all. * 
Entreat Christ, for Whom thou didst labor from thy youth, O venerable one, ** that 
He save and enlighten our souls.  
And 4 Stichera in Tone V, Spec. Mel.: “O venerable father ...”: 
O venerable father Anthony, having illumined thy mind with the grace of the most 
holy Spirit, as one with foresight thou didst therewith prophetically predict the wrath 
of God which would fall upon Orthodoxy. Wherefore, thou didst entrust the defense 
against foes unto Simon, and before the construction of the church thou didst foretell 
unto him that he would be laid to rest therein. Wherefore, we continually hymn thee 
as a mediator of good things for all, asking that through thee we may receive great 
mercy from Christ. (Twice)  
O venerable father Anthony, fulfilling the commandments of Christ, the true 
Shepherd and Teacher, and showing forth love even after thy departure, by thy 
supplications and appearance thou didst transform the deadly illness of Erasmus, who 
was living in sloth, pining for possessions; and having given him time for repentance, 
thou didst guide others to chastity. Wherefore, entreat Christ, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
O venerable father Anthony, with God’s help thou didst steer the ship of thy mind 
with chastity, safely sailing across the passion-fraught deep of the sea of this life 
impelled by the sail of the most holy Spirit, and didst reach the calm haven of 
paradise, where the habitation of the saints and the resting-place of the righteous are. 
With them do thou pray, we beseech thee, that we also may obtain entry there.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Hard was thy way of life and thy labors for God, as the fathers of the Holy 
Mountain learned. Wherefore, in accordance with God’s providence, they sent thee to 
thy homeland, saying: “Go, child, that through thee God may become known to 
those ignorant of Him there.” There, when thou didst arrive, O venerable one, thou 
didst enlighten thy native land and didst become a leader of monks, bringing a 
multitude of them to Christ. Wherefore, pray thou that we who celebrate thy most 
splendid repose may be preserved unvanquished by the enemy, and that our souls be 
saved.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 

--- PAGE 5 ---
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera: 
In Tone I: Thou wast named by divine providence, O Anthony, receiving a name 
in accord with thy deeds and thy manner of life; for having assembled a multitude of 
those who followed thy teachings, thou didst lead them unto God. As one who 
dwelleth with the venerable and the righteous, stand with them before the Trinity, 
and pray for all who hymn thy most glorious repose.  
When thou didst flee the passion-fraught darkness of this world, O venerable and 
most wondrous Anthony, thou didst make thine abode in a cave, where thou didst 
penetrate into the depths of divine understanding. Wherefore, thou wast deemed 
worthy of farsightedness, to perceive things which are remote, and to speak plainly of 
them as though they were near at hand; and suffering pain for the offenses of the 
people, and for the things which would come to pass because of the sins of mankind, 
as a prophet thou didst foretell the invasions of barbarians. Pray thou, O father, we 
entreat thee, that we be delivered from such a threat, and that our souls may be saved.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
In Tone II: What human understanding or tongue can recount or praise thy life as 
is meet? For the angels themselves marveled at the life thou didst lead on earth while 
in the body, and praised Christ, Who bestowed upon thee such a victory over the 
passions, O venerable one. Him do thou beseech, O all-famed and wondrous 
Anthony, that he who hath fashioned this praise from thee may, as far as possible, be 
saved.  
Blessed is the cave which contained thy precious relics, O venerable one, from 
whence healings are poured forth upon the faithful; and blessed are the disciples who 
acquired such a teacher as thee and called themselves children of such a father, O 
most wondrous Anthony, thou advocate for our souls.  
In Tone IV: Now, O venerable Anthony, thy most precious and sacred body, 
which lieth in the cave, wherein thou didst struggle greatly even during thy lifetime, 
doth pour forth healings in abundance upon those who have recourse unto it with 
faith. Wherefore, we entreat thee: By thy supplications do thou ever grant health of 
soul unto those who call thee blessed.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Great is the boldness and faith which thou didst acquire before God, O venerable 
Anthony; for as the Prophet Gideon tested victory with the fleece, so didst thou, O 
father, desire to learn through a fleece which site was pleasing to the Sovereign Lady 
and Queen. Wherefore, thou didst say: “If I have found grace before thee, let dew 
cover all this land, but let the place whereon thou dost desire thy temple to be built be 
dry. And afterward, let there be dew upon that place.” And thou didst receive both 
these things, O father. Wherefore, thou didst build the most honorable church of the 
Mother of God. With her entreat Christ, we pray, that our souls be saved.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Thou didst follow the footsteps of Anthony the Great, O venerable one. * For he 
made his abode in the desert for the sake of stillness, * and was deemed worthy to 
have angels with whom to converse; * while thou didst seclude thyself within a cave 
underground, * and wast deemed worthy to behold ineffable light. * Wherefore, 
emulating his way of life, * thou didst receive a name in accordance with thy deeds. * 
Standing with him before the Holy Trinity, ** pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Thou didst shine forth in a dark place * like a most radiant beacon, * and as the 
prophet said * thou didst flourish like a palm-tree in the house of God; * and thou 
didst offer thyself unto the Master * as a most holy fruit * and a living, un-bloody 
sacrifice, O father. * Wherefore, assembling with love, ** we all ever bless thee as is 
meet.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
 
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
The cave wherein lieth * thy sacred body, * O venerable Anthony, * doth by the 
power of the most holy Spirit * heal the divers ailments of those who approach it 
with faith: * the demons are expelled from mortals, * and paralytics walk away, 
receiving health. * And, praising the Lord, we say: ** Precious in the sight of the Lord 
is the death of His saints!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Wondrous is the influence and great the faith which thou hast acquired, O 
venerable Anthony, emulating the Prophet Elijah; for he drew down fire from heaven 
to consume the sacrifice, while thou didst draw down fire from heaven by thy 
supplication, to consume and cleanse the place where thou didst desire to erect the 
most precious temple of the Lady Theotokos. Wherefore, blessing thee as one who 
dwelleth with the venerable and who emulateth the prophets, we pray: Entreat Christ, 
that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O all-pure 
one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign Lady, ** 
the intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 
After the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Leaving behind the tumult of the world, * in accordance with the Gospel thou 
didst follow after Christ, rejecting the world; * and living an angelic life, thou didst 
attain unto the calm haven of Holy Mount Athos, * from whence, with the blessing 
of the fathers, thou didst go to Mount Kiev; * and living there an industrious life, 
thou didst enlighten thy homeland; * and showing a multitude of monastics the path 
which leadeth to the kingdom of heaven, * thou didst lead them unto Christ. * Him 
do thou beseech, O venerable Anthony, ** that He save our souls. (Twice)  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice!...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Leaving behind the tumult of the world, * in accordance with the Gospel thou 
didst follow after Christ, rejecting the world; * and living an angelic life, thou didst 
attain unto the calm haven of Holy Mount Athos, * from whence, with the blessing 
of the fathers, thou didst go to Mount Kiev; * and living there an industrious life, 
thou didst enlighten thy homeland; * and showing a multitude of monastics the path 
which leadeth to the kingdom of heaven, * thou didst lead them unto Christ. * Him 
do thou beseech, O venerable Anthony, ** that He save our souls. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
“Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
O divinely wise Anthony, thy most radiant and luminous festival hath arrived, 
summoning a multitude of monks to glorify and hymn thine honored repose, asking 
of Christ that through thy mediation we may receive great mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast been revealed to be more exalted than the heavenly hosts, O 
Theotokos, having given birth to the Master, and thou hast elevated the nature of 
mortals, O Bride of God; wherefore, with soul and tongue, we, the faithful, glorify 
thee as the true Theotokos.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Thou didst converse and serve with the fathers of the Holy Mountain, O father, 
and following in their footsteps, thou didst live on earth as though thou wast an 
incorporeal being; wherefore, thou hast been shown to dwell together with the 
venerable. Joining chorus with them in the highest, pray thou that the souls of us who 
unceasingly glorify thee be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
As he contemplated that which was beyond nature * Joseph was struck with 
wonder O Theotokos, at thy conception without seed. * He contemplated the 
mysterious dew upon the fleece, * the bush un-burnt by fire, * Aaron’s rod which 
budded. * Thus thy Betrothed and guardian bore witness and cried unto the priests 
saying: * A Virgin beareth a child, ** and after child-birth remaineth yet a virgin. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
  
Polyeleos, and magnification: We bless thee, O venerable father Anthony, and 
we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the 
angels.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Thou didst enter into subterranean caves, O venerable one, and from thence, as a 
victor over the passions, thou didst mount the chariot of the virtues, soaring to the 
heavens above like another Elijah, and there thou hast been crowned with the most 
radiant crown of righteousness, O blessed one. But as when thou wast with us in this 
life, thou didst grieve and didst take thought of goodly things for us, so now also, O 
father Anthony, entreat Christ God, that He great remission of sins unto those who 
with love honor thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
As the all-immaculate Bride of the Creator, * Mother of the Redeemer, who 
knewest not a man, * and as the receptacle of the Comforter O all-hymned one, * 
hasten thou to deliver me, * the vile abode of iniquity and noetic plaything of the 
demons, * from their evil machinations; * and make me the bright dwelling-place of 
the virtues, * O thou incorrupt light-bearing one. * Drive away the clouds of the pas-
sions and grant that, * by thy supplications, * I may receive a portion on high ** and 
share in the never-waning light.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath ...,  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 43 (MT. 11: 27-30) 
The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: 
and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, 
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and 
learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 
For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”  

--- PAGE 10 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Hard was thy way of life and thy labors for God, as the fathers of the Holy 
Mountain learned. Wherefore, in accordance with God’s providence, they sent thee to 
thy homeland, saying: “Go, child, that through thee God may become known to 
those ignorant of Him there.” There, when thou didst arrive, O venerable one, thou 
didst enlighten thy native land and didst become a leader of monks, bringing a 
multitude of them to Christ. Wherefore, pray thou that we who celebrate thy most 
splendid repose may be preserved unvanquished by the enemy, and that our souls be 
saved.  
Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and two canons of the venerable one, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon I of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
By intense asceticism, labors and standing in prayer for nights on end, thou didst 
make thy soul the ruler over the bodily passions, O father Anthony; wherefore, 
rejoicing with the saints, we hymn Christ, Who hath bestowed upon thee such a 
victory over the passions.  
Today the most honorable day of thy repose hath dawned, O father Anthony, 
richly gladdening thy children, O most honored one. Wherefore, commemorating thy 
way of life, which was angelic and like unto that of the ancients, we hymn thee, 
celebrating with splendor, O father.  
Caught up from dark places, O venerable one, thou didst most gloriously pass 
over to the splendors of heaven, and there thou wast crowned with the saints as a 
victor over the passions, O father.  
Theotokion: Stretching forth unto me thy saving hand, O Sovereign Lady, from 
the depths of mine evils raise up my soul, which is being grievously engulfed in the 
abyss of the passions by the tempest of wicked circumstances.  
Canon II of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Even from an early age, O venerable Anthony, thou didst acquire great love for 
God; wherefore, thou didst utterly mortify the uprisings and passions of the flesh. 
And having most gloriously furnished thyself with purity, as with wings, thou didst 
soar aloft to the heavens.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Emulating the Master’s love of wandering, O venerable one, it was thy pleasure 
also to wander, O Anthony; wherefore, the all-seeing Eye, beholding thy good 
intention, hath enriched thee with the gift of miracles, as one who is most glorious.  
Thy spiritual superior, seeing thee adorned with serenity of soul, love for God, and 
goodly habits and character, O venerable one, prophetically proclaimed unto all that 
most glorious things would later be wrought by thee, O Anthony.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, break asunder the bonds of my transgressions, 
beseeching thy Son and God; and cast down the sin which despoileth me, O Ever-
virgin, that, saved by thee, O most immaculate one, I may ever hymn thee.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth ... 
ODE III  
Canon I  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Thy great and sacred Lavra, which received its beginning through thee, doth most 
gloriously proclaim thee and crieth out louder than a trumpet; and the house of the 
Mother of God boasteth greatly saying, if not in words: I have been established 
through thee, O Lord!  
Thou didst love the Lord alone, O venerable Anthony, and taking His Cross upon 
thy shoulder, thou didst live as a sojourner, providing an example for thy disciples in 
fasting, the keeping of vigils and prayer; wherefore, thou hast been glorified by Christ.  
Having spurned carnal desire, O venerable one, thou didst hate pride, and 
enriched by humility and poverty, didst attain unto the most exalted abodes of the 
saints.  
Theotokion: Have mercy, have mercy, O only Mother of God, and take pity upon 
my wretched soul, which is being drowned by the demons and the wicked passions; 
and before my departure deign thou to purify it.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
Looking forward to the rewards which are to come, O father, thou didst forsake 
the transitory things of earth as though they non-existent; wherefore, thou hast 
received twofold rewards, O venerable one, for which cause thou dost hymn thy 
Master unceasingly with the angels.  
Cease thou never to pray for the flock which thou didst acquire with great efforts 
and labors, O father, that it be delivered from every evil circumstance, from 
tribulations and sorrows, that we may all hymn thee as a caring father.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Thou standest in gladness with the ranks of the saints before God, delighting there 
in joy and jubilation. Grant that we also may receive joy there, that we may magnify 
thee in gladness, O father Anthony.  
Theotokion: Stretching forth the hand of thy compassion, O Birthgiver of God, 
rescue me from all condemnation, for I flee unto thee, and fall down before thee, 
calling upon thine aid.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Beholding great asceticism in thee, thy spiritual superior marveled, and he 
pondered the things which thou wouldst later accomplish, O Anthony; for he 
perceived thy great and godly life, which was in nowise shaken by the assaults of the 
enemy. Wherefore, as the father and guardian of thy life, he bore witness, crying out 
to the fathers of the Holy Mountain: “This man who is seen to be the least of those in 
our midst will later become a great luminary in Russia!” (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
As he contemplated that which was beyond nature * Joseph was struck with 
wonder O Theotokos, at thy conception without seed. * He contemplated the 
mysterious dew upon the fleece, * the bush un-burnt by fire, * Aaron’s rod which 
budded. * Thus thy Betrothed and guardian bore witness and cried unto the priests 
saying: * A Virgin beareth a child, ** and after child-birth remaineth yet a virgin. 
ODE IV  
Canon I  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
In the place whereon thy precious and sacred body lieth, O venerable father 
Anthony, the faithful receive manifold healings, crying out to Christ with all their 
soul: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
The length of the onerous path did not daunt thee, O venerable one, nor did the 
threat of brigands along the journey to there; wherefore, having arrived at the Holy 
Mountain, thou didst chant with the fathers there: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
The supremely good God, seeing thy firm and goodly intention, made thee 
glorious among the fathers there in the holy places, and He deemed thee worthy to 
cry out with them: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: The King of all, the Root which sprang forth from thy royal womb, 
desiring thee and making thee more exalted than the cherubim and seraphim, made 
His abode within thee.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.  
By the providence of God thou wast sent back to thy homeland, O blessed one, 
that there thou mightest guide many to the path of salvation, that they may chant 
unto the Creator: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Strengthened by the hope of good things to come, O Anthony, thou didst restrain 
the onslaught of the flesh, O father, and wast a pitiless foe of thy flesh; wherefore, 
thou didst obtain aid from on high,  
Theotokion: I have stripped myself bare of all good things and lie in wickedness. 
O Bride of God, array me in all the ancient virtues which have fallen away, and adorn 
me now with my former traits, and deliver me from what I have become.  
ODE V 
 Canon I  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Thou wast a model and instructor of monastics, O father; wherefore, thou didst 
forbid the mighty to plunder, and didst urge them rather to have pity on the weak. 
For this cause thou wast glorified, O Anthony, and wast revealed to be a great 
teacher.  
Thou didst acquire a manner of life higher than that of a man, O Anthony, for 
thou didst live angelically upon the earth. Wherefore, thou wast deemed worthy to 
receive honor equal to that of the angels, and with them dost hymn thy Master,  
Thy divinely bestowed grace amazed every human ear, O father Anthony, and 
taught those who considered themselves great on earth to despise all things as small 
and poor in worth, and to follow in thy footsteps; wherefore, pray thou, O venerable 
one, that we be saved.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, thou art my hope, salvation and boast; wherefore, I 
flee to thy protection: disdain me not, who am now swallowed up by many sins and 
pangs and sorrows, but anticipating my needs, save me.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Christ God Thou art a mediator between God and man; * for by 
Thee, O Master, * we have been led from the night of ignorance, * to Thy 
Father, the Source of light.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Strange was thy manner of life and the humility which thou didst acquire, O 
venerable Anthony, for neither the light which is in the world, nor the radiance of the 
sun, didst thou deem thyself worthy to behold; but thou didst enclose thyself alone in 
a dark place.  
Thou wast the temple and dwelling-place of the most holy Spirit, O father 
Anthony, adorned with divers virtues; and inheriting the exalted heights through 
humility, thou didst receive the riches of heaven through poverty, O venerable one.  
From all transgressions, grief and perils save those who keep thy sacred memory, 
O father Anthony; and standing before the King of all, grant us thy divine aid.  
Theotokion: O pure Lady, in that the never-waning Light shone forth from thy 
womb, illumine my darkened soul, and drive all the gloom from my heart.  
ODE VI  
Canon I  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Through eternal love for God thou didst transcend the flesh and the world, O 
father Anthony; wherefore, thou wast shown to be a habitation worthy of the most 
holy Spirit, as Christ Himself hath said: Having come with the Father and the Spirit, 
there will I make My dwelling-place.  
The Holy Mountain, having given rise unto thee like a most sweet vine, O father, 
is most gloriously adorned by thee; and, rejoicing, it glorifieth Christ Who gave thee 
to it.  
For thee night seemed like day, and day like unto night, O Anthony; for, as the 
prophet hath said, thou gavest no sleep to thine eyes, neither slumber to thine eyelids, 
nor rest unto thy body, until thou didst present it pure unto God, together with thy 
soul.  
Theotokion: Grant me thine aid, and deliver me from misfortunes and tribulations, 
and from my transgressions, O thou who hast given birth unto the eternal 
Deliverance of all.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Thy blessed soul, having been freed from the tyranny of the flesh and the cruel 
tyrant Pharaoh, passed over to the promised land of paradise, departing this world; 
and it abideth, rejoicing, with the saints.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Thy sacred body, which now lieth in the cave, poureth forth manifold healings 
upon those who have recourse unto it with faith; wherefore, we beseech thee: By 
thine entreaties grant health of soul unto those who glorify thee.  
Assembling for thy most honored memorial, which hath shone forth more 
radiantly than the sun, O Anthony, we glorify thy repose and the labors which thou 
didst endure in this life, asking Christ that through thee we may receive remission of 
sins.  
Theotokion: Grant that I may behold the beauties of thy glory when I must needs 
be parted from my flesh, O Lady, for thou art my confirmation, that I may hence 
receive deliverance.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”: 
Having cleaved unto God, Whom from thy youth thou didst love above all, * O 
venerable one, with love thou didst follow Him with all thy soul; * and holding the 
corrupt world to be as naught, thou didst make a cave in the ground, * and, having 
struggled well therein against the snares of the invisible foe, * thou didst shine forth 
like the radiant sun upon all the ends of the earth. * Wherefore, in gladness thou didst 
pass over to the mansions of heaven. * And standing now with the angels before the 
throne of the Master, be thou mindful of us who honor thy memory, ** that we may 
cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Anthony our father!  
Ikos: Thou didst desire to enjoy the eternally undimmed light of the Holy Trinity. 
Wherefore, having enclosed thyself in a cave, thou didst remain there alone for forty 
years, not issuing forth until thou didst offer unto God thy body and soul in a state of 
purity. Hence, even after thy repose thou hast received from the Lord, as though 
alive, gifts of miracles, to heal the divers ailments of those who suffer grievously, and 
to drive demons away from those who approach thee. For this cause we beseech thee: 
Pray thou, O father, that thy homeland, thy city and people be preserved unharmed, 
that we may cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Anthony our father!  
ODE VII  
Canon I  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
At the command of thy spiritual leader, O blessed Anthony, thou wast sent back to 
thy native land; wherefore, those things which thy spiritual father said unto thee thou 
didst fulfill as though commanded by God. And when thou didst arrive there, O 
father, thou didst lead the souls of many unto the Lord.  
When thou didst attain unto the most sacred place, O venerable Anthony, thou 
didst astonish many with thy manner of life; for having received a way of life which is 
higher than that of a man, thou didst cause many to spurn worldly things.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
When thou didst find the cave of Archbishop Hilarion, in prayer and ascetic labors 
thou didst dwell therein with all industry, O venerable one, until thou didst make 
another cave for thyself; and therein thou wast deemed worthy of heavenly 
knowledge.  
Theotokion: By thy divine supplications set at naught the perils and counsels of 
mankind, O pure one, and deliver thy servants from sickening transgressions, that we 
may bless thee as the Ever-virgin.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
O venerable Anthony, thou didst acquire the blessed Theodosius as a great 
industrious companion and emulator of thy life, who followed thine angelic way of 
life. Abiding with him in the highest, be thou mindful of us.  
We have recognized thee as a new Moses, a victor over the passions, O father: for 
when Moses vanquished Amalek of old, he led forth the people; and thou, O father, 
hast led forth a multitude of monastics to the promised land of paradise.  
Thou didst forsake thy city and homeland, O father, yet, borne witness by God’s 
providence, thou didst gloriously return to thy native land, where thou didst receive 
grace from the Lord, O father.  
Theotokion: The furnace prefigured thy nativity, O most immaculate one; for it 
did not consume the children, just as the unbearable Fire did not harm thy womb. 
Wherefore, we entreat thee: Deliver thy servants from eternal fire.  
ODE VIII  
Canon I  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
O venerable Anthony, thou didst emulate the humility of Christ thy Master; 
wherefore, thou didst love the hard life of humility, cutting thyself off from 
passionate earthly attachments. For this cause thou wast deemed worthy of the honor 
of the saints, and with them thou hymnest the Lord throughout the ages.  
Pray thou, O blessed Anthony, that all who celebrate thy most glorious repose be 
delivered from divers perils, that we may all glorify thee and supremely exalt the Lord 
throughout the ages.  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Direct thy merciful eye for us to the Master, O venerable Anthony, showing 
thyself to be a caring father, and be thou not parted from us in spirit, as thou didst 
promise when thou wast with us, that with thee we may all chant unto Christ: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Regard now my supplication with pity, and grant me joy instead of 
grief, that I may hymn thee, O Lady, chanting unto thy Son: Hymn the Lord, O ye 
works, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Canon II  
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
O venerable one, grant abundant healing unto those who approach thy temple 
with faith, and consolation unto those in sorrow, that with thee we may all cry out to 
Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
From on high mercifully watch over those who offer thee this hymnody of 
thanksgiving, O father, and entreat Christ the Redeemer, that He save all who cry out 
to Him: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The multitude of those saved by thee, who followed thy way of life, O father 
Anthony, have been offered unto the Almighty as a gift; wherefore, pray thou that all 
be saved who cry out with thee unto Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Who will not marvel at the great mystery of thy birthgiving, O 
Theotokos? What earthly tongue or incorporeal intelligence is able to describe it? For 
thou, O Theotokos, hast given birth unto the Creator, in a manner transcending 
nature and comprehension.  
ODE IX  
Canon I  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
In every way thou didst strive to emulate the life of Anthony who shone forth of 
old; for he dwelt alone in the desert, while thou didst enclose thyself alone in a cave, 
O father, and abode there many years without coming forth.  
Thou wast the founder and leader of the monastic life in the caves, O father, and 
there thou didst struggle like one of the incorporeal beings; wherefore, Christ hath 
enriched thee with the gift of miracles, O venerable one.  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Emulating the goodness of the Master, accept thou the lifting up of my hands, O 
venerable one, overlooking our transgressions; for thou didst wound thy soul with the 
love of Christ and His most pure divine Mother, whom do thou beseech, that she 
save our souls.  
Theotokion: Thou didst most gloriously perform miracles by the uplifting of thy 
hands unto God, O venerable Anthony; for by thine entreaties thou didst call down 
fire from the sky to purify the site of the temple of the most pure one, whom we all 
magnify with thee.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Emulating the way of life of Pachomius the great, who was deemed worthy of the 
vision of the angel, O father, thou didst dwell in the cave like an angel. Wherefore, 
thou wast counted worthy to receive angelic honor, O Anthony. (Twice)  
Following the path from the Holy Mountain, O father, thou didst reach Kiev, 
where it was the pleasure of the Lady and Mother of God that a temple be erected; 
and there, with the blessed Theodosius, thou didst construct a most honorable temple 
to the glory of the Mother of God. Wherefore, we with him all glorify thee.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, Mother of the Light, drive away the cloud from my soul, 
and grant that with purity of sight I may behold the saving Beauty which shone forth 
ineffably from thy most pure womb as a light for the nations, O all-hymned Lady.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Thou didst mortify the sweet passions of life, O Anthony; and having recognized 
that glory is fleeting, thou didst quickly turn away from it, preferring to walk the 
narrow path which leadeth to the broad expanse of paradise. Wherefore, pray thou, O 
Anthony, that those who honor thee be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
We who are saved by thee confess thee to be the true Theotokos, O Lady, for thou 
hast given birth unto God, Who hath destroyed death by the Cross, and hath drawn 
to Himself the councils of the venerable, with whom we praise thee, O Virgin.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Desiring to behold * the ineffable joy of the saints * and the gladness of the 
righteous who have pleased God, * thou didst disdain every joy in the world, * and 
didst spend thy days in fasting and tears, * until thou didst mortify the passions of the 
body. * Wherefore, thou hast been deemed worthy * of the joy of the righteous. ** 
Pray thou with them, that our souls be saved. (Twice) 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Accept thou today * hymns of praise in thy memory, O Anthony, * and with thy 
supplications go before God, * and deliver us from those * who stand on His left 
hand, * and pray that we may receive * the portion of the elect, * that as is meet we 
may all bless thee ** as a fervent advocate.  
Like a star thou didst shine forth * in a dark place, O most wise and venerable one, 
* and didst put the dark faces of the demons to shame; * wherefore, having ascended 
to the heavens, * thou dost stand with boldness * before the throne of Christ, * 
where do thou remember those who * celebrate thy memory, O venerable one, ** 
that we may find mercy on the day of judgment. 
Glory..., in Tone VIII: 
Having forsaken thy homeland, O venerable father Anthony, and accepted 
voluntary wandering for the sake of the Lord, for Christ’s sake thou didst bear the 
labors of a long journey, hunger and thirst, burning heat and cold; wherefore, thou 
hearest: “O good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord!” Pray thou, O 
father, that we also may hear His voice, that we may ever bless thy memory with love.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the canon 
of the venerable one.  
Thy great and sacred Lavra, which received its beginning through thee, doth most 
gloriously proclaim thee and crieth out louder than a trumpet; and the house of the 
Mother of God boasteth greatly saying, if not in words: I have been established 
through thee, O Lord! (Twice) 
Thou didst love the Lord alone, O venerable Anthony, and taking His Cross upon 
thy shoulder, thou didst live as a sojourner, providing an example for thy disciples in 
fasting, the keeping of vigils and prayer; wherefore, thou hast been glorified by Christ.  
Having spurned carnal desire, O venerable one, thou didst hate pride, and 
enriched by humility and poverty, didst attain unto the most exalted abodes of the 
saints.  
Thy blessed soul, having been freed from the tyranny of the flesh and the cruel 
tyrant Pharaoh, passed over to the promised land of paradise, departing this world; 
and it abideth, rejoicing, with the saints.  
Thy sacred body, which now lieth in the cave, poureth forth manifold healings 
upon those who have recourse unto it with faith; wherefore, we beseech thee: By 
thine entreaties grant health of soul unto those who glorify thee.  
Assembling for thy most honored memorial, which hath shone forth more 
radiantly than the sun, O Anthony, we glorify thy repose and the labors which thou 
didst endure in this life, asking Christ that through thee we may receive remission of 
sins.  
Theotokion: Grant that I may behold the beauties of thy glory when I must needs 
be parted from my flesh, O Lady, for thou art my confirmation, that I may hence 
receive deliverance.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Leaving behind the tumult of the world, * in accordance with the Gospel thou 
didst follow after Christ, rejecting the world; * and living an angelic life, thou didst 
attain unto the calm haven of Holy Mount Athos, * from whence, with the blessing 
of the fathers, thou didst go to Mount Kiev; * and living there an industrious life, 
thou didst enlighten thy homeland; * and showing a multitude of monastics the path 
which leadeth to the kingdom of heaven, * thou didst lead them unto Christ. * Him 
do thou beseech, O venerable Anthony, ** that He save our souls.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Having cleaved unto God, Whom from thy youth thou didst love above all, * O 
venerable one, with love thou didst follow Him with all thy soul; * and holding the 
corrupt world to be as naught, thou didst make a cave in the ground, * and, having 

--- PAGE 21 ---
struggled well therein against the snares of the invisible foe, * thou didst shine forth 
like the radiant sun upon all the ends of the earth. * Wherefore, in gladness thou didst 
pass over to the mansions of heaven. * And standing now with the angels before the 
throne of the Master, be thou mindful of us who honor thy memory, ** that we may 
cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Anthony our father!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, § 213 (GAL. 5: 22-6: 2)  
Brethren, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who 
are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the 
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the Earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 10 (MT. 4: 25-5: 12)  
At that time there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, and 
from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond Jordan. And 
seeing the multitudes, He went up into a mountain: and when He was set, His 
disciples came unto Him: and He opened His mouth, and taught them, saying: 
“Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those 
who mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit 
the earth. Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be 
filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in 
heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the 
children of God. Blessed are they who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for 
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and 
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for My sake. 
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
