--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 17th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY GREAT-MARTYR MARINA 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O most glorious wonder! * He who exalted himself in his pride * and said that he 
would destroy the earth and the sea * hast thou, a young and all-immaculate maiden, * 
humbled to the ground, * vanquishing his wiles. * O, the power of the Cross and 
grace * which hath manifestly made firm ** all weakness for us!  
O all-famed martyr Marina, * neither the fire of torment, nor the enjoyment of 
food, * nor the joys of this world, * nor the beauty of youth * were able to separate 
from thy love for Christ * thee who desired to obtain the beauty * of thine honored 
Bridegroom * which transcendeth understanding. ** And thou wast deemed worthy 
of it, O divinely blessed one. 
O all-glorious martyr Marina, * who hast rightly made thine abode in the mansions 
of heaven * with the ranks of virgins * and the armies of the martyrs: * by thy prayers 
save those * who with faith keep thy memory * and faithfully have recourse to thy 
protection; * and ask of God remission of sins, ** deliverance and great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Let us listen to the praise of the holy virgin who, having kept her lamp ever 
burning, hath made her abode in the city of our God, in His holy mountain. O the 
virginity of the Church of God! O virginity, glory of martyrs! O virginity, shared by 
the angels!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Tree of the Cross, O Jesus, * she 
that kneweth not wedlock said weeping: * “O sweet Child, * why hast Thou 
abandoned me * who alone gave birth to Thee, * O unapproachable Light of the 
beginningless Father? * Hasten Thou, and glorify Thyself, * that those who glorify 
Thy divine sufferings ** may receive divine glory!” 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, and Glory ..., in Tone II: 
With a voice of joy and an exclamation of psalmody let us hymn the martyr 
Marina; for she cast down to the earth the falsehood of idolatry and manfully 
trampled underfoot the adverse foe. Wherefore, in dying she hath taken wing to the 
heavens, bearing a crown upon her head and crying aloud: “Thee do I desire, O my 
Bridegroom, and having the love of desire, I have committed my flesh to the fire for 
Thee, that I may dwell in Thine everlasting mansions, where the abode is of those 
who rejoice!”  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb * beheld her Lamb * willingly 
led as a man to the slaughter, * she said, weeping: “Dost Thou now hasten to leave 
me childless * who gave Thee birth O Christ,? * What is this that Thou hast done, O 
Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify * Thine extreme goodness, which 
is beyond understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of mankind!”  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Marina, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without the martyrica; and that of the holy great-
martyr, with 6 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “With hymns do l hymn the virgin 
martyr, the bride of Christ”, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Dancing for God and filled with rays of light by Him, O good virgin martyr, by thy 
supplications grant me a light-bearing beam.  
Vested with a wise mind, O martyr of Christ, thou didst wisely disdain the fleeting 
and corrupt nature of transitory things; and hast been deemed worthy of the heavenly 
radiance of the righteous.  
As a servant I come before thee, O honored martyr and passion-bearer. Save me 
from the tribulations of life by thine entreaties, and calm the turmoil of my passions.  
Thy mind, illumined with wisdom and grace, O Marina, martyr of the Savior, was 
not afraid of the tyrant’s threatening, being strengthened by divine power.  
Theotokion: Having conceived Life and given birth to Him in the flesh, O Mother 
of God, thou hast shown us the path to life and broken asunder the bonds of death.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as our God, 
* Whom the whole of creation doth hymn: * There is none more righteous 
than Thee, O Lord. 
Neither fire, nor wounds, nor beheading by the sword, neither the cruelty of the 
torturers, nor death, nor the savagery of wild beasts, was able to separate thee from 
the love of God, O all-praised one.  
Thou wast an unshaken and unshakable pillar during thy trials, O all-glorious one, 
and a foundation of piety established firmly upon the rock of faith, O most blessed 
one.  
Thou wast a virgin among the martyrs and an invincible martyr among virgins, O 
all-immaculate one, who betrothed thyself to Christ Who giveth thee a twofold 
crown.  
The streams of thy holy blood, having poured forth, quenched all the falsehood of 
idolatry; and thou hast led a company of martyrs to thy Bridegroom.  
Theotokion: Strengthened by grace, in oneness of mind we glorify thee, the 
Theotokos, who hast given birth to Him Who became the flesh which He giveth unto 
all; and thou hast restored the world.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
O ye who love the feasts of the Church, a splendid solemnity hath dawned, the 
commemoration of the glorious passion-bearer of Christ, bringing gladness unto all, 
shining forth rays of miracles in the world, and bearing constant grace for mankind. 
By her supplications, O Christ, save Thou our souls. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O all-immaculate Virgin * who hast given birth to the transcendent God: * do 
thou unceasingly entreat Him with the incorporeal ones, * that He grant forgiveness 
of transgressions * and correction of life before the end, * to us who, as is meet, 
hymn thee with faith and love, ** O thou who alone art all-hymned.  
Stavrotheotokion: When Thy most pure Mother beheld Thee uplifted upon the 
Cross, O Word of God she exclaimed, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and 
strange wonder, O my Son? How is it that Thou, the Life of all, dost taste of death 
desiring to bring life to the dead, in that Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Thy life was truly godly, and thou wast shown to be beloved of the angels and un-
touched by the cruelty of their servants; for thou didst cry out to Christ: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lover of mankind!  
Having struggled on the earth and endured transitory pain, O spiritually rich and 
invincible martyr, and having now received rewards in the heavens from thy Master, 
thou criest out with the angels: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
The choirs of virgins now rejoice in thee, the assemblies of martyrs are now filled 
with gladness, and the multitudes of the pious, gathering together, now join chorus, 
rejoicing and crying out to the Master with unceasing voices: Glory to Thy power, O 
Lover of mankind!  
Thou wast all comely, O undefiled virgin, and wast shown to be an all-immaculate 
bride, beloved of men’s soul for thy beauties, O all-blessed one, and through the 
tyrants’ burnings thou wast shown to be most splendid, chanting unto Christ: Glory 
to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Theotokion: Thou alone didst remain pure even after giving birth, for thou alone 
hast given birth to the hypostatic Word, the Son Who is co-enthroned with the 
Father, O Bride of God; and thou bearest in thine arms Him Whom all things cannot 
contain and Who sustaineth all the ends of the earth.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Mightily thou didst pass through the course of athletes at the tribunal, O maiden; 
for divine desire strengthened thy womanly weakness, manifestly revealing thee to be 
an independent martyr through the sufferings thou didst resolve to undertake.  
Shedding drops of thy blood, O martyr, thou didst weave for thyself a purple robe 
of great price and a garment of gladness untouched by corruption; and now clad 
therewith in the heavens, O divinely wise one, thou standest noetically before thy 
Bridegroom.  
Having bound the over-weaning serpent with the bonds of thy prayers, O maiden, 
thou didst humble to the ground his pride which of old was exalted; for the 
Omniscient One, in that He is good, hath known how to fill those who fear His will.  
Truly the Word, thy Bridegroom, hath adorned thee with divine crowns of 
supremely exalted glory, deifying thee who suffered for His sake and patiently 
endured the stripes of beating, O glorious one.  
Theotokion: Beholding the nature of mortals cleansed of the ancient curse 
through the birthgiving of thy virginity, O all-immaculate one, we glorify Him Who 
was born of thee as thine only-begotten, in His loving-kindness. Him do thou 
beseech, O Virgin, that He save us.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Thou wast shown to be committed to Christ, beautiful and undefiled, and like 
unto a pure well-spring and a greatly fertile orchard, O all-glorious Marina, thou 
beloved bride and garden of paradise which cannot be stolen.  
A most magnificent maiden followed after Thee, hastening to the sweet fragrance 
of Thy myrrh, O Master, and emulating with her patience Thy most pure and most 
honored sufferings.  
Manfully thou didst endure struggles, O much-suffering martyr Marina of lordly 
name, and with the power of the Cross thou didst destroy him who of old greatly 
boasted aloud to bring harm to the souls of mortals.  
Theotokion: O Mary, thou pure and most pure vessel of the Creator of all, grant 
me tears to cleanse my soul, and hearken unto my entreaty, O all- immaculate one.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin: ...”: 
Arrayed in the beauties of virginity, * O virgin Marina, * thou wast crowned with 
imperishable crowns; * and stained with the blood of thy martyrdom, * O martyr, 
thou hast received the trophy of victory * for thy suffering, ** piously shining forth 
miracles of healing.  
Ikos: Afire from childhood with love in thy heart, thou didst hasten to Christ thy 
Bridegroom like a deer thirsting for ever-flowing springs of water, O honored virgin 
and martyr; and having preserved thyself incorrupt through thy suffering, O right 
glorious bride, thou didst arrive, adorned and arrayed, in the bridal chamber of thy 
Creator, wearing thy crown of victory and bearing thy lamp, receiving the incorrupt 
Bridegroom and accepting like gold the trophy of victory for thy suffering.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
The unapproachable Light enlightened thy soul as is meet, O Marina, and hath 
illumined with radiant lights those who chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages.  
Thou wast truly taken up to the divine heights, for thou didst acquire an elevated 
understanding and hast made thine abode in a splendid mansion, crying out: Blessed 
art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages. 
A bride beloved of the Master wast thou shown to be, O God-bearing Marina, and 
as an invincible martyr thou criest out to Him: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: Judea no longer lacketh a Prince, for the Master, the expectation of 
the nations, shone forth ineffably from thee, O most pure one. Blessed is the Fruit of 
thy womb!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The instruments of music sounded out in harmony, * and countless 
multitudes worshipped the image in Dura; * but the three Children, refusing 
to bow in obeisance, * hymn and glorify the Lord throughout all ages. 
Having acquired steadfast integrity and steadfastly enduring sufferings, thou wast 
crowned with a crown of victory, chanting: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages.  
God the Word, thy Bridegroom, prepared for thee a mystic bridal chamber in the 
heavens, and, beholding it, thou didst cry aloud: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout the ages. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Adorned with divers virtues, thou hast been deemed worthy of many more gifts, 
beholding thine uttermost desire and crying out: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout the ages.  
O passion-bearer, thou wast shown to be the cause of salvation for mankind, and 
thou didst lead crowds of martyrs to Christ, crying out with them: Hymn the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: Through thee, O Birthgiver of God, hath cleansing been granted to 
us; for thou alone hast repaid our debt, O Virgin, having conceived the Lord of all, 
Whom we supremely exalt throughout the ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
O Marina, martyr of Christ, truly thou hast earnestly embraced everlasting and 
imperishable life in the comfort of paradise; for, shining from afar in the blood of thy 
martyrdom, O goodly virgin, thou didst pass unharmed by the guarding sword.  
Divine desire consumed thine every material and worldly thought, O virgin, and 
showed thee to be a most steadfast martyr who had shone forth first with the 
splendors of virginity, O all-wise Marina. Wherefore, all of us, the faithful, call thee 
blessed.  
By thy supplications, O chosen bride, loose thou the bonds of mine offenses and 
rend asunder the record of my sins, O martyr, standing in splendor before Christ, thy 
most compassionate Bridegroom; and dispel the gloom of my passions.  
The cruel arrogance of the false one hath been brought to an end; for, lo! a maiden 
suffered, unmindful of her womanly nature, and, splendidly winning the victory over 
him, she hath now manifestly set aright the fall of our first mother.  
Theotokion: Unharmed by the tree of knowledge, I reap the grain of life; for thou, 
O most holy one, didst bring forth Christ, the Tree of life, Who hath shown to all the 
way to life. Wherefore, we reverently proclaim thee the Theotokos, O all-pure one.  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Strengthened by the Cross of thy Lord, O goodly virgin, thou didst destroy the 
pride of thy torturers, and suffering manfully O martyr, thou didst receive from 
Christ the trophies of victory, O all-wise Marina of lordly name, who ever prayest for 
those who honor thee with love.  
Theotokion: The divinely wise virgins who stand round about thee, O most pure 
Mary, Birthgiver of God, have been brought to thy Son, the King of all, as brides. 
Him do thou entreat on our behalf, O Virgin Maiden and Mother.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone I:  
Having established thyself upon the firm rock of the confession of God, O all-
praised Marina, thou didst drown the murderous foe in the abyss and hast fittingly 
received the crown of victory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: The Sovereign Lady, the unblemished ewe-lamb, * beholding 
her Lamb upon the Cross, * bereft of form and comeliness, * lamenting, said: “Woe 
is me! * Whither hath Thy comeliness gone, * O most Sweet One? * Where is Thy 
splendor? Where is the brilliant grace * of Thine image, * O my Son most beloved?”  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos; and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the holy great-martyr.  
Neither fire, nor wounds, nor beheading by the sword, neither the cruelty of the 
torturers, nor death, nor the savagery of wild beasts, was able to separate thee from 
the love of God, O all-praised one.  
Thou wast an unshaken and unshakable pillar during thy trials, O all-glorious one, 
and a foundation of piety established firmly upon the rock of faith, O most blessed 
one.  
Thou wast a virgin among the martyrs and an invincible martyr among virgins, O 
all-immaculate one, who betrothed thyself to Christ Who giveth thee a twofold 
crown.  
Theotokion: Strengthened by grace, in oneness of mind we glorify thee, the 
Theotokos, who hast given birth to Him Who became the flesh which He giveth unto 
all; and thou hast restored the world.  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Marina, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone III: 
Arrayed in the beauties of virginity, * O virgin Marina, * thou wast crowned with 
imperishable crowns; * and stained with the blood of thy martyrdom, * O martyr, 
thou hast received the trophy of victory * for thy suffering, ** piously shining forth 
miracles of healing.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel  
 
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §181 (II COR. 6: 1-10)  
Brethren: As workers together with Christ, beseech you also that ye receive not the 
grace of God in vain. (For He saith, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the 
day of salvation have I succored thee: Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now 
is the day of salvation.) Giving no offense in any thing, that the ministry be not 
blamed: but in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much 
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in 
tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings; by pureness, by knowledge, by 

--- PAGE 10 ---
longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy Spirit, by love unfeigned, by the word of 
truth, by the power of God, by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on 
the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report: as deceivers, and yet 
true; as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold, we live; as chastened, 
and not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as 
having nothing, and yet possessing all things.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was 
attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Verse: And He brought me out of the pit of misery, and from the mire of clay.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §33 (LK 7:36-50)  
At that time, one of the Pharisees desired Jesus that he would eat with him. And he 
went down into the Pharisee’s house, and sat down to meat. And behold, a woman in 
the city, which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee’s 
house, brought an alabaster box of ointment, and stood at his feet behind him weep-
ing, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her 
head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment. Now when the 
Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spake within himself, saying, This man, if 
he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is that 
toucheth him; for she is a sinner. And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have 
somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on. There was a certain creditor 
which had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. And 
when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me, therefore, 
which of them will love him most? Simon answered and said, I suppose that he, to 
whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged. And he 
turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into 
thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath washed my feet with 
tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head. Thou gavest me no kiss: but this 
woman, since the time I came in, hath not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil 
thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment. 
Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved 
much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little. And he said unto her, Thy 
sins are forgiven. And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, 
Who is this that forgiveth sins also? And he said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved 
thee; go in peace.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
