--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 18th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR EMILIAN 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
The religion of the Greeks * didst thou grind fine as dust, * and through the grace 
of Christ our God, * O martyr Emilian, * thou didst erect an animate tower of divine 
knowledge, * a temple of sanctity, * and an immovable foundation of piety * for 
those who with godly wisdom ** honor thy valiant feats, O most noetically rich 
martyr.  
Though devoured by the fire, * afflicted with wounds, imprisoned in dungeons, * 
and subjected to manifold tribulations, O glorious one, * thou didst not sacrifice to 
the idols, * nor didst thou deny Christ, * but didst remain invincible. * Wherefore, the 
Master, as the good Judge of the contest, * the immutable King, ** hath bestowed 
upon thee the crown of victory.  
With thy blood * thou didst dye thy robe, * and, arrayed therewith, * thou hast 
entered the kingdom on high, * rejoicing, O glorious one; * and thou standest forever 
before God, * the King of all, * asking for peace, health and speedy deliverance from 
evils ** for those who honor thee with faith.  
Glory .., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
Bedew my mind * with showers of the Most holy Spirit, O most pure one, * who 
ineffably gaveth birth unto Christ * the drop Who with His compassions washeth 
away * the countless iniquities of mankind; * dry up the upwelling of my passions, * 
and grant unto me a torrent * of ever-living nourishment, ** by thy supplications.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee * nailed to the Cross, O Lord, * the ewe-lamb 
Thy Mother marveled * and cried aloud: * “What is this that I see, * O my Son most 
desired? How hast Thou been rewarded * by the unfaithful and iniquitous assembly * 
which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? ** Yet glory to Thine ineffable condescen-
sion, O Master!”  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Emilian O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “Gloriously do I hymn the martyr 
Emilian”, the composition of Theophanes: in Tone IV  
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
Let us praise today our God Who is over all things, and let us also praise His 
martyr, who suffered lawfully and won the crown of victory by the power of the 
Spirit.  
Arrayed in the power and grace of Him Who clothed Himself in our weakness, O 
glorious and divinely blessed martyr, thou didst strip bare the vainglorious arrogance 
and weakness of idolatry.  
Rejoicing, O glorious one, thou didst proclaim the triple Unity united in one 
essence, destroying the delusion of polytheism, and suffering steadfastly, O divinely 
blessed one.  
Theotokion: Christ the Lord, to Whom thou hast given birth, O all-immaculate 
one, is my strength and song and the enlightenment of my heart, and He is known to 
exist in two natures and in a single hypostasis.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
The law of our God was truly a lamp to thy feet and a light for thy steps, and 
thereby, as one adorned as a martyr, thou didst cause the steps of the iniquitous to 
falter.  
Thou didst direct the workings of thy mind toward the will of God, the calm 
haven, O wise one, fleeing the raging sea of polytheism, and the wickedness of the 
demons.  
The hosts of heaven wondered at the divine sufferings of Emilian and his faith 
and courage even unto death, how in the flesh he cast down the incorporeal one, 
humbling him.  
Theotokion: Exempted from the laws of nature, O Virgin Mother, through thy 
supra-natural birthgiving thou didst remain a Virgin even after giving birth; for thou 
didst bear the Author of all creation, O pure one.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Strengthened by divine power, thou didst commit the gods of the ungodly to utter 
oblivion, O valiant spiritual athlete; and entering the tribunal, thou didst steadfastly 
suffer laceration and manfully endure the flames. Wherefore, thou didst pass through 
the divine struggle and, rejoicing, received the crown of victory. O all-famed Emilian, 
entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with love honor 
thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
The divine desire of God set thee most gloriously afire; wherefore, thou didst 
endure the burning of bitter wounds, immolating the gods of the ungodly and 
bedewing the souls of the faithful, O most blessed one.  
Thou didst disdain temporal things for the sake of those which last, and binding 
thy whole soul to divine love, thou didst destroy the might of impiety, O right won-
drous passion-bearer Emilian.  
Piously glorifying the one essence and one glory of the three-Sunned Godhead, O 
Emilian, thou didst enter the tribunal as a valiant warrior and didst cast the mighty 
serpent down to the ground.  
Theotokion: O most holy Maiden, we glorify thee who alone hast been found to 
be the place of sanctity of Him Who hath hallowed us; for, for thy sake we who live 
on earth have been deified and deemed worthy of true life.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE V  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
With the drops of thy sacred blood thou didst extinguish the fire of ungodliness, 
O spiritual athlete Emilian; wherefore, thou hast poured forth a well-spring of 
miracles, which drieth up the lake of the passions, drowneth infirmities and doth 
engulf the demons.  
The wicked one ordered thee stretched forth and beaten; wherefore, as thy body 
was lacerated and afflicted with stripes, O spiritual athlete, thou didst depict the 
blessed suffering of Him Who was wounded on the Cross.  
Filled with spiritual gifts, O right wondrous one, thou dost heal the incurable 
ailments of the sick, cause the burning of fever to cease, drive out evil spirits and help 
all amid their grief.  
Theotokion: With thine effective remedies heal me who am wounded with the 
sword of sin, O thou who hast given birth to Christ the Savior, who for my sake was 
wounded with the spear and thereby pierced the heart of the serpent.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 
Thou wast enriched and filled with divine glory through thy martyrdom, O blessed 
one, and livest with the angels in the heavens. Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Thou didst not spare thy mortal body; wherefore, thou hast inherited lasting 
immortality, having died for the love of Him Who hath slain the passions, O glorious 
one.  
The shrine of thy relics poureth forth the myrrh of healings, O most noetically rich 
and valiant martyr, ever dispelling the fetid sicknesses of all.  
Theotokion: Eve plucked the deadly fruit from the tree; but thou, O most pure 
one, hast given birth to the Tree of life, the taste of which giveth life to all the dying.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Aflame with divine zeal, thou wast not afraid * of the ministering fire, * but 
fearlessly ascending of thine own will, * thou wast consumed by the kindled fire, * 
and didst offer thyself to the Master as a sacrifice. * O glorious martyr Emilian, ** 
entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Illumined with the grace of the divine Spirit, O blessed one, thou didst pass 
through the burning of the furnace and, unconsumed, didst chant: O supremely 
hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Set alight by desire for Christ Whom thou loved, O blessed one, thou didst not 
fear the fire, and, bedewed therein by the Spirit, thou didst chant: O supremely 
hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
In the beauty of thy sufferings thou didst emulate the incorporeal ones, O wise 
one, and standing with them before the all-comely Christ, thou chantest, rejoicing: O 
supremely hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O Bride of God of lordly name, with faith we cry out to thee; for 
thou hast given birth to Christ the Lord, our ineffable joy, to Whom we cry: O 
supremely hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Destroying the worship of falsehood, O most wise one, thou didst loose the bonds 
of him who held thee, and voluntarily gave thyself over to torture, O all-famed one, 
crying: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
I have not been found by those who seek me, nor have I been revealed to those 
who asked for me!” thou dost cry, O most glorious one; “Understand, ye iniquitous, 
for I have hastened to be slain as an innocent lamb, crying: Bless the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
The great Emilian hath summoned us to a banquet, offering us his struggles as 
food. Let us spiritually partake thereof, O ye faithful, and chant: Hymn the Lord, ye 
works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Rain down drops of mercy upon me, O thou who hast given birth to 
the Well-spring of mercy, dry up the floods of my sin and still the raging waves of my 
soul, O Virgin Mary Theotokos, that I may glorify thee throughout all ages! 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Desiring to behold the ineffable gladness and radiance of God, O glorious one, 
thou didst zealously despise all the beautiful things in this life, and rejoicing, passed 
through thy martyrdom. Wherefore, with faith we call thee blessed.  
O all-famed one, preserved by the sweet savor of the Spirit and deemed worthy of 
true glory, thou didst offer thyself as a sacrifice, wholly consumed by fire, for the 
divine altar of Him Who was slaughtered like a lamb; wherefore, with love we call 
thee blessed.  
Today thy memory hath shone forth upon us more brightly than the sun, O 
spiritual athlete, gladdening the hearts of all the faithful, illumining their thoughts and 
dispelling the darkness of infirmities; and we celebrate it with prayer. 
The chosen choir of the firstborn hath acquired thee as a fellow citizen, and all the 
martyrs, beholding thee joining chorus therewith, rejoice. With them be thou also 
mindful of us who commemorate thee, O martyr of great renown.  
Theotokion: With thy light illumine me who walk in darkness, O all-hymned one; 
grant me a helping hand and drive away the clouds from my soul. For thou dost still 
the tempest of my passions, O refuge of the despairing.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Emilian O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
Aflame with divine zeal, thou wast not afraid * of the ministering fire, * but 
fearlessly ascending of thine own will, * thou wast consumed by the kindled fire, * 
and didst offer thyself to the Master as a sacrifice. * O glorious martyr Emilian, ** 
entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.  
 
