--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 13th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY 
THE SYNAXIS OF THE HOLY ARCHANGEL GABRIEL  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER STEPHEN THE SABBAITE 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera: 3 for the archangel, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
The pre-eternal Mind * hath by divine communion * fashioned of thee a 
secondary luminary * who enlightenest the whole universe, O Gabriel, * revealing 
unto us * the truly great and divine mystery which was from all ages: * of Him Who 
assumed flesh in the Virgin’s womb * and, though incorporeal, became a man, ** that 
He might save mankind.  
Standing before the throne of the three-Sunned Godhead, * and richly radiant with 
divine splendors, * unceasingly emanating therefrom, * do thou deliver from the 
gloom of the passions * us who with joy form a chorus on earth * and praise thee, O 
Gabriel, * thou supreme commander; * and illumine us with enlightenment, ** O 
intercessor for our souls.  
Cast down the insolence of the Hagarenes * who at times descend upon thy flock; 
* heal thou the schisms of the Church; * still the tempest of our boundless 
temptations; * and from misfortunes and evil circumstances do thou deliver us * who 
honor thee with love * and have recourse to thy protection, * O Gabriel, thou 
supreme commander, ** and intercessor for our souls.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O our God-bearing father Stephen, * having splendidly strengthened thy mind 
with divine wisdom, * with love of wisdom thou didst restrain, * all the powers of the 
soul with righteousness, * and thine anger with manliness, * and thy desire with 
chastity; * rendering thy soul a comely chariot of the virtues; * and, seated thereon, ** 
thou didst ascend, rejoicing, to the heights, O glorious one.  
O divinely eloquent father Stephen, * thou didst fortify thy mind with theology, * 
bearing thy wrath as a spear * aimed at the blasphemous heretics, * O venerable and 
blessed one, * and yearning for heavenly sustenance, * thou wast deemed worthy to 
partake thereof, O glorious one, * standing now before the throne ** of the King and 
Ruler of all.  
O divinely eloquent father Stephen, * having hedged thy mind with temperance, * 
thou didst ascend on high * to the Cause of all things. * Having quelled the turmoil of 
the world * and stilled the tumult thereof, * thou wast made steadfast in purity of 
mind, O most wise one, * by Him Who is truly the ultimate Desire, ** O divinely 
wise and venerable one.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VI: 
Rejoice with us, O all ye ranks of the angels, for your commander and our helper, 
the great archangel, appearing today in his most honored temple, doth bestow 
sanctification. Wherefore, raising hymnody as is meet, we cry out to him: protect us 
beneath the shelter of thy wings, O great archangel Gabriel.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee hanging upon the Cross * the all-pure one 
weeping, cried aloud with a mother’s grief: * ‘O my Son and my God, O my sweetest 
Child, ** how dost Thou endure this shameful suffering?’ 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, then:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
The composition of John the Monk: As captain, champion and foremost leader of 
the angels, O supreme commander, from all want and tribulation, infirmity and 
grievous offenses do thou free those who hymn thee with faith and entreat thee, O 
glorious one, who, as one immaterial, dost clearly behold the Immaterial One and art 
illumined with the unapproachable light of the Master’s glory. For in His love for 
mankind He received flesh from the Virgin for our sake, desiring to save our race.  
Troparion of the holy archangel, in Tone IV: 
O supreme commander of the heavenly hosts, * we entreat thee unworthy as we 
are, * that by thy prayers, thou wilt encompass us * with the protection of the wings 
of thine immaterial glory * preserving us who fall down before thee and earnestly cry 
aloud: * deliver us from all misfortunes, ** for thou art the commander of the hosts 
on high. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 4 Troparia, including its Irmos; 
The canon of the archangel, with 6 Troparia;  
And that of the venerable Stephen, with 4 Troparia. 
ODE I 
Canon of the archangel, the composition of Joseph, the acrostic whereof is: 
 “I praise Gabriel as all-honorable”, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O archangel of the Lord, I entreat thee, as thou art light by partaking immaterially 
in the ultimate Light; do thou illumine my mind by thy prayers, that I may hymn thee.  
In gladness let us form a godly choir today, honoring the foremost of the 
incorporeal intelligences, who announced the ineffable Joy which for the good of the 
world came thereto.  
Having thee, O Gabriel, as a great intercessor and helper before God, and as a 
rampart and confirmation, we who love thee praise thee, and are delivered from 
misfortunes and the assaults of the serpent.  
Theotokion: When Gabriel beheld thee, the pure and all-immaculate one, he cried 
out in splendor unto thee, O Lady: Rejoice, thou who hast not known wedlock, thou 
salvation of mankind and the boast and praise of the angels!  
Canon of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
In debt to thee for thy teaching, O most blessed one, plaiting a wreath of praises 
we offer it to thee in return. By thy prayers, O most noetically rich father, grant me 
the grace of spirit, showing thyself to be merciful.  
The most pernicious assaults of the passions didst thou quell, O father, possessed 
of the divine wisdom of the Word; for thou wast beneficent and right eloquent, meek 
and humble, and crowned by the Word with wisdom and knowledge, O Stephen.  
In a sacred manner thou didst adorn thyself with understanding and the active 
working of grace, O divinely eloquent father Stephen, desiring the crown of the glory 
of Christ; and thou wast not amiss in thy desire, O most blessed one.  
Manifestly didst thou lay hold of chastity, extreme meekness and lofty humility, O 
God-bearer; and, exalted thereby, through the activity of thy works and thy vision, 
thou didst present thyself before the Lord, rejoicing, and didst receive an 
imperishable crown.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: O pure one, thou hast been revealed to be more exalted than all 
creatures, visible and invisible; for thou hast given birth unto the Creator, in that it 
was His good pleasure to assume flesh in thy womb. Him do thou now entreat with 
boldness, that He save those who hymn thee.  
ODE III 
Canon of the archangel 
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
O Gabriel, in that thou art truly immaterial and illumined immaterially through 
partaking of the immaterial Light, thou art seen to be a secondary luminary, ever 
enlightening the material mortals who hymn thee.  
O thou who art great among the angels, thou hast been deemed worthy of renown, 
having disclosed unto us the great mystery whereby we who honor thee have been 
caught up to the most exalted heights.  
From heaven dost thou ever appear unto all who seek thee with love, stilling the 
tempest of temptations and tribulations which rage against them, O Gabriel, thou 
supreme commander.  
Theotokion: Giving utterance unto the mystery which had been hidden from all 
ages, Gabriel once cried out to thee, O Maiden: Rejoice, thou palace of God, wherein 
making His abode He hath deified all mankind, in that He is full of loving-kindness!  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a lily * 
at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established 
Like the sun thy most splendid life hath shone forth throughout the world, O 
God-bearing Stephen, illumining those who approach thee with faith and love.  
The ends of the earth are illumined by thy teachings, O venerable one, for thou 
didst shine forth like a beacon upon the Church of Christ, wherein my heart hath 
been established, O God-bearer.  
Thou didst maintain thy soul un-enslaved by the passions and the pleasures of the 
flesh, O honored God-bearer Stephen. Wherefore, we now praise thee as is meet.  
Theotokion: In thy purity thou hast been revealed to be like a lily amid thorns, O 
Lady, radiant in the splendors of thy virginity, O most pure Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the holy archangel, in Tone II: 
O wise Gabriel, thou leader of the angels, * minister of the glory of God * and 
divine champion of the world, * who dost behold the glory of God in the heavens, * 
and bestow grace upon the earth; * save and preserve those who cry out to thee: ** 
Be thou thyself our helper, and none shall prevail against us!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy archangel, in Tone IV, 
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Thou art foremost among the incorporeal ministers of God, O glorious Gabriel, 
for to thee was entrusted the dread mystery of the ineffable birth giving of the holy 
Virgin, which was commanded immemorially, when thou didst exclaim to her: 
Rejoice, O joyous one! Wherefore as is meet, we the faithful ever bless thee with glad-
ness.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
 The amendment of thy life doth truly serve as a light to the feet of those who 
emulate thee with faith, O father Stephen. Wherefore, by thy supplications do thou 
ever save from all imprisonment those who bless thee with love, entreating Christ, O 
blessed, right wondrous and venerable one.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
As an uncultivated vine, O Virgin, * thou didst sprout forth the most comely 
Cluster of grapes * Which poureth forth upon us the wine of salvation * making glad 
the souls and bodies of all. * Wherefore, ever blessing thee as the cause of good 
things, * with the angel we cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!  
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure unwedded Mother, O Christ, * upon seeing Thee 
hanging dead upon the Cross, * said, weeping maternally: * “How hath the iniquitous 
and thankless council of the Jews * repaid Thy many and great wonders, O my Son, * 
Thou Who hast filled them with Thy gifts? ** I hymn Thy divine condescension!”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the archangel 
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Of old, by communion with God O right wondrous Gabriel, thou didst stand 
enlightening 
the 
Prophet 
Daniel, 
having 
expounded 
manifestations 
of 
incomprehensible things through the Spirit.  
With mouths of clay we joyously praise thee who art fiery by nature. From the fire 
which burneth everlastingly do thou rescue us by thy divine mediations, O Gabriel.  
Arrayed in divine vesture which shineth with unapproachable glory more brightly 
than the sun, O supreme commander of God’s servants, thou dost stand in gladness 
before the King of heaven.  
Theotokion: Gabriel, understanding through the Spirit that thou art wholly pure, O 
all-immaculate one, manifestly cried out to thee: Rejoice, thou who art the deliverance 
from the primal curse, and the restoration of the forefathers!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Thou, O Stephen, wast the crown of monastics, adorned with the virtues as with 
precious stones; for thou art truly seen to be a divinely joyous adornment, O blessed 
one.  
Thou didst hold divine wisdom in veneration, O God-bearer; wherefore, Wisdom 
hath made thee radiant with crowns of spiritual gifts, bestowing eternal glory upon 
thee, O most honored father.  
By the splendor of thy demeanor and the nature of thy goodness thou didst live a 
fitting life, O venerable Stephen; wherefore, thou hast become accessible unto all, O 
all-blessed and most wondrous one.  
Theotokion: Eve offered me the fruit of mortality, but thou, O most pure one, 
giving birth to Life hypostatic, hast straightway set our life aright. Wherefore, I cry 
out to thee: Rejoice, O Ever-virgin!  
ODE V  
Canon of the archangel  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Made radiant by communing with the primordial Mind, thou art seen to be a 
secondary luminary, crying aloud with the countless ranks of the angels: Holy is the 
Father, the Accomplisher of all things, the co-beginningless Son, and the Spirit Who 
is enthroned with them!  
Fiery is thine aspect, most wondrous thy beauty, and great is thy glory, astonishing 
every mind, O Gabriel, great leader of the incorporeal hosts of God, thou adornment 
of all who hymn thee with faith.  
When of old the godly Zacharias beheld thee standing nearby at the hour of 
censing, he fell mute; for he did not believe the strange proclamation made by thee, O 
Gabriel, thou supreme commander.  
Theotokion: As thou wast a temple of sanctification, O most immaculate one, at 
the cry of the archangel thou hast given birth unto the Most holy God Who resteth in 
the saints, Who sanctifieth all, rescuing them from evils.  
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: O Christ God Thou art a mediator between God and man; * for by 
Thee, O Master, * we have been led from the night of ignorance, * to Thy 
Father, the Source of light.  
With desire for dispassion didst thou quell the assaults of the passions, O God-
bearing Stephen; and with visions and good works thou didst enlighten the state of 
thy soul, O father.  
With a pure mind and spiritual writings didst thou converse, O divinely eloquent 
Stephen, gathering a divine wealth of visions and deeds, O venerable father.  
Plumbing the abyss of wisdom, O Stephen, thou didst attain to the discovery of 
that which is right profitable; and for thine efforts thou didst acquire the precious 
pearl of knowledge, O most blessed one.  
Theotokion: Lo! in a manner surpassing all telling thou didst contain Christ God 
within thy womb, O most pure Theotokos; and the Prophet Isaiah cried aloud, 
saying: Thou hast given birth unto Him Who is above our essence, O Birthgiver of 
God!  
ODE VI 
Canon of the archangel 
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Earthly tongues cannot honor thee, the radiant and heavenly intelligence, most 
splendidly illumined with divine radiance in a manner past understanding and all 
telling.  
O greatly splendid beam of the Sun, leader of the fiery ministers, by thy radiant 
entreaties to the Master rescue those who hymn thee from the darkness of the 
passions.  
Confound the counsels of the heathen; confirm the Orthodox Faith; and abolish 
the divisions of the Church, by thy supplications to the Creator of all, O archangel.  
Theotokion: Obedient to the divine words of Gabriel, O pure one, thou hast given 
birth in the flesh unto the beginningless Word Who hath delivered the world from 
madness. 
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
 Thou hast been shown to be a most radiant beacon for the whole world, 
illumining with the brilliance of thy words those who with faith and love have 
recourse unto thee, O father Stephen.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou didst pass thy blessed life lulling thy senses to sleep and setting thyself 
beyond the tumult of the world; and didst thereby draw nigh unto God, O Stephen.  
Crowned with the virtues, O most wise Stephen, thou hast now been crowned as 
with a most comely crown, having gained rule over the passions, O most eminent 
one.  
Theotokion: In a manner transcending nature, thou hast given birth, O Virgin, and 
hast remained a virgin forever, having revealed the true divinity of thy Son and God.  
Kontakion of the holy archangel, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”: 
Supreme commander of God, minister of His divine glory, * leader of the angels 
and instructor of mankind: * ask for us great mercy and that which is profitable, * in 
that thou art the supreme commander ** of the incorporeal hosts.  
Ikos: O Immortal One Who lovest mankind, in Thy Scriptures Thou didst say, that 
a multitude of angels rejoice in heaven over one repentant sinner. Wherefore, O Thou 
Who alone art sinless and knowest the hearts of all, we who are amid transgression 
ever dare to entreat Thee, in that Thou art compassionate: Have pity and send down 
compunction upon us, even though we are unworthy; and grant us forgiveness, for 
the supreme commander of the incorporeal hosts doth beseech Thee on behalf of us 
all.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the Archangel  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Thou didst announce the birth of John unto Zacharias, O glorious one, when he 
once stood within the temple of God and chanted unto our Redeemer and God: 
Blessed art Thou, O supremely hymned Lord and God of our fathers!  
The most glorious magnificence of thy temple, O Gabriel, doth most splendidly 
sanctify the souls of the faithful and impel them to cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O 
supremely hymned Lord and God of our fathers!  
Mystically enlightened by communing with the primordial Light, O supreme 
commander, thou art seen to be truly a secondary luminary, and dost ever illumine 
those who sing: Blessed art Thou, O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
fathers!  
Theotokion: Gabriel, the supreme commander, was sent to announce joy unto 
thee, O pure Virgin Mother, for whose sake grief hath ceased, the curse hath truly lost 
its force, and blessing hath blossomed forth for the faithful throughout the ages.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
Shining forth with the grace of the Spirit, O venerable one, the words of thy 
teachings emit a sweet fragrance; for honoring the one Godhead in three Hypostases, 
and hymning the incarnation of the Word, thou dost render us fragrant, O most 
noetically rich father.  
With purity of mind and splendor of knowledge thou didst pass thy life, O divinely 
wise one; and with purity of body and the splendor of virginity thou didst show 
thyself to be an offering to the Almighty Who seeth all things.  
As thy discourse appeared seasoned with salt, O most wondrous one, so did thy 
life shine forth radiantly with grace, wherefore, rejoicing in Christ, thou hast made 
thine abode in the mansions of heaven, standing before Him now with boldness.  
Theotokion: Directing my life, O most pure one, do thou guide it to thy calm 
haven, O thou who hast given birth to the Wellspring of blessing Who bestoweth an 
abundance of goodness upon all the faithful.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the archangel  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
With sacred utterances the priestly people hymn thee in gladness, for thou didst 
announce unto the Virgin, O archangel, the Word, the Cause of all, Who became 
incarnate for our sake, becoming one of us.  
Uniting thyself immaterially to the great and primordial Mind, O archangel, with 
thy fiery mouth thou dost chant the awesome hymn which all the angelic choirs sing: 
Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Manifestly adorned with divine splendor, thou dost traverse the heavens and the 
earth, carrying out the wishes of Christ, the God of all, O Gabriel, thou leader of 
angels and beauty of those who ever praise thee with faith.  
The Word, wishing to associate Himself hypostatically, in the flesh, with mankind, 
had thee go before Him and prepare a sanctified palace for Him, O sacred Gabriel, 
chanting: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Let us hymn the blessed Virgin as the beautiful throne of the King, 
for she is more eminent than all other creatures, having alone brought into the world 
the Transcendent One Who hath deified mankind through the supra-natural union of 
His ineffable and wondrous birthgiving.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
In accordance with the meaning of thy name, Christ, the Bestower of life, placed a 
splendid crown upon thy head, O Stephen; for thou didst shine forth in deeds and 
visions, and wast revealed to be one who crieth aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord!  
Having transcended all that is sensual, O most blessed one, thou didst draw nigh 
to the primordial Mind in purity of soul, wearing a crown because of the splendor of 
thy life, O Stephen, and crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
With eager desire thou didst follow after the God-bearing Sabbas, O most blessed 
Stephen, emulating his godly life through the splendor of thy life, O all-famed one, 
thus being a truly worthy disciple of him.  
Theotokion: The dispassionate Mind hath united Himself to a human mind in thy 
womb, O most pure one, and He Who transcendeth time hath come under time 
through the coarseness of the flesh. Wherefore, with faith and love we glorify thee, 
the Theotokos.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the archangel  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Ministering before the throne of grace, illumined with splendor which passeth 
understanding, edified in sacred manner, beholding the Light and enlightening those 
who honor thee with faith, O sacred Gabriel, supreme commander, thou dost 
intercede for us in an awesome manner.  
Like the heavens adorned with stars, thou dost appear resplendent with divine 
splendors; and, like a general, thou dost hold a most radiant staff in thy hands, going 
about the whole universe fulfilling the will of the Master and ever rescuing the faithful 
from evil circumstances.  
Still thou the cruel storm of the barbarians which ever riseth up against thy 
servants, and heal thou the breaches within the Church; grant deliverance from 
transgressions unto those who hymn thee and victories to our Orthodox hierarchs 
over all heresies, through thy fervent intercession, O Gabriel.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
O most good and most glorious twain, Michael and Gabriel, who stand before the 
throne of the glory of God: ask forgiveness of sins and release from evils for all, in 
that ye are our intercessors and in all emulate the goodness of the Master.  
Theotokion: The light of grace shone forth through thy birthgiving illumining the 
whole world and destroying the princes of darkness, O most pure Birthgiver of God, 
thou boast of the angels and salvation of all those who praise thee with unceasing 
hymnody.  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
O most honored and blessed Stephen, who delightest now in a pure manner, 
receiving the sustenance which transcendeth understanding where the assemblies of 
the saints join chorus in the praise of God; in thy mediation draw unto thyself those 
who now hymn thee.  
Rejoicing, thou hast passed over to the ultimate Desire, to Him Who alone is 
blessedness itself, to the highest Beauty, to the Life which in truth never ageth, to the 
never-waning Light, O God-bearing father Stephen.  
In the assemblies of monks thou didst shine forth like the sun, sanctified from 
thine earliest childhood, O Stephen most sweet; emitting the virtues of thy life like 
beams, O our God-bearing and venerable father.  
Theotokion: Perceiving from afar with prophetic eyes, the prophets clearly 
proclaimed thee who wast to become the Mother of the Creator and Master of all. 
Wherefore, we confess thee to be the Theotokos, O all-hymned one.  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us ...”: 
O supreme commander of God, arraying thyself in thy sheltering wings, protect 
me who have recourse unto thee, deliver me from the wicked interrogators when I 
depart this life, and save me by thine entreaties.  
Theotokion: God hath given thee to us, O pure one, as a refuge, strength and aid 
amid our tribulations and evil circumstances. Wherefore, deliver us all from our 
misfortunes. 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone V: 
Where thy grace doth cast its shadow, O archangel, thence is the power of the 
devil driven away; for the fallen morning-star cannot bear to look upon thy light. 
Wherefore, we entreat thee: quench thou the fiery darts which he doth loose at us, 
delivering us from his temptations by thy mediation, O right laudable Gabriel, thou 
supreme commander.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone V: 
Of old, the Virgin Mother, the all-blessed Maiden, beholding the Lamb, her Son, 
lifted up upon the Cross, cried out, weeping: “Woe is me, O my Son! How is it that 
Thou diest Who art in essence God immortal?”  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the archangel.  
O Gabriel, in that thou art truly immaterial and illumined immaterially through 
partaking of the immaterial Light, thou art seen to be a secondary luminary, ever 
enlightening the material mortals who hymn thee.  
O thou who art great among the angels, thou hast been deemed worthy of renown, 
having disclosed unto us the great mystery whereby we who honor thee have been 
caught up to the most exalted heights.  
From heaven dost thou ever appear unto all who seek thee with love, stilling the 
tempest of temptations and tribulations which rage against them, O Gabriel, thou 
supreme commander.  
Theotokion: Giving utterance unto the mystery which had been hidden from all 
ages, Gabriel once cried out to thee, O Maiden: Rejoice, thou palace of God, wherein 
making His abode He hath deified all mankind, in that He is full of loving-kindness!  
Troparion of the archangel, in Tone IV: 
O supreme commander of the heavenly hosts, * we entreat thee unworthy as we 
are, * that by thy prayers, thou wilt encompass us * with the protection of the wings 
of thine immaterial glory * preserving us who fall down before thee and earnestly cry 
aloud: * deliver us from all misfortunes, ** for thou art the commander of the hosts 
on high. 
ODE III, Kontakion of the archangel, in Tone II: 
O wise Gabriel, thou leader of the angels, * minister of the glory of God * and 
divine champion of the world, * who dost behold the glory of God in the heavens, * 
and bestow grace upon the earth; * save and preserve those who cry out to thee: ** 
Be thou thyself our helper, and none shall prevail against us!  
ODE VI, Kontakion of the archangel, in Tone II: 
Supreme commander of God, minister of His divine glory, * leader of the angels 
and instructor of mankind: * ask for us great mercy and that which is profitable, * in 
that thou art the supreme commander** of the incorporeal hosts.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His ministers a 
flame of fire.  
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been magnified 
exceedingly.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 305 (HEB. 2:2-10) 
Brethren: For if the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression 
and disobedience received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we 
neglect so great a salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and 
was confirmed unto us by them that heard him; God also bearing them witness, both 
with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, 
according to His own will? For unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the 
world to come, whereof we speak. But one in a certain place testified, saying, What is 
man, that thou art mindful of him? or the Son of Man, that Thou visitest Him? Thou 
madest Him a little lower than the angels; Thou crownedst Him with glory and 
honor, and didst set Him over the works of Thy hands; Thou hast put all things in 
subjection under His feet. For in that He put all in subjection under Him, He left 
nothing that is not put under Him. But now we see not yet all things put under Him. 
But we see Jesus, Who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of 
death, crowned with glory and honor; that He by the grace of God should taste death 
for every man. For it became Him, for Whom are all things, and by Whom are all 
things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation 
perfect through sufferings.  
Alleluia, in Tone V: Praise the Lord, all ye His angels; praise Him, all ye His 
hosts.  
Verse: For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were 
created.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 51 (LK. 10:16-21) 
He that heareth you heareth Me; and he that despiseth you despiseth Me; and he 
that despiseth Me despiseth Him that sent Me. And the seventy returned again with 
joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through Thy name. And He said 
unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give unto you 
power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy; and 
nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the 
spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in 
heaven. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of 
heaven and earth, that Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and 
hast revealed them unto babes; even so, Father; for so it seemed good in Thy sight.  
Communion Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of 
fire.  
