--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 15th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
THE HOLY EQUAL-OF-THE-APOSTLES GRAND PRINCE 
VLADIMIR, IN HOLY BAPTISM BASIL 
AT GREAT VESPERS 
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” we chant 6 Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
In word and deed * thou wast a second Constantine; * for he was born in a 
Christian age, * yet remained a pagan for many years, * while thou wast born among 
pagans, * yet came to love Christ Who loved thee, * and to Him thou hast ascended, 
rejoicing. * Cease thou never to entreat Him in behalf of those ** who honor thy 
memory. (Twice)  
Mount Sinai is glad, * shining eternally with splendor, * having been sanctified by 
the law of Moses * and seen the Invisible One; * and thy great city, O Vladimir, * 
rejoiceth and is glad, shining with splendor, * beholding in itself, and not in darkness, 
* the Son Who is glorified with the Father in the Spirit. ** Him do thou entreat, that 
He save and enlighten our souls. (Twice) 
Spiritually, thou wast the father, * and materially thou wast the king * of the 
Russian people, O Vladimir; * and as a true preacher, an apostle of Christ, * thou 
didst proclaim the baptism of salvation. * And splendidly illumining all therewith, * 
thou didst sanctify the people * in all the lands of thy kingdom, ** O blessed one. 
Thou wast a root of the Orthodox Faith, O Vladimir, * watered by the most holy 
Spirit, * putting forth for us divinely planted branches * which emit the sweet 
fragrance of flowers: * the wondrous Boris and Gleb, the lovers of piety, * who pour 
forth miracles in abundance upon all the faithful. * Standing with them before Christ, 
** pray thou, that He save and enlighten our souls. 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Come, let us all hasten to the honored memorial of the father of Russia, * 
Vladimir, our leader; * for he was born of the heathen, * but came to love Christ Who 
loved him, * and to Him hath he now gone up, rejoicing, with his grandmother Olga. 
* For he taught all his people * to believe in and worship the one God in Trinity, * 
and, destroying the idols, he trampled them underfoot, * and produced for us his 
precious offspring, Boris and Gleb. * Wherefore, faithfully honoring their memory 
with hymns and splendor, * we celebrate with love, * that they may pray for us to the 
Lord, * grant victory to the faithful over the pagan foe, * bring peace to the whole 
world, ** and save our souls. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth forth 
from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, twofold in nature * 
but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect 
man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O unwedded Mother, ** 
that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
READING FROM THE 3rd BOOK OF KINGS. 
Solomon stood up before the altar in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, 
and spread forth his hands toward heaven: and he said, “Lord God of Israel, there is 
no God like Thee, in heaven above, and on the earth beneath, If the heaven, and 
heaven of heavens will not suffice Thee; how much less this house that I have builded 
to Thy name? Yet Thou, O Lord God of Israel, shalt have respect unto my 
supplication, to hearken unto the prayer which Thy servant maketh unto Thee in Thy 
presence this day; that Thine eyes may be open toward this house day and night, even 
toward the place whereof Thou saidst, My name shall be there: that Thou mayest 
hearken unto the prayer which Thy servant prayeth at this place day and night. And 
Thou shalt hearken unto the prayer of Thy servant, and of Thy people Israel, when 
they shall pray toward this place: and Thou shalt hear in Thy dwelling place in heaven; 
and Thou shalt do, and be gracious.”  
READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH.  
Let my soul rejoice in the Lord; for He hath clothed me with a robe of salvation, 
and a garment of gladness: He hath put a mitre on me, as upon a bridegroom, and 
decked me with an ornament as a bride. And as the earth bringeth forth her flowers, 
and as a garden the seed thereof: so shall the Lord cause righteousness and exceeding 
joy to spring forth before all the nations. For Zion’s sake I will not hold my peace, 
and for Jerusalem’s sake I will not slacken, until the righteousness thereof go forth as 
light, and my salvation burn as a torch. And the nations shall see thy righteousness; 
and all kings thy glory: and he shall call thee by a new name, which the Lord shall 
name. Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal 
diadem in the hand of thy God. And thou shalt no more be termed forsaken; and thy 
land shall no more be called desert: for thou shalt be called my pleasure, and thy land 
inhabited: for the Lord hath taken pleasure in thee, and thy land shall be inhabited. 
And as a young man liveth with a virgin, so shall my sons dwell in thee: and it shall 
come to pass that as a bridegroom shall rejoice over a bride, so shall the Lord rejoice 
over thee. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH. 
Shine, shine, O Jerusalem, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen 
upon thee. Behold, darkness and gloom shall cover the earth upon the nations: but 
the Lord shall appear upon thee, and His glory shall be seen upon thee. And kings 
shall walk in thy light, and the Gentiles in Thy brightness. Lift up thine eyes round 
about, and behold thy children gathered together: all thy sons are come from far, and 
thy daughters shall be borne upon shoulders. Then shalt thou see, and fear, and be 
astonished in thine heart; for the riches of the sea shall come round about thee, and 
of nations and peoples; and herds of camels shall come unto thee, and the camels of 
Midian and Ephah shall cover thee; all they from Sheba shall come bringing gold, and 
they shall bring frankincense; and they shall shew forth the salvation of the Lord. And 
all the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together, and the rams of Nebaioth shall 
come; and acceptable sacrifices shall be offered upon Mine altar, and My house of 
prayer shall be glorified. Who are these that fly as clouds, and as doves with young to 
see Me? The isles have waited for Me, and the ships of Tarshish among the first, to 
bring thy children from afar, and their silver and gold with them, and for the sake of 
the holy name of the Lord, and because the Holy One of Israel is glorified. And 
strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee; for because 
of My wrath I smote thee, but because of mercy I loved thee. And thy gates shall be 
open continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; to bring unto thee the power 
of the Gentiles, and their kings leading them. For the nations and the kings that will 
not serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly waste. And the glory of 
Lebanon shall come unto thee, with the cypress, and pine, and cedar together, to 
glorify My holy place; and I will make the place of My feet glorious. The sons also of 
them that afflicted thee, and of them that provoked thee, shall come unto thee in fear; 
and thou shalt be called the city of the Lord, Zion, the Holy One of Israel. Whereas 
thou art become forsaken and hated, and there was no helper, therefore I will make 
thee a perpetual joy, a gladness from generation to generation. Thou shalt also suck 
the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt eat the riches of kings: and thou shalt know that I, 
the Lord, am thy Savior, and thy Redeemer, the God of Israel. 
At the Litiya, the Stichera of the temple, then in Tone II: 
Today the memory of the pious Prince Vladimir * hath shone, poured forth like 
myrrh; * for, having loved Christ and triumphed over the idols, * he built churches in 
his land * to Him Who was crucified for our sake, * and hath received a crown and 
kingdom ** in the heavens. 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Come ye, let us all hasten with faith * to the honored memorial of the father of 
Russia, * Vladimir, our guide; * for, lo! he was born to the heathens, * but came to 
love Christ Who loved him; * and unto Him he hath ascended, rejoicing, * with his 
grandmother Olga. * Wherefore, we also celebrate with love, * entreating him to pray 
to the Lord for us, ** that He grant peace to the world and save our souls. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O most 
pure one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Lady, ** the 
intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! * The vaunted mind is cast * into the depths today, * 
and all the armies of evil lament, * beholding a most wild shoot divinely planted * and 
glorified by the power of God, * and crowned by God with splendor: * Vladimir the 
great, ** our faithful leader. 
Verse: I have raised up * one chosen out of My people. 
Wondrous is the abyss of miracles! * For those who before were hardened in 
mind * and raged in vain, * are gladdened today in the honored Church * by the face 
of Vladimir; * and Christ God doth reign, having acquired him * as He did Paul of 
old, * and in His land hath set him as a faithful prince, ** who hath enlightened his 
people with honorable baptism. 
Verse: With My holy oil * have I anointed him. 
Rejoice, O boast of Russia! * Rejoice, O helmsman of the faithful! * Rejoice, O 
godly Vladimir, our leader! * Rejoice, bulwark of the Faith! * Rejoice, most glorious 
wonder of wonders, * calm haven of those who have recourse to thee! * Rejoice, all-
holy root of the Faith * and intercessor for those who hymn thee ** and magnify thee 
with faith! 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Assembling today, O ye councils of Russia, * let us laud Vladimir the Great, * the 
author of piety and preacher of the Faith, * supreme among the princes of Russia, * 
the peer of the apostles; * and with praises and spiritual hymns let us crown him, 
saying: * Rejoice, O most valiant warrior of Christ, * for, having utterly destroyed the 
tyrannous enemy * and delivered us from his deceit, thou hast led us to the King, 
Christ our God. * O most blessed and all-praised one, * beseech Him to grant peace 
and health, steadfast might and victory * over the heathen to thy people, ** and great 
mercy to our souls. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O Sovereign lady, * accept the supplications of thy servants, ** and deliver us 
from all want and grief. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 
After “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,”  
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
Thou wast like a merchant that seeketh a beautiful pearl, * O glorious sovereign 
Vladimir, * sitting on the height of the throne of the mother of cities, God-protected 
Kiev. * Searching and sending to the imperial city to know the Orthodox Faith, * 
thou didst find Christ, the priceless Pearl, * Who chose thee as a second Paul, * and 
Who did shake off thy spiritual and physical blindness in the holy font. * Wherefore, 
we who are thy people celebrate thy falling asleep. * Pray that thy Russian land be 
saved, * and that Orthodox people ** be granted peace and great mercy. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Resurrectional Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
Thou wast like a merchant that seeketh a beautiful pearl, * O glorious sovereign 
Vladimir, * sitting on the height of the throne of the mother of cities, God-protected 
Kiev. * Searching and sending to the imperial city to know the Orthodox Faith, * 
thou didst find Christ, the priceless Pearl, * Who chose thee as a second Paul, * and 
Who did shake off thy spiritual and physical blindness in the holy font. * Wherefore, 
we who are thy people celebrate thy falling asleep. * Pray that thy Russian land be 
saved, * and that Orthodox people ** be granted peace and great mercy. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Resurrectional Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
O blessed Prince Vladimir, equal of the apostles, * we cry out to thee as to the 
author and root of the Faith and the destroyer of the idols: * Entreat Christ God, that 
He grant remission of sins ** unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
Do thou guide to the path of repentance, * us who have ever wandered away into 
the trackless wastes of evil * and have angered the supremely good Lord, * O blessed 
Mary who knewest not wedlock, ** thou refuge of despairing men and dwelling-place 
of God.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Taught ineffable heavenly wisdom by God, * thou didst richly attain an 
understanding of His Faith and didst quickly hasten to His beauty. * Wherefore, thou 
didst illumine the eyes of thy mind and didst lift thyself up to an understanding of the 
pious Faith. * For which cause, we say in celebration: * Blessed is God Who illumined 
thy heart with the light of knowledge, O radiant luminary Vladimir! ** Entreat Christ 
God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with 
love. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
The gloom of sin doth cover me, as do the shameful works which I have 
constantly committed, without restraint; * and the oppression of my conscience 
tormenteth me. * Woe is me! Where now shall I hide myself? To whom shall I flee to 
find help again? * before thee alone do I fall down, O Mother of God, and I entreat 
thee: ** Pray thou continually, that our souls be saved! 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify * we magnify thee, * O holy 
Equal-of-the-Apostles Grand Prince Vladimir, * and we honor thy holy 
memory, * for thou didst trample down the idols, ** and enlighten with 
baptism the whole Russian land. 
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the work 
of His hands.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice). 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Thou didst acquire speedy and steadfast zeal * for the true Faith of Christ; * and 
having found the spiritual font of the mind of God, * thou didst quickly hasten with 
love, * and, washing away the defilement of transgressions, * thou didst likewise 
sanctify thy people. ** Pray thou to God, that our souls be saved!  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Go thou quickly in advance, O prince, thou guide of the faithful and favorite of 
God; * for our enemies mock us and cause us to stumble. * By thy faith destroy those 
who make war upon us, * that they also may learn to glorify thy memory; ** and save 
us who hymn thee from all wrath. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The Word of the Father, Christ our God, * Who was incarnate of thee, * we have 
come to know, O Virgin Theotokos, * who alone art pure, who alone art blessed. ** 
Wherefore, we unceasingly hymn and magnify thee.  
Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I have raised up one chosen * out of My people. 
Verse: For My hand shall be unto Him an ally.  
Let every breath ...,  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN, § 36 (JN. 10: 9-16)  
The Lord said: I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and 
shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to 
kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it 
more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the 
sheep. But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, 
seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, 
and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not 
for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. 
As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the 

--- PAGE 8 ---
sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and 
they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Assembling, let us praise Vladimir, * the emulator of the apostles, * our most 
blessed father and teacher, * through whom we have come to know Christ God. * 
Drawing nigh unto the Light out of the darkness, * let us illumine our eyes and hearts, 
and joining chorus on the day of his memorial, * let us be glad together, ** having 
found in him an Orthodox guide to the kingdom of heaven.  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (From the Oktoechos - Tone VIII Compline 
for Tuesday Evening), with 6 Troparia; and two Canons of the saint, with 8 Troparia. 
ODE I  
1st Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified! 
Refrain: Holy Equal-of-the-Apostles, Grand Prince Vladimir, pray to God for us. 
O Word Who art also without beginning, the Creator of the four elements of old, 
Who by them hast bound together the whole world: Loose thou my soul, which hath 
been bound by the passions, that, joining chorus, I may hymn the glorious Prince 
Vladimir. 
O Master Who from the heavens descended immaterially upon the spiritual 
mountain: send down abundant radiance from on high upon the souls of us who 
make supplication, that we may praise the wondrous Prince Vladimir as is meet. 
Theotokion: O Mistress, thou art the boast of mothers and virgins, who gavest 
birth to Life and the Creator of the world, yet didst not experience the pain of 
childbirth; and though thou art a mother, thou hast remained a virgin. Wherefore, 
praising thee, we cry out to thee: Rejoice! 
2nd Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory.  
Refrain: Holy Equal-of-the-Apostles, Grand Prince Vladimir, pray to God for us. 
Come, ye faithful, let us give utterance to a spiritual hymn, and let us glorify Christ 
Who hath splendidly glorified the honored Vladimir, the great prince. 
O Benefactor Who givest seed to the sower, grant me discourse, loosing the bonds 
of my tongue; and renew me, O Savior, that I may glorify Thee with faith. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., O Thou Who callest all to thee, not by force, but willingly: As of old 
Thou didst call Moses and Elijah, so now hast Thou spoken in the heart of the 
faithful and right laudable prince. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: Adorned with the beauty of the virtues, O pure Mother 
of God, thou didst conceive the true God Who hath enlightened us with divine 
virtues. 
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
ODE III  
1st Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: My heart is established in the Lord, * my horn is exalted in my God, * 
my mouth is enlarged against mine enemies, * and I rejoice in Thy salvation. 
Like a clarion of godly tone thy spiritual tongue sounded forth, O blessed one, 
announcing to all the ends of the Russian land the baptism of Christ’s Orthodox 
Faith. And illumined thereby, thou hast enlightened the whole world. 
Thy most glorious memory shineth forth today, and our Orthodox hierarchs, and 
all the Christian people whom thou didst lead to the noetic Light, celebrate it, praising 
thee as their forefather. 
Theotokion: The shadow of the law passed away because of thy birthgiving, O 
Theotokos, from whence came the grace of Christ our God, the Word of the Father. 
And the glorious prince, acknowledging Him, hath splendidly adorned thy church. 
2nd Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
O Merciful One, Who enlightened Paul and made him Thine elect, by Thy baptism 
Thou hast now also dispelled the affliction of sight of Vladimir, the father of Russia. 
Thou hast shown thyself to be an emulator of the faithful Constantine, receiving 
Christ in thy heart; and life an apostle thou hast taught the whole land of Russia His 
commandments. 
Glory ..., Aided by the power of God, thou didst topple the ungodly Perun, the vile 
abode of the demons, and binding him to a horse’s tail, thou didst command thy 
soldiers to beat him. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: The great Prince Vladimir, the vessel of God and 
emulator of the Apostle Paul, found the Virgin Mary to be a holy tabernacle and 
erected this divine church to her name. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Sessional Hymn of the righteous one, in Tone II: 
Ever keeping vigil in prayer with joyous soul, O Vladimir, * thou didst therefore 
draw forth the wisdom of the Spirit * from the wellspring which cometh down from 
on high. * Wherefore, thinking like the sun with faith, * and praying unceasingly to 
Christ, haste thou with all speed, O compassionate one, ** to save the world from 
transgressions. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
О pure, unwedded Theotokos, who without seed hast given birth to the Master of 
all, with the angels entreat Him, that we may be delivered from all doubt, and that He 
grant compunction and light unto our souls, and the cleansing of offenses, О thou 
who alone art quick to help. 
ODE IV  
1st Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: With noetic eyes the Prophet Habbakuk * foresaw Thy coming, O 
Lord; * wherefore he cried aloud: * 'God shall come out of Theman!' Glory to 
Thy power! * Glory to Thy condescension!  
Radiant and sweet is the sun of heaven after it hath been covered by a cloud; and 
gladsome and joyous is the spring after the sorrow of winter. And thou, O Vladimir, 
hath through baptism shone forth upon us like the radiant sun after the cloud of the 
gloom of idolatry. 
On the road to Damascus, Saul the Pharisee was struck blind by a small measure 
of the radiance of the great Light, but his sight was restored in baptism; and thou hast 
become his emulator, O glorious one, who, having travelled to Korsun, didst dispel 
the darkness from thine eyes. 
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou hast been shown to be an un-watered root putting 
forth our deliverance in giving birth to Christ our God, the radiant Fruit. Illumine my 
soul, which hath been enshrouded in gloom by the passions, and ask for me 
remission of sins.  
2nd Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Christ the Master performeth an awesome, most glorious and ineffable miracle; for 
he restoreth the whole Russian land through baptism and illumineth Prince Vladimir. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Come ye with splendor! Ye children of Russia, lift up your voices, as is meet, to 
Vladimir our father, and let us all radiantly celebrate his memorial with faith. 
Glory ..., Thou didst drive out the ungodliness of thy father and didst love the 
Orthodox Faith of thine all-honored grandmother, O great Prince Vladimir, equal of 
the apostles of Christ. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: We bless thee, the Virgin, as the gate which giveth 
divine entry to the radiant garden of paradise, as the noetic place of sanctuary, as the 
beauty of Jacob. 
Katavasia: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
ODE V  
1st Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: O Lord our God, bestow Thy peace upon us; * O Lord our God, take us 
for Thy possession; * O Lord, besides Thee we know none other: * and we call 
upon Thy Name. 
Rejoice and adorn thyself in spirit, O great Prince Vladimir; for thou hast offered 
to Christ thine excellent and divinely planted scions, thy fruit of godly excellence: the 
glorious Boris and the pious Gleb. And, standing with them before Christ, pray thou 
on our behalf. 
Isaiah foretold wondrous things for Jerusalem: it shall manifestly be the mountain 
of God and His dwelling-place above the mountains. And we have rightly understood 
the grace of the Spirit which came upon thee, for thou didst build a house for the 
Master on the summit of a mountain. 
Theotokion: In the Spirit Isaiah proclaimed wondrous things concerning thee who, 
though a virgin, wouldst give birth to Christ without seed. And David, thine ancestor, 
wondrously proclaimed thy mighty works; for Christ hath saved us, in that He is 
merciful. 
2nd Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Today the angels of God rejoice in splendor in the heavens, on the day of thy holy 
commemoration; for thou hast saved us from all evil and hast delivered many people, 
and the whole land of Russia, from sacrificing to demons.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
The multitude and dark assembly of the demons lamenteth, beholding the idols 
overturned, which had been raised up for the destruction of mankind, for thou didst 
topple them in accordance with God’s commands, O Vladimir. 
Glory ..., Rejoice and be glad, O servant of Christ, great and wise prince, 
intercessor for our souls; for through thee have we all been delivered from the deceit 
of the demons. Wherefore, we cry aloud to thee: Rejoice! 
Both now ..., Theotokion: Shining from afar in purity, thou wast the divine 
habitation of the Master, O all-hymned one; for thou alone hast been shown to be the 
Mother of God, who bore Him in thine arms as a babe. 
Katavasia: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin 
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, 
* and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn 
thee. 
ODE VI  
1st Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The billows of life trouble me like the waters of the sea, * O Lover of 
Mankind. * Wherefore, like Jonah I cry unto Thee, O Word: * Raise up my life 
from corruption, O compassionate Lord. 
Thou wast an emulator of the piety of the glorious Emperor Constantine who 
enlightened the Greek nations with baptism, O Vladimir; for thou didst most 
gloriously renew thy people with the laver of the Spirit. 
Having sweetened thy soul with the love of Christ and received noetic wings, thou 
didst soar far above the darkness of the idols and didst drive away the gloom of false 
belief, O blessed one, making thine abode in the habitation of God, the Savior of all. 
Theotokion: The Orthodox hierarchy and right-believing people of Russia are of 
good cheer today on the exceedingly radiant memorial of Vladimir, blessing thy 
seedless birthgiving, O Virgin; and, earnestly entreating thy Son, they cry aloud: Thee 
do we magnify! 
2nd Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
By the power of God hath Satan, the destroyer of souls, and his false sacrifices 
been trampled underfoot; for unto us hath Christ shown the faithful Prince Vladimir 
to be a model of one who doth crush and dash him down beneath our feet. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Of old the Lord saved Israel from slavery by the hand of Moses; and now He hath 
likewise saved us all from the falsehood of idolatry by the hand of Vladimir, the 
faithful prince. 
Glory ..., As is meet, we all call upon thee, crying aloud: Rejoice, O all-honored and 
most blessed one! For we have thee as our deliverer with God, O Vladimir. Disdain 
not thy servants, but ever preserve us. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: O most pure and supremely hymned Virgin, through 
thee we have found salvation. Our God, Whom the angels in the heavens desire to 
see, hath now become a visible infant in thy womb. 
Katavasia: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O 
ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone VIII: 
Like the great Apostle Paul, O all-glorious Vladimir, * in old age thou didst leave 
off all zeal for idols as a childish sophism, * and as a full-grown man thou wast 
adorned with the royal purple of divine baptism. * And now as thou standest in joy in 
the presence of Christ the Savior, * pray that thy Russian land be saved, ** and that 
Orthodox people be granted peace and great mercy 
Ikos: O Christ God Who of old enlightened Israel with the law of Moses, Thou 
hast illumined the world by the advent of Thy coming, and hast sent Thy divinely 
eloquent disciples to preach throughout all lands Thy seedless nativity from the 
Virgin; and thou didst command them to baptize in the name of the Father, and the 
Son, and the Holy Spirit. And seeing the Russian land grown old in sin, thou didst 
send forth Thy Spirit to the soul of the glorious Vladimir, mighty of mind, that He 
might acknowledge thee, Christ God, as One of the Trinity, and by Thy baptism 
enlighten Thy chosen people, who cry aloud to Thee: “Deliver Thy realm, the land of 
Russia, and grant Orthodox Christians peace and great mercy!” 
ODE VII  
1st Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having quenched the all-consuming power of the Chaldean furnace * 
with the form of the Angel, that had descended therein, * the children cried 
out to the Creator: * Blessed and praised art Thou, O God of our fathers!  
The enemy, the destroyer of souls, stripped me of the divinely woven raiment of 
my forefathers; but Jesus the One Who is without beginning, Who appeared in the 
flesh, cleansing me with the water of the Spirit, hath granted it to me again. And 
acknowledging Him, O glorious Vladimir, thou criest out in gladness: Blessed is the 
God of our fathers! 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Having kept the law of Moses, Daniel was granted divine vision; and thou, having 
trampled the idols of thy forebears underfoot, hast beheld Christ noetically with the 
Father and the Spirit, not in darkness, but in the greatest glory; and, illumined by 
baptism, thou criest out in gladness: Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
Theotokion: Having deceived the first-created ancestor, O Virgin, the enemy 
stripped him of his divine garment; but my sweet Jesus, Who issued forth from thy 
pure womb which knew not wedlock, hath saved him. And the evil one, hurling 
himself against God as against Adam, hath wounded and wrought himself grievous 
injury. But we cry out to thy Son: Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
2nd Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
As the grandson of the all-blessed Olga, thou wast confirmed by the love of that 
new Helena; and thou didst show thyself to be a new Constantine the Great, O 
Vladimir, crying out to Christ: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou! 
The cruel deceiver prompted thee to make war on Christians, but the supremely 
great Lord illumined thee at Korsun, granting thee divine baptism, and bestowing the 
kingdom of heaven upon thee. 
Glory ..., As a great disciple of Christ thou didst drive out the age-old falsehood of 
the demons, and renewing all of us, thou hast enlightened us to cry out without 
ceasing: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou! 
Both now ..., Theotokion: Before time began the pre-eternal God chose thee from 
among all generations, and, receiving flesh from thee in latter days, He revealed 
Himself as perfect God and man, O Ever-virgin. 
Katavasia: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII  
1st Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: O Thou who dost cover Thy chambers on high with the waters, * Thou 
Who hast set the sands to bound the sea * and Who upholdest all things: * the 
sun doth sing Thy praises, * the moon giveth Thee glory, * every creature 
offereth a hymn unto Thee, * as their Creator, throughout the ages. 
The generation of the righteous is blessed, declared the divine mouth, and this 
hath been fulfilled in thee, O blessed one; for thou hast brought hallowed and 

--- PAGE 15 ---
divinely chosen seed to Christ: the invincible martyrs by whom thou hast enlightened 
the Russian land. And praising them with thee, we supremely exalt Christ throughout 
the ages. 
The city of Kiev hath truly been shown to be the mother of all the cities of thy 
kingdom, for therein Christ was first glorified with the Father and the Spirit by thy 
grandmother and thee, O blessed one, and there thy valorous body lay in splendor in 
the church of our Mistress. And we, thy people, praising thee, hymn Christ 
throughout the ages. 
Theotokion: The voices of the prophets truly proclaimed Emmanuel, the Father’s 
Effulgence and Word Who is without beginning, Who would be born of thee without 
corruption: God and man, the mighty expectation of the nations. Him do thou now 
entreat, O Mother, that we be saved. 
2nd Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thou hast delivered us from all the idols of the ungodly and hast led us to Christ, 
O father of faithful princes, teacher of thy flock, who hymn Christ throughout the 
ages. 
Thou hast been proclaimed to be a new Constantine for all the land of Russia, O 
blessed Vladimir; for thou hast made luminous the name of Christ, Whom we 
supremely exalt throughout the ages. 
We bless the Father ..., Thou standest now before the eternal King and hast been 
crowned by His right hand. Pray thou to Him for thine unworthy servants, that we 
may hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou art the cloud of the Word, O supremely hymned 
one, the lamp of the Sun, the priceless chariot, the exaltation of virgins, the rich and 
curdled mountain, and thou remainest most pure, O august Sovereign Virgin. 
We praise, we bless, we worship ..., 
Katavasia: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The Magnificat (More honorable ...) is chanted. 
 
 
ODE IX  

--- PAGE 16 ---
1st Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Of old David was found to be the mighty king of Israel, and he saved the people; 
and, casting down the gods of other nations, he proclaimed the Son of God through 
the Spirit. And thou didst acknowledge God in Trinity, O blessed Vladimir. Him do 
we magnify. 
Let the chosen people of God celebrate thy memory today with gladness and 
sanctity in the church of the Mother of God which thou didst lovingly adorn as an 
earthly heaven, as an everlasting memorial of thy passing; for, resting therein, thou 
dost await the most awe-inspiring trumpets of the archangels, O blessed one. 
Wherefore, we ever magnify thee. 
Theotokion: All of us, the generations of mankind, set afire by the divine Spirit, 
bless thee with love, O Theotokos; for thou hast annulled the curse of our first 
mother. And we earnestly hymn God the Word, for, having received Him in thy 
womb without being consumed, thou gavest birth to Him in the flesh. To Him do 
thou now pray, that thy faithful flock be delivered from every sorrow and need. 
2nd Canon of the righteous one, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Thou art like a sweet date-palm lofty of stature, like a flourishing olive-tree, 
putting forth most fruitful branches, like a grape-vine giving rise to two scions, the 
honored martyrs Boris and Gleb. 
Choirs of noble princes now stand before thee, bearing the piety received from 
thee, and praising thee with the faithful people, crying: O speedy guide and helper, be 
thou mindful of us, that we may find life in peace through thee! 
Glory ..., Come, ye people of Russia, let us come together in the honored church 
of the holy Vladimir, the most blessed great prince, the glorious favorite of Christ, 
who was named Basil in baptism; and let us receive life and salvation, grace and great 
mercy. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: O Virgin, thou gavest birth to God on earth: the 
Incorporeal One came into union with the flesh, in a single hypostasis, yet in two 
natures, that He might save us all who with faith bow down before thee as the most 
pure Theotokos. 
Katavasia: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 

--- PAGE 17 ---
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Exapostilarion of the righteous one: 
With thy glorious grandmother Olga, * thou wast truly shown to be a beacon * 
enlightening the whole world with piety and faith, * O Vladimir, who art crowned by 
God. * And we glorify Christ Who loved you, ** and is wondrous in His saints..  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O most immaculate one, * thou didst ineffably give birth to God * in two wills and 
natures, * yet in a single hypostasis, * Who for our sake abased Himself of His own 
will, * even to accepting crucifixion, ** and hath given us divine riches, O Virgin 
Mother of God. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the righteous one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...,” 
O Lord, Thou gavest Thy Cross * to our prince as a mighty weapon, * whereby he 
lived righteously on earth, * and, shining forth with piety, * hath been deemed worthy 
of the kingdom of heaven * by Thy tender compassion. * Wherefore, we glorify Thy 
loving dispensation, * O almighty Jesus, ** the Savior of our souls. (Twice) 
As the King of kings * and Lord of all lords, * O Thou Who lovest mankind, * 
Thou gavest to Thy pious favorite * the wisdom of Solomon, the meekness of David 
* and the Orthodoxy of the apostles. * Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving 
dispensation, * O almighty Jesus, ** the Savior of our souls. 
O ever-memorable prince, * thou wast the first to receive the purple robe by the 
will of Christ, * having acknowledged Him as the King and Benefactor of all, * Who 
granteth victories to every ruler, * and authority to those who deserve it. * Wherefore, 
unto thee did Jesus the Savior of our souls, * Who loveth mankind, ** entrusted the 
kingship unto thee. 
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Thou didst receive thy calling, * not from men, * but, like the wondrous Paul, * 
didst receive it from on high, * O glorious apostle Vladimir, * from Christ God. * 
For, protected by the sign of the Cross, * and hunted down by it like a most comely 
prey, * thou wast shown by it to be an invincible victor * over enemies visible and 
invisible. * Wherefore, we mortals entreat thee as an intercessor, * honoring thy 
memory as is meet, * that with boldness thou mayest ask for us ** enlightenment, 
cleansing and great mercy. 
 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 

--- PAGE 18 ---
All my hope I place in thee, * O Mother of God; ** keep me under thy protection. 
Great Doxology; 
Then the Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV:  
Thou wast like a merchant that seeketh a beautiful pearl, * O glorious sovereign 
Vladimir, * sitting on the height of the throne of the mother of cities, God-protected 
Kiev. * Searching and sending to the imperial city to know the Orthodox Faith, * 
thou didst find Christ, the priceless Pearl, * Who chose thee as a second Paul, * and 
Who did shake off thy spiritual and physical blindness in the holy font. * Wherefore, 
we who are thy people celebrate thy falling asleep. * Pray that thy Russian land be 
saved, * and that Orthodox people ** be granted peace and great mercy. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the 1st Canon, and 4 from 
ODE VI of the 2nd canon of the righteous one.  
Like a clarion of godly tone thy spiritual tongue sounded forth, O blessed one, 
announcing to all the ends of the Russian land the baptism of Christ’s Orthodox 
Faith. And illumined thereby, thou hast enlightened the whole world. (Twice) 
Thy most glorious memory shineth forth today, and our Orthodox hierarchs, and 
all the Christian people whom thou didst lead to the noetic Light, celebrate it, praising 
thee as their forefather. (Twice) 
By the power of God hath Satan, the destroyer of souls, and his false sacrifices 
been trampled underfoot; for unto us hath Christ shown the faithful Prince Vladimir 
to be a model of one who doth crush and dash him down beneath our feet. 
Of old the Lord saved Israel from slavery by the hand of Moses; and now He hath 
likewise saved us all from the falsehood of idolatry by the hand of Vladimir, the 
faithful prince. 
Glory ..., As is meet, we all call upon thee, crying aloud: Rejoice, O all-honored and 
most blessed one! For we have thee as our deliverer with God, O Vladimir. Disdain 
not thy servants, but ever preserve us. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: O most pure and supremely hymned Virgin, through 
thee we have found salvation. Our God, Whom the angels in the heavens desire to 
see, hath now become a visible infant in thy womb. 
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
Thou wast like a merchant that seeketh a beautiful pearl, * O glorious sovereign 
Vladimir, * sitting on the height of the throne of the mother of cities, God-protected 
Kiev. * Searching and sending to the imperial city to know the Orthodox Faith, * 
thou didst find Christ, the priceless Pearl, * Who chose thee as a second Paul, * and 
Who did shake off thy spiritual and physical blindness in the holy font. * Wherefore, 
we who are thy people celebrate thy falling asleep. * Pray that thy Russian land be 
saved, * and that Orthodox people ** be granted peace and great mercy. (Twice) 
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone VIII: 
Like the great Apostle Paul, O all-glorious Vladimir, * in old age thou didst leave 
off all zeal for idols as a childish sophism, * and as a full-grown man thou wast 
adorned with the royal purple of divine baptism. * And now as thou standest in joy in 
the presence of Christ the Savior, * pray that thy Russian land be saved, ** and that 
Orthodox people be granted peace and great mercy 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: Chant unto our God, chant ye; * chant unto 
our King, chant ye.  
The Verse: Clap your hands all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing.  
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIONS, § 200 (1: 11-19)  
Brethren: I certify you that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man. 
For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus 
Christ. For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews' religion, how 
that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it: And profited in 
the Jews' religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly 
zealous of the traditions of my fathers. But when it pleased God, who separated me 
from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, To reveal his Son in me, that I 
might preach him among the heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and 
blood: Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles before me; but I 
went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. Then after three years I went 
up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days. But other of the 
apostles saw I none, save James the Lord's brother. 
Alleluia, in Tone VI: I have raised up one chosen out of My people. 
Verse: For My hand shall be unto Him an ally. 
 
GOSPEL ACC. TO ST. JOHN, § 35 FROM THE MIDPOINT (JN. 10: 1-8)  
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He 
that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, 
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of 
strangers. This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things 
they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, verily, verily, I 
say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves 
and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by me if any man enter 
in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. 
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be, he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
