--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 29th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR CALLINICUS 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O divinely wise martyr Callinicus, * piously desiring to die * rather than to live, * 
thou didst truly present * an image of the death of Christ; * wherefore thou hast 
received immortality * and unwaning blessedness; * and, rejoicing, thou hast made 
thine abode, O glorious one, ** where the ranks of the angels and spiritual athletes 
dwell.  
A light emitting healing, * a river full of true gifts, * a treatment which costeth 
naught, * a vessel of sanctity * hath the shrine of thy relics been shown to us, * 
whence let us who approach with faith * draw forth ever-living health, * O glorious 
martyr, ** for whose sake we glorify our wondrous God.  
O most blessed martyr Callinicus, * possessing the invisible God * as an invincible 
aid * against the invisible foe, * thou didst raise the standard of immortality; * and 
having felled him who boasted * that he would destroy the earth * thou didst drown 
him in the streams of thy blood ** by the exercise of thy sufferings.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
With hymns let us honor today the wondrous Callinicus, the champion of piety 
and destroyer of the enemy, the converser with martyrs, who was a temple of the 
Holy Spirit, the warrior of Christ God, the truly inexhaustible treasury of healings, the 
confirmation of the faithful.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
The pre-eternal God, * taking flesh from thy blood, * hath shown thee forth, O 
pure one, * as an intercessor for all mankind. * Wherefore, deliver thy servants * from 
all misfortune and every evil circumstance, * and grant that all who glorify * and bow 
down before thee ** be deemed worthy of the splendor of the elect.  
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all? * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Callinicus O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and this canon of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: The chariots of pharaoh and his power * were cast into the sea by Him 
Who is mighty in battles: * Let us chant a new hymn, * for He hath been 
glorified!  
Having truly mounted the noetic chariot, thou didst drown the captains of the 
noetic Egypt in the streams of thy blood, O Callinicus, thou boast of martyrs.  
Clothed in divine vesture, O most blessed and wise one, thou didst divest thyself 
of earthly garments, hastening to the contest and putting the enemy to shame.  
Having broken the subtle snares of the enemy with the bonds of thy suffering, 
thou didst cast him, helpless, to the ground, O Callinicus, and trampled him under thy 
feet.  
Theotokion: O pure Virgin Mother, we know thee to be her who gave birth to 
God, whom the choir of the prophets foresaw as the portal of heaven and the 
unburnt bush.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Having established the thunder * and fashioned the wind: * do Thou 
make me steadfast O Lord, * that I may hymn Thee in truth and do Thy will; * 
for there is none holy like unto Thee, O our God.  
Wounded with the love of Christ, the martyr cried out, enduring pain amid his 
struggles: “I make haste to the sweet fragrance of myrrh, following Thy Passion, 
through the suffering of my blood!”  
Thou wast preserved unassailed by the darts of the serpent; for the crafty one, 
having bruised thy heel amid thy wounds, crushed his own head in thy sufferings, O 
Callinicus.  
Having cut down the thorns of deception with the sword of the Spirit, thou didst 
truly offer unto thy Master the fruit of the Christian Faith, O most blessed one: thy 
hundredfold pangs.  
Theotokion: In thy womb thou alone didst conceive as the ineffable Offspring of 
thy birthgiving, God the Word, Who existed before thee, O Mother; and with milk 
thou didst nourish the Beginningless One as a babe, O most pure one.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Having divine zeal within thy soul, O glorious one, thou didst steadfastly 
denounce those who vainly worked iniquity; and having drawn nigh unto torments, 
thou didst pass through thy struggle with valiant mind. O martyr Callinicus, entreat 
Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence when He took flesh in thy 
womb, the one Lord remained God though He had become a man; and even after thy 
birthgiving He preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He grant us great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord and I am afraid. * Having 
understood Thy works, * I am in awe of Thee O Lord, * for the earth is full of 
Thy praise.  
Washed in the streams of thy blood, O most blessed one, thou wast revealed as 
most pure by the Spirit, and hast attained unto the delight of the incorporeal ones, O 
martyr Callinicus.  
Thou wast truly set as a stone precious to the Church, for shaking the temples of 
the idols thou didst cast them down to the ground by the steadfast opposition of thy 
sufferings.  
The deadly allurements of the enemy didst thou truly turn aside with the words of 
the Spirit, O martyr; and, strengthened in thy soul, thou didst win the victory over 
deception.  
Theotokion: We now recognize thee, O pure one, as the bush which the great 
Moses beheld prophetically on Sinai, burning without being consumed, having borne 
Fire within thy womb.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Shine upon me, O Lord, * the light of Thy commandments, * for my 
soul riseth early to Thee and hymneth Thee: * For Thou art our God, * and 
unto Thee do I flee, O King of peace. 
Foundering in the quicksand and abyss of my sins and having fallen into the 
tempest of mine evil deeds, I cry to thee: Be thou my helper!  
When the soles of thy feet were pierced with nails, O martyr, thou didst sing: “In 
the path of Thy testimonies have I richly delighted, enduring wounds in the 
expectation of reward, O Master, Thou Judge of the contest!”  
Having traded well in torment, thou didst trim thy lamp with the oil of mercy, O 
most blessed one; wherefore, thou didst become a wholly unblemished sacrifice, an 
acceptable whole-burnt offering.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou art the subject of the prophets’ proclamation, the 
boast of the angels and the adornment of martyrs, bearing the divine Word, Who 
wast ineffably begotten of the Father before time, O most pure one.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Drowning in the tempest of my sins, * and as though imprisoned in the 
belly of the whale, * with the Prophet I cry out to Thee: * Raise up my life 
from corruption, O Lord, and save me. 
The fold of thy flock hath been preserved unharmed from the beasts of heresy; for 
the stout staff of thy sufferings, which thou didst hold fast, O glorious one, hath been 
shown to drive the wolves away.  
Thou didst escape the night of deception by thy suffering, and the beauty of faith 
hath shone forth like the sun upon the ends of the earth in thy confession.  
As a renowned preacher of the Faith, thou didst readily cry out to the iniquitous 
one: “Why dost thou threaten one whose spiritual strength is not weak? For the darts 
of the ungodly are feeble!”  
Theotokion: As before thy birth giving, O thou who hast not known wedlock, 
thou didst remain incorrupt and virginal; for in thee the mystery which passeth 
understanding and all telling hath been revealed, O Bride of God.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
The beautiful things of heaven * hast thou now inherited as is meet; * for, greatly 
aflame with the love of Christ, * thou didst manfully brave the fire therewith, O 
Callinicus. ** Standing now before Him, cease not to pray on behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The fire burning in the furnace quaked with fear, * and the children 
were bedewed and sang, saying: * Blessed art Thou, O only God of our 
fathers!  
“The terrors of torments are for me a means to obtain sweetness; for neither fire 
nor wounds will separate me from Him Who truly loveth me!” cried the martyr.  
Strengthened by the support of Christ, O glorious one, thou didst contend and 
cast the adversary down to the ground; and, true to thy name, didst show thyself to be 
the goodly victor over the tyrant.  
Thou didst put the devil to shame and didst gladden the angels with thy sufferings, 
O glorious one; and thou didst cry out to Christ: Blessed art Thou alone, O God of 
our fathers!  
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving, O most pure Virgin, thou didst annul the curse of 
Eve our first mother; for thou art the Mother of the Master of all, who hast mediated 
joy for all.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In wisdom hast Thou fashioned all things, O Master, * Thou didst 
establish the earth firmly upon the fathomless depths of the waters, * in 
accordance with Thy knowledge, * wherefore we hymn Thee chanting: * 
Unceasingly bless ye the Lord all ye works of the Lord. 
Rejoice, O delight of true spiritual athletes! Rejoice, adornment and ornament of 
the Faith! Rejoice, torch-bearer most splendid among the martyrs, who hast dispelled 
deception and shone forth light upon the world by thy suffering, O most wise 
Callinicus.  
The tyrant was put to shame by thy struggles and opposition, and the malefactors 
were vanquished by thy wounds, O blessed one. for though thy heels were pierced 
with nails, all deception was consumed, and the temples of the idolaters were 
destroyed by the fire of thy contest.  
Bowing thy head, O Callinicus, in thy boldness pray unceasingly to God on behalf 
of those who honor thee. Intercede for thy flock, rescuing it from the divers snares of 
the deceiver, and make it steadfast by faith. For through thee hath it grown in stature 
and might.  
Theotokion: In the Spirit, the prophets perceived thee, the Virgin, as tabernacle 
and altar, jar and lamp-stand, the most holy mountain, the cloud and the tables of the 
law, the ark and the staff, the divine portal whereby ancient paradise hath been made 
accessible unto all.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: O undefiled Theotokos, * with never-silent hymns * we magnify thine 
Offspring born without seed, * Christ our God. 
A robe of faith was woven for thee on high, whereby thou didst strip the enemy 
naked at the tribunal, O glorious martyr.  
The tyrant thought to deceive the martyr with allurements, but the martyr 
remained steadfast in the Faith.  
O glorious Callinicus, thou didst offer thyself unto God as a pure whole-burnt 
offering and a pleasing sacrifice on the fire of thy contest.  
Beautiful are thy feet, O athlete Callinicus, which, though pierced with nails, went 
on to preach God.  
Theotokion: O pure one, we have acquired thee as our protection and refuge, our 
rampart and bulwark, our ever firm hope amid tribulations.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT LITURGY 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Callinicus O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II:  
The beautiful things of heaven * hast thou now inherited as is meet; * for, greatly 
aflame with the love of Christ, * thou didst manfully brave the fire therewith, O 
Callinicus. ** Standing now before Him, cease not to pray on behalf of us all.  
 
