--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 20th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY AND GLORIOUS PROPHET ELIJAH  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy prophet, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
With the light of the divine radiance of the three-fold Sun, * with purity of mind 
and righteous judgment * didst thou denounce the impious king as a transgressor of 
the Law * and shut the heavens, * and didst nurture the widow and her son. ** Pray 
thou, O prophet, that our souls be saved! (Twice)  
Worthily honored with the prophetic office, * and the divine vision of God with 
understanding, O divine prophet, * thou hast prophesied things afar off as though 
they were near. * Thou didst denounce the king as unrighteous, * and slay the 
shameful priests with a knife. ** Entreat thou Christ God, that our souls be saved!  
The impious king, unable to endure thy reproof, said to thee, * O divine prophet: 
Art thou he that tormenteth and perverteth Israel? * And thou didst say: Not I, O 
king, but it is thou and thy father’s house, * in that thou hast forsaken thy God Who 
formed thee, * and hast brought in strange gods. ** O Christ, through the prayers of 
Thy prophet, deliver us from such deception and save our souls!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O divine prophet Elijah, denouncing the king, who had committed 
unrighteousness, for the murder of Naboth and the seizure of his vineyard, thou didst 
boldly say: Inasmuch as thou hast slain a man of Israel unjustly, thus shalt thou 
thyself also be slain, and the dogs shall lick thy blood, and harlots shall wash them-
selves in thy blood. O Christ, by the prayers of Thy prophet and favorite, deliver us 
from such a threat, and save our souls, for Thou art the Lover of mankind!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy prophet, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephrata ...”: 
O divine prophet, * zealous for the Lord Almighty: * by thy prayer thou didst shut 
the heavens, saying: * Let rain and dew not descend upon the earth, ** save at the 
word of my mouth!  
Verse: Moses and Aaron among His priests, *and Samuel among those who call 
upon His name.  
O divine prophet, * with prayer and compassion * thou dost open the heavens 
again, * and dost richly grant ** rain unto a thirsting people.  
Verse: Thou art a priest forever, * after the order of Melchizedek.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
O divine prophet, thou didst nourish the widow and her son, * by thy prayer 
increasing a handful of meal and a cruse of oil; * for in accordance with the word of 
the Lord, * the handful of meal and the cruse of oil ** did not diminish.  
Glory ..., in the same melody: 
O divine prophet, by thy prayer * thou didst call down fire from heaven, * and 
didst compel the king to say: * Truly God is the One Who is preached ** by Elijah!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
O blessed Lady, * stretch forth thy holy hands * to thy Son, the Creator * who 
loveth souls, ** that He take pity on thy servants.  
Troparion of the holy prophet, in Tone IV:  
The angel in the flesh, and foundation of the prophets, * the second forerunner of 
the Coming of Christ, * the glorious Elijah from on High * sent down grace upon 
Elisha * to dispel infirmities and to cleanse lepers. * Wherefore, he poureth forth 
healings ** upon those who honor him.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy prophet, 3 in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
O compassionate Word * Who translated Elijah the Tishbite * from the earth in a 
fiery chariot: * by his supplication save us * who glorify Thee in faith ** and celebrate 
his divine and salvific memory.  
In the earthquake and the gentle breeze * thou didst perceive the coming of God * 
which of old enlightened thee, O divinely blessed Elijah; * and, seated in a chariot 
drawn by four steeds, * in amazement thou didst traverse the sky in a strange manner, 
** O divinely inspired one.  
Aflame with divine zeal, * thou didst slay the shameful priests with a knife; * and 
with thy tongue thou didst constrain the sky, * that it not rain upon the earth; * and 
thou didst fill Elisha with a twofold measure of divine grace, ** by the bestowal of thy 
mantle, O wise Elijah.  
And these 3, the composition of John the Archbishop, in Tone II:  
Two beacons have shone forth upon the world: the most radiant Elijah and Elisha! 
The one by the word of God shut up the drops of the rains of the sky, denounced the 
king, and was borne up to the heavens on a fiery chariot; the other cured bitter waters 
and, having received a double measure of grace, parted the Jordan’s streams. And 
now, joining chorus with the angels, they pray for us, that our souls be saved.  
The fiery chariot which caught thee up to the heavens on the air as in an 
earthquake, bestowed upon thee the fiery grace of miracles, O Elijah the Tishbite, 
rendering thee incorrupt, that thou not see death until thou hadst proclaimed the end 
to all. Wherefore, come thou, granting us the instruction of thy worthy deeds.  
O inextinguishable beacon of the Church, aflame with divine zeal, prophet Elijah! 
Thou didst shut up the drops of heaven; and, fed by a raven, thou didst denounce the 
king, and put the priests to death; fire from heaven didst thou call down, and, having 
slain the two captains of fifty, thou didst sustain the widow with oil and a small 
handful of meal, and raise her son from the dead by thy prayer; thou didst kindle fire 
amid water; the streams of Jordan didst thou traverse on foot; thou didst ascend to 
the heavens on a fiery chariot, and didst bestow upon Elisha a double measure of 
grace. Pray thou unceasingly to God, that our souls be saved!  
Glory ..., the composition of the Byzantine, in Tone VI:  
Come, ye assemblies of the Orthodox, and, gathering together in the most 
honored temple of the divinely eloquent prophets today, with psalmody let us chant 
an harmonious hymn unto Christ our God Who hath glorified them; and with joy and 

--- PAGE 4 ---
gladness let us cry out: Rejoice, O Elijah of great renown, earthly angel and heavenly 
man! Rejoice, O most honored Elisha, who received from God a double measure of 
grace! Rejoice, ye fervent helpers, intercessors and physicians of the souls and bodies 
of Christ-loving people! From every hostile attack and evil circumstance, deliver those 
who with faith celebrate your most solemn memory!  
Both now ..., Dogmatic, in Tone VI 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the Day. Three Lessons:  
READING FROM THE THIRD BOOK OF THE KINGS  
The word of God came unto Elijah the prophet, and he said unto Ahab, As the 
Lord God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these 
years, but according to my word. And the word of the Lord came unto him, saying, 
Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook Cherith, that is 
before Jordan. And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the brook; and I have 
commanded the ravens to feed thee there. So he went and did according unto the 
word of the Lord: for he went and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan. 
And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in 
the evening; and he drank of the brook. And it came to pass after a while, that the 
brook dried up, because there had been no rain in the land. And the word of the Lord 
came unto him, saying: Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and 
dwell there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee. So he 
arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of the city, behold, the 
widow woman was there gathering of sticks: and he called to her, and said: Fetch me, 
I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink. And as she was going to fetch it, 
he called to her, and said: Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand. And 
she said, As the Lord thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a 
barrel, and a little oil in a cruse: and, behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go 
in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die. And Elijah said unto 
her, Fear not; go and do as thou hast said: but make me thereof a little cake first, and 
bring it unto me, and after make for thee and for thy son. For thus saith the Lord 
God of Israel: The barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, 
until the day that the Lord sendeth rain upon the earth. And she went and did 
according to the saying of Elijah: and she, and he, and her house, did eat many days. 
And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the 
word of the Lord, which he spake by Elijah. And it came to pass after these things, 

--- PAGE 5 ---
that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so 
sore, that there was no breath left in him. And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do 
with thee, O thou man of God? Art thou come unto me to call my sin to remem-
brance, and to slay my son? And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And he took him 
out of her bosom, and carried him up into a loft, where he abode, and laid him upon 
his own bed. And he cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, hast thou also 
brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son? And he 
stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto the Lord, and said, O 
Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child’s soul come into him again. And the Lord 
heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child came into him again, and he 
revived. And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the chamber into 
the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and Elijah said, See, thy son liveth. 
And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and 
that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is truth.  
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE KINGS  
And it came to that the word of the Lord came to Elijah in the third year, saying, 
Go, show thyself unto Ahab; and I will send rain upon the earth. And it came to pass, 
when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him, Art thou he that troubleth Israel? 
And he answered, I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father’s house, in that 
ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and thou hast followed Balaam. 
Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets 
of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the groves four hundred, which 
eat at Jezebel’s table. So Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the 
prophets together unto mount Carmel. And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, 
How long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, 
then follow him. And the people answered him not a word. Then said Elijah unto the 
people, I, even I only, remain a prophet of the Lord; but Baal’s prophets are four 
hundred and fifty men. Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose 
one bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and put no fire 
under: and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under: 
and call ye on the name of your gods, and I will call on the name of the Lord: and the 
god that answereth by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and said, It is 
well spoken. And Elijah said unto the prophets of Baal, Choose you one bullock for 
yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call on the name of your gods, but 
put no fire under. And they took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed 
it, and called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon, saying, O Baal, hear 
us. But there was no voice, nor any that answered. And they leaped upon the altar 
which was made. And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry 
aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or 
peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked. And they cried aloud, and cut 

--- PAGE 6 ---
themselves after their manner with knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon 
them. And it came to pass, when midday was past, and they prophesied until the time 
of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that there was neither voice, nor any to 
answer, nor any that regarded. And Elijah said unto all the people, Come near unto 
me. And all the people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the Lord 
that was broken down. And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of 
the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the Lord came, saying, Israel 
shall be thy name: and with the stones he built an altar in the name of the Lord: and 
he made a trench about the altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed. 
And he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and laid him on the 
wood, and said, Fill four barrels with water, and pour it on the burnt sacrifice, and on 
the wood. And he said, Do it the second time. And they did it the second time. And 
he said, Do it the third time. And they did it the third time. And the water ran round 
about the altar; and he filled the trench also with water. And it came to pass at the 
time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that Elijah the prophet came near, and 
said, Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art 
God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy 
word. Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou art the Lord 
God, and that thou hast turned their heart back again. Then the fire of the Lord fell, 
and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and 
licked up the water that was in the trench. And when all the people saw it, they fell on 
their faces: and they said, The Lord, he is the God; the Lord, he is the God. And 
Elijah said unto them, Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape. And 
they took them: and Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and slew them 
there. And it came to pass that he said, Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the 
sea, like a man’s hand. And he said, Go up, say unto Ahab, Prepare thy chariot, and 
get thee down, that the rain stop thee not. So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And 
Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he cast himself down upon the earth, and 
put his face between his knees. And it came to pass in the mean while, that the 
heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode, 
and went to Jezreel. And the hand of the Lord was on Elijah; and he girded up his 
loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel. And Ahab told Jezreel all that 
Elijah had done, and withal how he had slain all the prophets with the sword. Then 
Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods do to me, and more also, 
if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time. And 
when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to Beersheba, which 
belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there. But he himself went a day’s journey 
into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper tree: and he requested for 
himself that he might die; and said, It is enough; now, O Lord, take away my life; for I 
am not better than my fathers. And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold, 
then an angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat. And he looked, and, 

--- PAGE 7 ---
behold, there was a cake baked on the coals, and a cruse of water at his head. And he 
did eat and drink, and laid him down again. And the angel of the Lord came again the 
second time, and touched him, and said, Arise and eat; because the journey is too 
great for thee. And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that 
meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God. And he came thither 
unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the word of the Lord came unto him, and 
he said unto him, What doest thou here, Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous 
for the Lord God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, 
thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, 
am left; and they seek my life, to take it away. And he said, Go forth, and stand upon 
the mount before thy Lord. And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong 
wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord 
was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the 
earthquake: and after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and after 
the fire a still small voice. And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his 
face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave. And, 
behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou here, Elijah? And he 
said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts: because the children of 
Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets 
with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away. And 
the Lord said unto him, Go, return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus: and 
when thou comest, anoint Hazael to be king over Syria: and Jehu the son of Nimshi 
shalt thou anoint to be king over Israel: and Elisha the son of Shaphat of 
Abelmeholah shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room.  
THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE KINGS  
In those days it came to pass that Elijah came upon Elisha the son of Shaphat, 
who was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen before him, and he with the twelfth: and 
Elijah passed by him, and cast his mantle upon him. And he left the oxen, and ran 
after Elijah, and said, Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and then I 
will follow thee. And he said unto him, Go back again: for what have I done to thee? 
And he returned back from him, and took a yoke of oxen, and slew them, and boiled 
their flesh with the instruments of the oxen, and gave unto the people, and they did 
eat. Then he arose, and went after Elijah, and ministered unto him. And it came to 
pass, when the Lord would take up Elijah into heaven in a whirlwind, that Elijah went 
with Elisha from Gilgal. And Elijah said unto him, Tarry, I pray thee, here; for the 
Lord hath sent me to Jordan. And he said, As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I 
will not leave thee. And they two went on. And fifty men of the sons of the prophets 
went, and stood to view afar off: and they two stood by Jordan. And Elijah took his 
mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the waters, and they were divided hither 
and thither, so that they two went over on dry ground. And it came to pass, when 

--- PAGE 8 ---
they were gone over, that Elijah said unto Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before 
I be taken away from thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy 
spirit be upon me. And he said, Thou hast asked a hard thing: nevertheless, if thou 
see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it shall not be 
so. And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared 
a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up 
by a whirlwind into heaven. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the 
chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof, and he saw him no more. And he took 
hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces. He took up also the mantle of 
Elijah that fell from him, and went back, and stood by the bank of Jordan; and he 
took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said, Where is 
the Lord God of Elijah? And when he also had smitten the waters, they parted hither 
and thither: and Elisha went over.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple. 
And these Stichera of the holy prophet, in Tone IV: 
O blessed prophet, thou wast a partaker of an incorrupt union in God my Savior; 
parting the Jordan by prayer, thou didst cross it as on dry land, and wast caught up on 
a fiery chariot to the heavens, leaving Elisha a double measure of grace. Wherefore, 
we beseech thee: though thou hast been caught up in the body, yet cut not asunder 
thyself from us in spirit, and ever entreat the Lord, that our souls be saved.  
O divine prophet, thou wast shown to be a luminous cloud, letting fall a shower of 
divine knowledge upon all the faithful, richly giving drink with the wine of gladness 
unto all who with faith have recourse to thy most divine temple. Wherefore, we 
entreat thee, O divine prophet and God-seer Elijah: grant health to our Orthodox 
hierarchs, and great mercy to our souls.  
Thou didst subject the flesh to the governing mind, O divine prophet Elijah, 
diligently ascending in thy heart as by steps. Wherefore, having denounced the 
unrighteous king, and pronounced the proscription of the wrath of God, with a knife 
thou didst destroy the shameful priests as unrighteous, and hast clearly taught all to 
cry aloud: “Truly there is one God: Him that Elijah hath preached!”  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O, the commands of the impious king! O, the fast full of blood and iniquity! for 
Jezebel proclaimed a fast, that she might commit murder, and straightway Naboth the 
Israelite was slain. And what didst thou say to these things, O prophet? “Thus saith 
the Lord: Inasmuch as thou hast unjustly slain a man of Israel; thus shall thy blood 
also be spilled, and harlots shall wash themselves in thy blood!” O Christ, by the 
prayers of Thy prophet and preacher, deliver our souls from such inhumanity, since 
Thou lovest mankind.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: ** Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy prophet, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
Elijah, the most wondrous prophet, * having illumined his mind with radiance, * 
became wholly divine, * and, beholding the unjust judgment of the impious king, * 
was greatly displeased. * Wherefore, by the judgment of God he sent condemnation 
upon him; * and likewise the queen, merciless and avaricious, * he committed to the 
judgment of God. ** By the prayers of Thy prophet Elijah, O Christ, save us, as Thou 
art merciful!  
Verse: Moses and Aaron among His priests, * and Samuel among those who 
call upon His name.  
“How long, O Lord, will the way of the impious prosper?” * thou didst say, O 
prophet. * “Thou hast planted, and they have uprooted, * and have brought forth the 
fruit of iniquity; * truly, they themselves have perished wickedly * through their 
impiety. * They cry to Thee, but Thou hearkenest not. * Why hast Thou shown me 
the godlessness of the judges ** that transgress the Law?”  
Verse: Thou art a priest forever, * after the order of Melchizedek.  
O great Elijah, * honored among the prophets, * by thy prayers deliver from 
misfortunes and tribulations, * and from the incursions of the pitiless foe, * those 
who celebrate * thine honored ascent; * that we, the Christian people, * may ever 
honor and bless thee, ** O most glorious prophet.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O prophet, preacher of Christ, thou dost never depart from the Throne of 
Majesty, and ever intercedest for everyone afflicted with sickness. Ministering in the 
Highest, glorified in all places: thou dost bless the whole world. Ask thou for the 
cleansing of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O all-pure 
one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign Lady, ** 
the intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Troparion of the holy prophet, in Tone IV:  
The angel in the flesh, and foundation of the prophets, * the second forerunner of 
the Coming of Christ, * the glorious Elijah from on High * sent down grace upon 
Elisha * to dispel infirmities and to cleanse lepers. * Wherefore, he poureth forth 
healings ** upon those who honor him.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
  

--- PAGE 11 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy prophet, in Tone IV:  
The angel in the flesh, and foundation of the prophets, * the second forerunner of 
the Coming of Christ, * the glorious Elijah from on High * sent down grace upon 
Elisha * to dispel infirmities and to cleanse lepers. * Wherefore, he poureth forth 
healings ** upon those who honor him. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Ascending on a fiery chariot as on the wings of the wind, O divine prophet, thou 
dost most gloriously make thy journey to the Heavens today, leaving to Elisha a 
double measure of grace and thy mantle from on high. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
All we who with love flee for refuge to thy goodness * know thee to be the Mother 
of God * and after childbirth still truly Virgin; * for we sinners have thee as our 
protection; * we have thee as our salvation in misfortunes, ** as the only All-
blameless one. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Thy divine temple poureth forth healings upon all, O most wondrous prophet. 
With the most marvelous Elisha, entreat Christ to send down peace upon the world 
and great mercy upon the people who honor thee. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Whither doth each one who is saved, * rightly have recourse; * and to what other 
such refuge can there be * which doth protect our souls like thee, ** O Theotokos?  
Polyeleos; and this Magnification: We magnify thee, a glorious Elijah, prophet 
and forerunner of the Coming of the Lord, and we honor thy fiery ascent to 
heaven in the flesh.  
Selected Psalms verse:  
A: Lo, I have fled afar off and have dwelt in the wilderness.  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Being a lover of wisdom, O most honored prophet, openly denouncing the unjust 
king who acted unrighteously, thou didst constrain him to cry out: “Truly there is but 
one God: He that is preached by Elijah!” And thence thou didst proceed to upbraid 
Jezebel for her plundering and love of gold. O prophet and forerunner of the Coming 
of Christ, Elijah of great renown: entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins 
to those who with faith glorify thine ascent.  
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thine all-holy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat 
Christ God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thine 
all-holy Offspring.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Thou art a priest forever, * after the order of 
Melchizedek.  
Verse: The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make 
Thine enemies the footstool of Thy feet.  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (4:22-30)  
At that time; all wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of Jesus’ 
mouth. And they said, Is this not Joseph’s son? And he said unto them, Ye will surely 
say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in 
Capernaum, do also here in thy country. And he said, Verily I say unto you, No 
prophet is accepted in his own country. But I tell you of a truth, many widows were 
in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up three years and six 
months, when great famine was throughout all the land; but unto none of them was 
Elijah sent, save unto Zarephath, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. 
And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and none of them 
was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian. And all they in the synagogue, when they 
heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him out of the city, 
and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might 
cast him down headlong. But he, passing through the midst of them, went his way.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone IV:  
On a fiery chariot wast thou taken up to the clouds, and wast translated to the land 
of light, O Elijah the Tishbite, having put the disgraceful prophets to shame. O thou 
who didst bound fast the sky by thy word, so also loose our transgressions by thy 
prayers to the Lord, and save our souls.  
Canon of the Theotokos (the Paraklisis), with 6 Troparia, including its Irmos; and two 
canons of the holy prophet, with 8 Troparia:  
ODE I  
Canon I, in Tone II: 
Irmos: Let us chant a hymn of victory unto the Lord, * Who of old guided the 
people in the midst of the sea, * and drowned Pharaoh and all his army 
therein, * for He hath been glorified.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Desiring to behold the fiery power of the miracles of Elijah, his fiery and honored 
tongue and strength of spirit, we have assembled as is meet.  
O God-bearer, our lips and the muteness and lack of skill of our tongue do thou 
open through the activity of the Spirit which is within thee, and illumine us, that we 
may hymn thy wonders.  
Thou dost grant that which transcendeth nature unto those who have submitted to 
Thine honored precepts, O Word, and Thou dost make the portals of the rain subject 
to them through the Spirit, confirming their word.  
Theotokion: To the Lord Who was born of the Virgin and Who hath renewed the 
world, and Who for her sake hath bestowed upon us divine life, we chant a hymn of 
victory, for He hath been glorified.  
Canon II, the acrostic whereof is: “I sing praise to the great Elijah,” the composition 
of Hieromonk Pachomius, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Thou hast been shown to be an instrument struck by the divine plectrum, O most 
wondrous prophet, hymning the omniscient God Who doth visit retribution upon all 
according to their deeds.  
O wondrous prophet, unable to endure deception, thou didst denounce the 
unrighteous king for his iniquity. Wherefore, thou didst impose God’s judgment of 
condemnation, full of wrath, upon him.  
O divine Elijah, prophet and forerunner of grace, having denounced Ahab, the 
iniquitous king, as a transgressor of the Law, thou didst destroy the shameful 
prophets as impious.  
Theotokion: Ye faithful, let us make haste to praise in hymns as is meet the 
Mother of Christ, for she gaveth birth unto the Savior of all, Who is the Master of life 
and death.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth ..., 
ODE III  
Canon I  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
He, that alone sustaineth every living thing by His good will, through a raven 
provided thee with a banquet as a chosen guest, O Prophet. To Him do we all cry 
aloud: Thou art our God, and there is none holy save Thee, O Lord!  
Grace be to the Benefactor and Guardian Who, in His ineffable providence, 
nourished the widow and the prophet. To Him do we all cry out: Thou art our God, 
and none is holy save Thee, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
O thou who didst forbid the rain-laden clouds to pour forth, when the widow of 
Zarephath was deprived of food, thou didst cause the remnant of her food to 
increase continually; and didst cry aloud: None is holy save Thee, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Thou alone, surpassing all of ages past; hast been deemed worthy of 
great things transcending nature, for thou didst receive the infinite God of all creation 
within thy womb and gave Him flesh. Wherefore, we all honor thee as the 
Theotokos.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
With mercy dost thou chastise all, taking pity on all who with faith have recourse 
to thee in thy temple. And in asking help of thee they have in no wise sinned.  
Thou didst denounce Ahab, the impious king, O divine prophet, and judge him 
with the judgment of God as a violator of the Law.  
The shameless Queen Jezebel sought to slay thee, O most divine prophet, for thou 
didst pronounce the sentence of death upon her unholy priests, as was meet.  
Theotokion: O Lady, we hymn thee as a palace of the priesthood of glory and the 
altar which held Christ, the Bread of life, O pure one.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy prophet, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Ye faithful, with hymns let us all praise Elijah the Tishbite, the wellspring of 
miracles and adornment of prophets; for, being immortal while yet in the flesh, as a 
mortal he assured us of the resurrection of the dead. Wherefore, having boldness 
before God, he granteth healing to those who ask with faith, and earnestly beseecheth 
Christ to bestow forgiveness of sins upon those who with love celebrate his holy 
memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, * we have been overcome by the 
storms of our uncountable sins, * and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, * we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. * Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee * to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O most pure one, * 
unto Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, * that those who worthily 
hymn thee ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
ODE IV  
Canon I  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Thou art shown to be one that cutteth down evil at its root and a planter of virtue, 
O wise prophet. Wherefore, we bless thee.  
With words the widow who fed thee upbraided thee for the death of her son, 
compelling thee to raise him from the dead.  
Thou didst clearly signify the glory of the Trinity with thy threefold breathing, and 
didst hand back alive the child to his mother.  
How thou didst burn, aflame with divine fire and zeal, O prophet, denouncing the 
king who wrought iniquities!  
Theotokion: O pure one, who without seed didst conceive God, we entreat thee 
ever to pray for thy servants.  
Canon II  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee O Lord, * and I was afraid, * for thy 
counsel is ineffable, * being the ever-existent God, * Thou didst come forth 
from the Virgin, * wherefore I hymn Thee: * glory to Thy condescension, O 
Christ, * glory to Thy power.  
The Lord crowned thee a prophet, O most wise one, granting thee the grace to 
foretell things of the future as though they were of the present. Wherefore, beholding 
now the fulfillment of thy words, we bless thee ever with praises as a true prophet.  
As the soul of Thy prophet hath been most greatly adorned with humble-
mindedness, O Christ God, so, aflame with zeal which surpasseth fire, he destroyed 
the shameful priests.  
Reflecting like a mirror with thy countenance, the face of Christ before Whom 
thou dost stand, O most wondrous prophet; from whence do thou mercifully visit us, 
that with praises we may all bless thee as a prophet.  
Theotokion: Having acquired thee as our hope and confirmation, an impregnable 
rampart of salvation, O all-hymned one, we are delivered from every evil 
circumstance.  
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
The Law of thy fathers hath shown thee to be a true man of prayer, O Elijah, a 
wonderworker who transformed the nature of the elements and utterly consumed the 
righteous sacrifice with water.  
As thou art a true minister of God, thou didst utterly put to shame the prophets of 
abominable ignominy, O venerable and all-blessed Elijah, clearly marking the power 
of the Trinity.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Rendering priestly service through the word of grace, O Elijah, thou didst slay the 
shameful priests with thy blameless hands, consumed with zeal as with fire.  
Theotokion: To thee who hast given birth unto Christ, the Creator of all, we cry 
aloud: Rejoice, O pure one! Rejoice, thou who hast shone forth the Light upon us! 
Rejoice, thou who didst contain the infinite God!  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
O prophet Elijah, whom the unwaning splendor of divine grace hath revealed: 
having diligently acquired a most divine mind, thou dost rouse the pious to song.  
Who doth not marvel at thy divine zeal, O wondrous prophet? And who doth not 
hymn Christ Who hath given thee such great might?  
With prophecy wast thou adorned by God, O Elijah, thou most wondrous 
prophet; hence, having wholly united thyself to God, and denouncing deception, thou 
didst lead the Israelites to the knowledge of God.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, who hast given birth to the never-setting Sun, 
enlighten me who am utterly darkened by the passions, and fill me with the divine 
light.  
ODE VI 
Canon I  
Irmos: The deep abyss of offenses hath surrounded me, O Lord, * but do 
Thou lead up my life from corruption, * as Thou didst the Prophet Jonah, O 
Lord.  
A pillar of piety and of a pure life, an instiller of purity, and an emulator of the 
angels wast thou, O wondrous God-bearer Elijah.  
The wrath of the prophet-slaying woman, having frightened thee who had 
received the power to bind and loose the flow of the rains, O wondrous Elijah, 
caused thee to flee.  
Having knelt down, thou didst raise on high the supremely exalted eye of thy 
mind, and by thine eminent entreaty didst cause the rains to be loosed; and with 
showers, watered the furrows of the earth.  
Theotokion: The bush on Sinai, which drew nigh to the Fire without being 
consumed, prefigured thee, the Ever-virgin Mother, O all-hymned Theotokos Mary.  
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
A hymn of supplication do thou offer unto God, O most honored prophet, on 
behalf of all who have recourse to thy divine temple, that we may honor thee as a 
great helper.  
The mortal mind doth not suffice to praise thy life as is meet, O prophet; for, 
beholding the transfiguration of Christ, thou wast exalted far above the noetic ranks.  
He who is the Lord and Creator of all hath appeared to us in accordance with thy 
prophecy, O blessed Elijah, calling all to the knowledge of Him, for He is the Lover 
of mankind.  
Theotokion: O Mary, pure vessel of virginity: cleanse thou my mind of the gloom 
of the passions, and fill my heart with righteousness, O all-immaculate one.  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone II:  
O prophet, foreseer of the mighty works of our God, * Elijah of great renown, * 
who by thy voice didst restrain the cloud of rain: * on our behalf entreat thou Him ** 
who alone is the Lover of mankind.  
Ikos: Beholding the great iniquity of mankind and the great love of God for them, 
the prophet Elijah was troubled and grew wroth; and he addressed pitiless words to 
the Merciful One, crying aloud: Be Thou angered against those who deny Thee, O 
righteous Judge! But he could not move the compassion of the Good One to torment 
those who deny Him, for He who alone is the Lover of mankind doth ever await the 
repentance of all.  
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: The bush which burned with fire on the mountain * and the dew-
bearing furnace of the Chaldeans * clearly prefigured thee, O Bride of God; * 
for, without being consumed, * thou didst receive the divine and immaterial 
Fire * within thy material womb. * Wherefore, we chant unto Him Who was 
born of thee: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou! 
Most gloriously vested with divine and formidable power, thou didst undertake a 
long journey, having eaten of food that sufficed thee for forty days, O wondrous 
Elijah. Wherefore, thou didst say on Horeb: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The mild and gentle breeze showed the Lord to thee, O Elijah, who wast zealous 
for God Almighty: not the wind of the tempest, nor the earthquake, nor yet the 
fearsome fire. Wherefore, to meek Jesus thou didst chant: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Like the great Moses, thou wast deemed worthy of the vision of God and 
prophecy, O wondrous Elijah, anointing prophets and kings with the Spirit. And 
having borne witness to the glory of Christ on Tabor, thou didst chant: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: In times past thou didst supra-naturally and without seed give birth in 
the flesh to the beginningless and pre-eternal Lord, the Son, Power and Wisdom of 
the Father, O most pure one, unto the renovation of mortals. Wherefore, we cry out 
to Him who was born of thee: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Canon II  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
The people of Israel that came to thee with a captain of fifty thou didst utterly 
consume with fire from heaven as unworthy, O divine Elijah.  
Thou wast a most divine prophet who wast rightly illumined with the vision of 
God, O most honored Elijah; and didst straightway put an end to the sacrifices made 
to Baal.  
Inasmuch as the most holy Spirit gave thee the gift to prophesy, O most honored 
prophet Elijah, thou didst foretell the coming of the Son of God and didst not sin, O 
all-blessed one. To Him do we chant: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Truly, as was meet, the poison of death was poured forth through the judgment of 
God and the hand of the prophet upon the shameful priests that ate unrighteously at 
the table of Jezebel.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, save me who am held fast by the abyss of sins, 
and rescue me from all the malice of the foe, that, saved by thee, I may magnify thine 
aid.  
ODE VIII  
Canon I  
Irmos: The relentless fire, fed with endless fuel, * drew back in fear before the 
pious Children, * pure in body and in soul; * and as the flame waned in 
strength, * they sang an everlasting song: * O all ye works, praise ye the Lord * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Well did Ahab find the just destruction of his house, through the prophet’s 
condemnation, to be the dread retribution for his vile commission of murder. And 
with fiery mind the Tishbite chanted a hymn unto the Bestower of life: All ye works 
of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Fire rained down from heaven for thee, O Elijah, twice consuming captains of 
fifty, in that thou art God’s chosen minister; for to Him who controlleth everlasting 
life didst thou in a godly manner hymn: All ye works of the Lord, hymn and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 19 ---
On Tabor Christ showed thee to be an initiate of the mystery of His divine 
incarnation, as thou wast an instiller of purity and a most divine offshoot of virginity, 
showing the unapproachable light of the Godhead in His Body to thee who dost cry 
aloud: All ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Exceedingly rich was the womb of the Mother of God; for, having 
received the Word in the coarseness of the flesh and wrought therefrom an earthly 
form according to His hypostasis, it was shown to be the city of God wherein the 
Most High was well-pleased to dwell. To Him do we chant: All ye works of the Lord, 
hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon II  
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
He who, as God, knoweth all things, entrusted to thee, O Elijah, in that thou art 
faithful, the knowledge of things to come and of things that shall come to pass; and 
He showed thee things which are afar off as though they were near.  
Having strengthened thy mind with pious boldness, O blessed prophet, thou dost 
foretell those things that are far off as though they were near, O most honored 
prophet.  
Having cleansed thy mind of all defilement, O divine prophet, thou didst become 
completely holy, guiding all to the divine Light.  
Theotokion: The Word, to Whom thou didst give birth indescribably, do thou 
entreat on behalf of those who faithfully honor thee, O pure Birthgiver of God.  
ODE IX 
Canon I  
Irmos: Thee do we magnify, O blessed and most pure Theotokos, * who 
through thy virginal womb ineffably brought forth * God incarnate, * the 
Luminary Who shone forth before the sun * and hath come to us in the flesh.  
Having lived on earth the course which man cannot change, and crossed the 
Jordan’s stream by means of his mantle, the Tishbite, that air-borne charioteer, made 
a strange and heaven-traversing journey in the Spirit.  
The Tishbite, aflame with the zeal of piety, was taken up on a fiery chariot; and he 
let drop his mantle; and Elisha, robed therein, received divine grace which could not 
be concealed.  
The Tishbite and Moses the God-seer beheld in a revelation on Tabor what eye 
hath not seen, nor ear heard, and what hath not entered into the hearts of earth-born 
men: the Lord Almighty, incarnate.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, we magnify thee, who removed the severe 
condemnation which was of old the correction of our first mother, and who art ever 
the reconciliation of our race to God, thou bridge to the Creator.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Thou hast been deified by the immaterial splendor of the life-creating Trinity, O 
prophet Elijah; wherefore, we all appoint thee as an intercessor to God for the world, 
O blessed one.  
Thou wast known as an angel on earth, O divine prophet, and in heaven as a man 
of God; for the Lord Himself said: Because thou art an austere man, O Elijah, thou 
canst not endure iniquitous Israel. Come thou up to Me, that I may come down!  
Thou didst live on earth as one of the bodiless ones, O divine prophet, and now, 
borne up to heaven, thou dost join chorus with the angelic choirs. From on high 
watch over us who hymn thee, O blessed one.  
Theotokion: Thou didst bear in thine arms God Who beareth all things, and thou 
hast fed the Nourisher Who became like unto us, O pure one. Him do thou beseech, 
that He grant to thy people deliverance from all oppressors.  
Exapostilarion of the holy prophet:  
Spec. Mel.: “O immutable Light ...”:  
The Light Who showed thee to be a charioteer traversing the sky on a fiery chariot 
drawn by four steeds, O Elijah, did not consume thee utterly; for with thy fiery 
tongue thou didst draw fire down and didst dry it up with showers.  
Glory ..., another Exapostilarion:  
Thou wast caught up on a fiery chariot to the circles of heaven; whence looking 
down, as thou art close to the Light, grant noetic light unto us that now celebrate thy 
holy memory with faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Thou wast the author of the blessings bestowed by God on the world, O 
Theotokos. And do thou now entreat the easily-placated God for the salvation of all.  
On the Praises, 6 Stichera of the holy prophet: three in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you ...”:  
O wondrous prophet, * when thou didst unite thyself to God * by thy pure life of 
virtue, * and hadst received dominion thereby, * thou noetically didst traverse 
creation, * by thy will shutting up the portals of the rain, * and didst call down fire 
from on high, * destroying the enemy. ** Pray that our souls be saved.  
Aflame with zeal for the Lord, * thou didst openly denounce the iniquitous king, * 
and zealously put to death * the shameless priests, * kindling fire amid the water, O 
blessed one. * And thou wast a source of food not produced by cultivation, * and 
with thy mantle * didst part the waters of the Jordan. ** Pray that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
When thou O prophet, * didst show forth a life on earth * which was truly 
heavenly, * enriched by the hypostatic Life within thee, * thou didst resurrect a dead 
boy by thy breath; * and thou didst remain apart from death for many years, * for 
thou didst sit upon a fiery chariot * and wast raised up to the Highest. ** Pray that 
our souls be saved.  
And these Stichera, the composition of Germanus, in Tone I:  
The zealous Elijah, ruler over the passions, hath today been taken up in the air, the 
initiate of the mysteries and the inaugurator of universal salvation. O precious glory, 
which the heaven-traversing prophet hath been vouchsafed! O eminent adornment of 
the prophets! For, lo! by his reproofs he showed himself to be an angel in the flesh 
and an incorporeal man. Praising him, let us say: Help us, O wise one, on the day of 
Judgment!  
With spiritual songs let us all praise the prophets of Christ: for Elijah the Tishbite 
became a traversor of the heavens, and through his mantle Elisha received a double 
measure of grace from God; and they have both been revealed to be radiant beacons 
for the whole world, praying ceaselessly on behalf of our souls.  
O ye faithful, like David let us honor with hymns today the prophet of the Lord, 
Elijah the Tishbite, the most splendid zealot. For, lo! by his speech he shut heaven 
like a curtain and rendered the fertile earth barren. O most glorious wonder! A man 
of earth doth not permit the heavens to rain! O wonder! A corruptible man is clothed 
in incorruption, and hath ascended to the heavens on a fiery chariot; and by his 
mantle bestowed a double measure of grace upon Elisha, and denounced the king, 
and destroyed the disobedient people with famine. He put to shame all the shameful 
priests, and raised up the widow’s son from the dead by his word. Through his 
supplications, O Christ our God, preserve all right-believing Orthodox Christians in 
peace, granting them the triumph of victory over their enemies.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
O ye faithful, let us honor in song the chiefs among the prophets, the most radiant 
beacons of the whole world: Elijah and Elisha. And let us joyously cry out to Christ: 
O compassionate Lord, through the supplications of Thy prophets, grant Thy people 
forgiveness of sins and great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief. 
 Great Doxology and Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the first canon, and 4 from 
ODE VI of the second canon of the holy prophet.  
He, that alone sustaineth every living thing by His good will, through a raven 
provided thee with a banquet as a chosen guest, O Prophet. To Him do we all cry 
aloud: Thou art our God, and there is none holy save Thee, O Lord! (Twice) 
Grace be to the Benefactor and Guardian Who, in His ineffable providence, 
nourished the widow and the prophet. To Him do we all cry out: Thou art our God, 
and none is holy save Thee, O Lord!  
O thou who didst forbid the rain-laden clouds to pour forth, when the widow of 
Zarephath was deprived of food, thou didst cause the remnant of her food to 
increase continually; and didst cry aloud: None is holy save Thee, O Lord!  
A hymn of supplication do thou offer unto God, O most honored prophet, on 
behalf of all who have recourse to thy divine temple, that we may honor thee as a 
great helper.  
The mortal mind doth not suffice to praise thy life as is meet, O prophet; for, 
beholding the transfiguration of Christ, thou wast exalted far above the noetic ranks.  
He who is the Lord and Creator of all hath appeared to us in accordance with thy 
prophecy, O blessed Elijah, calling all to the knowledge of Him, for He is the Lover 
of mankind.  
Theotokion: O Mary, pure vessel of virginity: cleanse thou my mind of the gloom 
of the passions, and fill my heart with righteousness, O all-immaculate one.  
Troparion of the holy prophet, in Tone IV:  
The angel in the flesh, and foundation of the prophets, * the second forerunner of 
the Coming of Christ, * the glorious Elijah from on High * sent down grace upon 
Elisha * to dispel infirmities and to cleanse lepers. * Wherefore, he poureth forth 
healings ** upon those who honor him.  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone II:  
O prophet, foreseer of the mighty works of our God, * Elijah of great renown, * 
who by thy voice didst restrain the cloud of rain: * on our behalf entreat thou Him ** 
who alone is the Lover of mankind.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Thou art a priest forever, * after the order of 
Melchizedek.  
Verse: The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make 
Thine enemies the footstool of Thy feet.  
 
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF ST. JAMES (5:10-20)  
Brethren: take the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an 
example of suffering affliction, and of patience. Behold, we count them happy which 
endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that 
the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. But above all things, my brethren, swear 
not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath: but let your 
yea be yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation. Is any among you 
afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing psalms. Is any sick among you? let 
him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with 
oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord 
shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Confess 
your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The 
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much. Elijah was a man subject to 
like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained 
not on the earth by the space of three years and six months. And he prayed again, and 
the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. Brethren, if any of you do 
err from the truth, and one convert him; let him know, that he which converteth the 
sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a 
multitude of sins.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Moses and Aaron among His priests, and Samuel among 
them that call upon His name.  
Verse: A light hath dawned forth for the righteous man and gladness for the 
upright of heart.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (4:22-30)  
At that time; all wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of Jesus’ 
mouth. And they said, Is this not Joseph’s son? And he said unto them, Ye will surely 
say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in 
Capernaum, do also here in thy country. And he said, Verily I say unto you, No 
prophet is accepted in his own country. But I tell you of a truth, many widows were 
in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up three years and six 
months, when great famine was throughout all the land; but unto none of them was 
Elijah sent, save unto Zarephath, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. 
And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet; and none of them 
was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian. And all they in the synagogue, when they 
heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him out of the city, 
and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might 
cast him down headlong. But he, passing through the midst of them, went his way.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
