--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 25th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE DORMITION OF THE RIGHTEOUS ANNA, THE 
MOTHER OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY WOMEN OLYMPIA & EUPRAXIA 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the righteous one: 3 in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast Given a Sign ...”: 
Preserving intact * the justifications of the law, * and laboring blamelessly for God 
Almighty, * thou wast deemed worthy, O Anna, to become the mother * of her who 
would give birth to Christ in the flesh: * the pure and divine maiden. * With her we 
also call thee blessed, * and with joyous thought we celebrate today ** thy holy 
dormition.  
Having given birth, O divinely wise Anna, * unto the palace of Life, * thou hast 
truly been translated to life incorruptible, * and hast joined the choirs of the righteous 
* who nurture thee richly with the joy of the Master. * Wherefore, we celebrate thy 
repose, * O ever-memorable one, * and, made wise by God, ** we honor thee with 
faith.  
Having given birth, O divinely wise Anna, * unto the gateway to heaven, * thou 
hast made haste to the mansions of heaven, O glorious one, * and delightest now in 
divine glory. * By thy supplications grant it also unto us * who celebrate thine 
honored dormition; * and dispel thou the gloom of the passions, * driving away the 
darkness ** of cruel circumstances.  
And 3 Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O wondrous miracle ...”: 
Behold! the splendid solemnity, the radiant day which bringeth joy to the world, 
the honored and right-praiseworthy dormition of the right glorious Anna, from 
whom she who gaveth birth to Life was born: the animate tabernacle which held the 
uncontainable Word, our release from grief and mediatress of joy, who bestoweth 
great mercy upon all the faithful.  
O most glorious wonder! The right-glorious Anna, who most wondrously gaveth 
birth to the well-spring of Life, the pure one who, alone among women, is blessed, is 
translated from this transitory life to that which is without end, taken up from the 
earth to the heavens, to rejoice today with the assemblies of the angels. And we now 
celebrate her holy festival.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
The choirs of the faithful, today, with all reverence, celebrate in the divine Spirit 
thine honored dormition, the splendid festivity; for the brilliant grace of healings hath 
dawned upon us, burning up the hordes of the wicked airborne demons, and guiding 
with its light the thoughts of those who with faith hymn thine honored repose, O 
right-wondrous Anna.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII: 
Joachim and Anna, the blameless spouses and holy couple, from whose barren 
loins and womb sprang forth the Theotokos, the holy staff from whom Christ God 
shone forth as the salvation of the world, having passed over to the mansions of 
heaven with their daughter, the most pure Virgin, join chorus with the angels, making 
supplication for the world. And, assembling, we hymn them, saying: O ye who, for 
the sake of the divine Maiden, the most pure Mary, were the grandparents of Christ: 
pray ye on behalf of our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the righteous one, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Rejoice, noetic swallow, who announced the spring-time of grace to us, who lived 
well and blamelessly in chastity, and preserved the treasure of virginity; thou who 
didst give birth with maternal pangs to the immaculate Theotokos who alone kneweth 
not a man, O honored ewe-lamb who hast given birth to the heifer who at the angel’s 
word bore the Word, the Lamb Who taketh away the transgressions of the world, and 
Who hath from the earth translated thee, the grandmother of the Lord, O Anna. Him 
do thou now entreat, that He grant great mercy to our souls.  
Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; * praise is meet for the upright.  
Rejoice, O God-receiving Joachim and divine and most honorable Anna, desired 
of God, O honorable couple, who were chosen by the holiness of the splendors of 
the law, who by divine grace proclaimed glad tidings, having given birth to her who 
bore Christ, the Author of our life! O lamps who lighted the unshaded candle, who 
guided well the grace which is the most pure Theotokos. With her pray ye, that Christ 
grant to our souls great mercy.  
Verse: Blessed are all they that fear the Lord, * who walk in His ways.  
Rejoice, O divine and blessed Anna, grandmother of Christ God, blessed ground 
who caused to blossom the earth which put forth God for the world, who 
unceasingly studied the law of God and inscribed grace for all; who by thy birthgiving 
didst elude the bond of barrenness, who dost counter death with incorruption, and 
hast passed over to divine splendor, having given birth to the Theotokos, the Light-
bearing lamp. With her do thou make supplication, that great mercy be granted to our 
souls.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Come, all creation, and, assembling, let us praise the divinely wise Anna on 
cymbals and with psalms, who through her womb hast given birth to the divine 
mountain, and today is translated to the noetic mountain and the mansions of 
paradise; and let us cry out to her: Blessed is thy womb which bore her who truly 
carried within her womb the Light of the world, and beauteous are thy breasts which 
nourished with milk her who with milk nurtured Christ, the Nourishment of our life! 
Him do thou entreat, that He deliver us from all tribulation and every assault of the 
enemy, and save our souls.  
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
O divinely wise Anna, * in thy womb thou didst bear the pure Mother of God, * 
who gaveth birth unto Life. * Wherefore, rejoicing in glory, * thou hast now been 
translated to the mansions of heaven, * where is the abode of those who rejoice. * O 
ever-blessed one, * beseech thou cleansing of transgressions ** for those who honor 
thee with love.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of the holy women, the acrostic whereof is: “To the honorable women I chant 
a precious hymn”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
With the weakness of your flesh ye cast down the mighty foe and have united 
yourselves to God, O venerable women, praying that He grant us all the power of 
salvation.  
Ye were wounded by the comeliness of the Bridegroom and with hymns cleaved 
unto His feet, following His life-bearing steps; wherefore, ye brought down the 
serpent foe.  
In causing the beauty of your bodies to wither through the labors of fasting, ye 
adorned your souls; and with Christ the Bridegroom ye have entered into the splendid 
bridal-chambers, O venerable ones.  
Theotokion: Thy womb, O Virgin, was shown to be a radiant bridal-chamber of 
the Lord, Who in His mercy became incarnate bodily through thee, illumining all 
things with the radiance of divine knowledge.  
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Thou didst disdain the beauty of the flesh, O all-honored Olympia, and transitory 
glory didst thou consider to be like a dream; and thou didst seek God in humility and 
fasting, O divinely blessed one.  
From infancy didst thou with faith love the Word Who came to earth as a babe for 
our sake, O Eupraxia, and thou didst bind thy soul to His image, remaining steadfast.  
Ye rejected the world and the wisdom of the flesh, having by abstinence and labors 
reached the heavenly bridal-chamber of Christ the supremely honored Bridegroom, 
Who bestoweth upon you divine delight.  
Theotokion: The hallowed labors of the sacred prophets announced thee of old: 
the portal who gaveth birth to the Light, and the animate scroll whereon the Word 
was ineffably inscribed by no human hand, O most pure Virgin.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Thou wast a most diligent and hospitable woman, giving rest to the council of the 
ordained, and thereby gladdening Christ Who had become a wanderer in His loving-
kindness.  
Seeing the most pure comeliness of Christ, thy Bridegroom, O Eupraxia, thou 
didst cause the beauty of thy flesh to wither up through abstinence.  
Driving the slumber from the eyelids of their souls, by abstinence the sacred 
women lulled to sleep the movements of the body.  
Theotokion: Loving the Lord Who became incarnate of thee, the most pure 
Virgin, the venerable ones hastened to the fragrance of thy myrrh, wounded by thy 
divine love.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Watered by the well-spring of the sacred Pastor who hath given drink to the whole 
world with golden teachings, thou didst put forth good works as grain, O Olympia, 
whereby thou dost nourish the hearts of those who honor thee.  
Having strengthened thy glorious soul with blessed hope, O Eupraxia, rejoicing 
thou didst patiently and with purity of mind endure hunger for many days, nurtured 
with immaterial food.  
Having died to the world, ye inherited immortal life and have been deemed worthy 
of the blessed bridal chamber, O divinely blessed and most honored ones, who kept 
your lamps alight with the oil of fasting.  
Theotokion: Of His own will, God the divine Word made His abode within a 
womb which knew not wedlock; and He became a visible man, preserving thee a 
virgin, O most pure one. Desiring Him, the maidens followed Him in fasting with a 
splendid life.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
While young, Eupraxia trampled upon the ancient supplanter with the fervor of 
pangs, with pious thought and in the weakness of her female body; for, Christ, Who 
wrapped Himself in our weakness, made her steadfast.  
Having acquired abstinence and a humble heart, vigilance and almsgiving, 
understanding, the right faith and perfect love, O Olympia, thou didst become a 
temple of God and an abundant fount of miracles.  
Having distanced thyself from the pleasures of life through the endurance of 
pangs, for the sake of Him Who came down to earth for our sake and became a 
wanderer of His own will, O honored and right wondrous ones, ye have reached Him 
Who receiveth you as guests in the heavens.  
Theotokion: The Creator found thee to be a pure vessel of purity and honorable 
virginity, O Maiden; and at the word of the archangel He made His abode in thy most 
pure womb and hath driven from mankind all the malice of the enemy.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded ...”: 
Keeping vigil in mystic prayer, and taking delight in divinely inspired writings, the 
glorious Olympia and Eupraxia took the Cross of the Lord upon their shoulders, and, 
following Him in abstinence, cast down all the deception of the serpent, crying out to 
Christ: “O heavenly Bridegroom, be Thou our confirmation!”  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
By love the venerable ones transformed corruptible glory into incorrupt glory; and 
ever delighting therein, rejoicing in gladness, they chant: Blessed in the God of our 
fathers! 
O how Eupraxia endured standing and hunger for many days, crying out to Christ 
the Bridegroom: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Perceiving thee to be a great vessel of the divine Spirit, O blessed Olympia, 
Chrysostom, great among the patriarchs, filled thee abundantly with his great 
teachings.  
Theotokion: Thou alone didst abolish the curse of our first mother, O Virgin, 
having given birth to Christ Who crowneth all with blessings. To Him do we chant: 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thou didst subject the irrational passions to thy mind, O pure and blameless 
virgin, having wedded thyself to the Word and Bridegroom, crying aloud: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works; hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Having cast down the prince of darkness by your struggles, ye have obtained for 
us a crown of incorruption, entry into paradise and divine delight in spiritual joy 
throughout the ages, O maidens.  
Having crucified yourselves to the world and been wounded with the love of God, 
O sacred virgins, with darts of abstinence ye have wounded him who wounded Eve 
with the taste of sweetness; and ye hymn Christ throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin Mother, who hast given birth to Jesus, Who was 
incarnate of thy pure blood: thou hast assembled all the virgins, crying out with them: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
O turtle-doves beautiful to the Master and divinely melodious, O splendid 
swallows of pure love: ye have been led to the beauties of heaven.  
Ye have been numbered among the choirs on high and have made your abode 
among the assemblies of the elect, praying with love to our compassionate God on 
our behalf.  
The memory of Eupraxia and Olympia hath dawned like the sun upon the world, 
illumining the thoughts of the faithful who ever magnify Christ.  
Theotokion: As thou art the receptacle of the light, O Virgin, enlighten my soul, 
which hath become darkened by the passions, and by thy supplications deliver me 
from the outermost darkness.  
And these Stichera of the holy women, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Together, as is meet, let us honor Olympia in hymns: * the disciple of our teacher, 
* the initiate of the prophet. * And let us praise * the chaste and pure Eupraxia with 
her, ** who prayeth to Christ, that we be saved.  
With hymns, all ye faithful, * let us together honor as is meet * the chaste 
Eupraxia, the offspring of piety, * the adornment of monastics, * for she entreateth 
the Creator on our behalf, ** that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., in Tone I: 
Having shed earthly beauty, O divinely wise one, * thou didst choose well the 
good portion * which Mary found; * and having forsaken all transitory things without 
hesitation, * by virtue thou didst receive ** the noetic Pearl of great price.  
Both now ..., It is truly meet ..., 

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
O divinely wise Anna, * in thy womb thou didst bear the pure Mother of God, * 
who gaveth birth unto Life. * Wherefore, rejoicing in glory, * thou hast now been 
translated to the mansions of heaven, * where is the abode of those who rejoice. * O 
ever-blessed one, * beseech thou cleansing of transgressions ** for those who honor 
thee with love. (Thrice) 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
We celebrate thy dormition, O righteous Anna, for Christ God hath glorified thee 
with ineffable glory, as His grandmother. Wherefore, having been translated, by thy 
supplications beseech Him to grant us peace, protecting our souls against the 
adversaries. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
exceedingly glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled”:  
Thou didst commit thy soul into the hands of Him Who for our sake became a 
man through the Virgin; yea, thy Creator and God hath translated thee to the life of 
incorruption. Wherefore, with honor we now bless thee as the one truly honored and 
immaculate Theotokos; and together we cry out: Entreat Christ our Savior, thy 
Creator and God, that our souls be saved! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Joseph marveled, beholding that which transcends nature, * and pondering thy 
seedless conception, O Theotokos, * he thought of the dew upon the fleece, * the 
bush unconsumed by the fire, * and the rod of Aaron which buddeth forth. * And 
bearing witness, thy betrothed and guardian * cried aloud to the priests saying: ** A 
Virgin giveth birth, and remaineth a Virgin even after birthgiving!  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without the Troparia to the martyrs; and the canon 
of the righteous Anna, with 6 Troparia, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Forgiveness of sins, deliverance from evils and correction of life do thou ask for 
me for today I honor thy radiant memory, O all-praised Anna.  
In a godly manner didst thou give birth unto her who gaveth birth unto Life; 
wherefore, thou hast been translated unto life everlasting, delighting in ineffable joy 
and the unwaning light, O Anna of godly calling.  
Divine and pure grace hath translated unto joy her whose daughter gaveth birth 
without seed; and with great boldness she standeth before the Lord, praying that all 
be saved.  
Having lived righteously and venerably, thou hast now been translated to the 
righteous Lord, to rejoice with righteous from all ages. Wherefore, having assembled, 
we honor thee with faith.  
Theotokion: From thee hath the Sun of righteousness shone forth upon us, 
illumined all the earth with the knowledge of God and dispelled the gloom of 
ignorance, O pure, all-immaculate and blessed one.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth ..., 
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Thou didst conceive her who conceived Him Who sustaineth all things; and in a 
manner past all telling thou hast given birth to her who gaveth birth unto Christ. 
Wherefore, we honor thy dormition, O Anna.  
With praises thy glorious memory is celebrated today; for thou, O Anna beloved of 
God, hast given birth for us unto her who is far above praise: the pure Mother of 
God.  
The glorious Joachim, uniting himself to Anna, like the sun to the moon, giveth 
birth to the effulgence of virginity, for whose sake the Beam of divinity hath shone 
forth.  
From thy womb thou didst give birth to the divine mountain, O Anna blessed of 
God, and hast passed over to the noetic mountains and the mansions of paradise.  
Theotokion: O Birthgiver of God, we have acquired thee as a steadfast intercessor; 
and, having set our hope on thee, we are saved. For, fleeing to thee, we find 
protection.  
Sessional Hymn of the righteous one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom”: 
The mother of the Mother of the Master and Creator wast thou, O all-praised 
Anna, ever keeping His commandments. Wherefore, in dying thou hast truly been 
translated to immortal life and the unwaning light. Wherefore, ever enlightened by the 
Spirit, we keep thy radiant and holy memory; and together we cry out to thee: Entreat 
Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory 
with love.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
In study thou didst perfect the things which are written in the law, and became the 
mother of the Mother of the Bestower of the law. Wherefore, all creation now doth 
joyously celebrate thy memory as is meet.  
Truly blessed is thy womb, O Anna, which bore within itself her who would bear 
the Light of the world; and beautiful are thy breasts, for they nourished with milk her 
who nurtured Christ our Nourisher.  
As thou didst live a blameless life, thou didst give birth blamelessly to the Maiden 
Theotokos who bore the Word of the Father; and to Him hast thou been translated 
with glory, truly deified in partaking of honors.  
Theotokion: The womb of the Virgin was shown to be like a mound upon a 
threshing-floor, holding the Grain which grew without being cultivated, whereby all 
nature is nourished, crying aloud: Glory to Thy power, O almighty Christ!  
ODE V  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
O most glorious Anna, thou didst truly give birth to heaven on earth: to her who 
gaveth birth to the Creator of heaven, Who today translateth thee with glory to the 
heavens.  
Filled with the radiance of the Bestower of riches, with an immaterial mind thou 
dost joyously join chorus with the immaterial choirs. Yet be thou mindful of us who 
praise thee with faith.  
O glorious one who manifestly sprang forth from the root of Jesse, thou didst give 
rise unto the blossoming rod: the pure one who put forth Jesus our Redeemer, the 
never-withering Bloom.  
Theotokion: To thee who alone art mighty, the protection of the faithful, do I flee; 
and on thee do I set the hope of my salvation. O most holy Lady Theotokos, disdain 
me not!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Let Joachim and Anna, the forebears of Jesus the Lord God, who are adorned 
with righteousness, be praised today in hymns, as is meet!  
Anna hath surpassed all praises, in that she hath given birth unto her who 
surpasseth all laudations. Wherefore, she maketh her abode in the choir of the 
righteous.  
Thy memory is full of brilliance and splendor; and emitting the effulgence of 
salvation in the world, O chaste Anna, thou hast filled all with all manner of gifts.  
The jar which contained the divine Manna didst thou bear in thy womb, O Anna; 
and, living now in the heavens with her, O all-praised one, thou prayest for us all.  
 
Theotokion:  Through Anna thou wast brought into the world, O most 
immaculate Queen who hast given birth to the King of all, who remained Virgin after 
giving birth and art more highly exalted than the cherubim.  
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
We celebrate the memory of the forebears of Christ, * entreating them with faith 
for help, * that from every tribulation * all may be delivered who cry: * Our God is 
with us, * Who hath glorified them, ** as was His good pleasure!  
Ikos: We all come together to hymn prophetically the blessed repose of the grand-
mother of Christ; for today hath she been translated from this transitory life; and, 
progressing joyously to the heavens, she rejoiceth, as the mother of her who is truly 
the Theotokos. And with faith she crieth out: My soul doth magnify the Lord; for I 
have given birth on earth to His mother, whom He hath glorified, as was His good 
pleasure!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
As thou hast given birth to the Mother of true Life, O Anna, thou hast been 
translated to the true life and light, crying out: O Lord God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
As mother of the Mother of the Redeemer, O Anna, thou hast gone up from earth 
to heaven, adorned with the virtues, crying out in praise: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
O God-bearer, thou hast departed for never-ending life, for the vast plain of the 
meadow of paradise, for the unwaning light, crying out: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Ripe with the virtues and adorned with the beauty of divine gifts, thou hast been 
translated to God, crying out unceasingly: O supremely hymned Lord God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: Adorned with the beauties of the virtues, O most immaculate one, 
thou hast given birth to the Word Who is more comely than the sons of mankind, 
and Who adorneth those who hymn thee with beauteous majesty.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The mother of her who alone is the Theotokos, who was barren but is now the 
grandmother of Christ, shed the vesture of mortality as she had that of barrenness. 
And we cry out in the land of the living: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Christ hath opened unto thee the gates on high and received thee with joy; for 
thou hast given birth to the portal through which He Himself passed, showing it to 
be shut after His passage, O divinely wise and rightly hymned Anna. Wherefore, we, 
the faithful, honor thee throughout the ages.  
Thou wast the mother of the holy ever-virgin who gaveth birth to the Most holy 
Word Who hath bestowed sanctification and deliverance upon us, O divinely wise 
and right wondrous Anna; and thou didst reach the end of thy life in a holy manner. 
Wherefore, we, the faithful, ever hymn thee throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: O Lady, Birthgiver of God, to the calm haven of the breath of the 
Spirit do thou now guide me who am beset by many tribulations and am buffeted by 
the tempest of sin; for thou art the refuge of Christians. Wherefore, we hymn thee 
throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
From the earth of thy womb was the holy earth truly born which without seed put 
forth the uncultivated Wheat, the Nourisher and Lord of the world, Who most wisely 
hath brought thee over to inexhaustible nourishment, O Anna.  
Today hath thy memory shone forth upon us more brightly than the sun in the 
effulgence of rich gifts, O most honored one, enlightening us and dispelling the 
darkness of the passions. Preserve those who celebrate it.  
The godly Joachim and the divinely wise and all-glorious Anna, the honored and 
splendid couple, summon us in a godly manner to rejoice on their feast, which the 
Lord of all, the Bestower of light, hath made splendid.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
 
Theotokion: O Mary, thou Sovereign Lady of all, free me now who am in thrall to 
all manner of offenses; for thou thyself hast given birth to the Redeemer of all Who 
hath delivered us from slavery to sin through a divine gesture.  
Exapostilarion of the righteous one:  
Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples ...”: 
We rightly hymn Anna, who was called by God; for, past all hope, she gaveth birth 
to the Virgin Mary, the Theotokos, who was shown to be the mother of Christ our 
Redeemer in the flesh, Who today hath in a godly manner received her in the highest, 
who prayeth for us and for the peace of the world. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars ...”: 
Having given birth, O Anna, to Mary, the new heaven through which the Sun of 
glory shone forth, thou dost pass from earth to the heavens today, rejoicing with 
Christ, O most glorious one.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Celebrating the honored memory of Anna, O Christ, * we hymn Thee Who hast 
now translated her * from this transitory life to never-ending glory, * in that she is the 
mother of the Theotokos and Ever-virgin Mother * who without seed gave birth unto 
Thee ** in a manner transcending nature. (Twice)  
Celebrating the holy memory of Joachim and Anna, * the honored and blameless 
forebears of Christ, * without ceasing we glorify our compassionate Lord and 
Redeemer, * Who hath translated them * to life incorruptible ** which ageth not.  
The joy of those who keep festival is made perfect * among the immaterial choirs 
* and the mansions of the righteous, * where the ranks of the angels and the assembly 
of the saints are. * And now it hath caused the souls of the righteous Joachim and 
Anna to dwell there, ** whom, piously praising, we call blessed.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II 
Come, all ye who love virginity, ye lovers of purity! Come, let us celebrate the 
honored dormition of Anna; for in a manner transcending nature, she gaveth birth to 
the divine Maiden Mary, the well-spring of life, from whom was born the Redeemer 
Who enlighteneth and sanctifieth our souls.  
Great Doxology, and Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the righteous Anna:  
Thou didst conceive her who conceived Him Who sustaineth all things; and in a 
manner past all telling thou hast given birth to her who gaveth birth unto Christ. 
Wherefore, we honor thy dormition, O Anna.  
With praises thy glorious memory is celebrated today; for thou, O Anna beloved of 
God, hast given birth for us unto her who is far above praise: the pure Mother of 
God.  
The glorious Joachim, uniting himself to Anna, like the sun to the moon, giveth 
birth to the effulgence of virginity, for whose sake the Beam of divinity hath shone 
forth.  
From thy womb thou didst give birth to the divine mountain, O Anna blessed of 
God, and hast passed over to the noetic mountains and the mansions of paradise.  
Let Joachim and Anna, the forebears of Jesus the Lord God, who are adorned 
with righteousness, be praised today in hymns, as is meet!  
Anna hath surpassed all praises, in that she hath given birth unto her who 
surpasseth all laudations. Wherefore, she maketh her abode in the choir of the 
righteous.  
Thy memory is full of brilliance and splendor; and emitting the effulgence of 
salvation in the world, O chaste Anna, thou hast filled all with all manner of gifts.  
 
Theotokion:  Through Anna thou wast brought into the world, O most 
immaculate Queen who hast given birth to the King of all, who remained Virgin after 
giving birth and art more highly exalted than the cherubim.  
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
O divinely wise Anna, * in thy womb thou didst bear the pure Mother of God, * 
who gaveth birth unto Life. * Wherefore, rejoicing in glory, * thou hast now been 
translated to the mansions of heaven, * where is the abode of those who rejoice. * O 
ever-blessed one, * beseech thou cleansing of transgressions ** for those who honor 
thee with love.  
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone II: 
We celebrate the memory of the forebears of Christ, * entreating them with faith 
for help, * that from every tribulation * all may be delivered who cry: * Our God is 
with us, * Who hath glorified them, ** as was His good pleasure!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, § 210 (GAL. 4: 22-31) 
Brethren: It is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the 
other by a free woman. But he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; 
but he of the free woman was by promise. Which things are an allegory: for these are 
the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, 
which is Hagar. For this Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem 
which now is, and is in bondage with her children. But Jerusalem which is above is 
free, which is the mother of us all. For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren that bearest 
not; break forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desolate hath many more 
children than she which hath a husband. Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the 
children of promise. But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that 
was born after the Spirit, even so it is now. Nevertheless what saith the Scripture? 
Cast out the bondwoman and her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be 
heir with the son of the free woman. So then, brethren, we are not children of the 
bondwoman, but of the free.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The salvation of the righteous is from the Lord, and He is 
their Defender in time of affliction.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 36 (LK. 8: 16-21) 
The Lord said: No man, when he hath lighted a candle, covereth it with a 
vessel, or putteth it under a bed; but setteth it on a candlestick, that they which enter 
in may see the light. For nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest; neither any 
thing hid, that shall not be known and come abroad. Take heed therefore how ye 
hear: for whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he seemeth to 
have. Then came to him His mother and His brethren, and could not come at Him 
for the press. And it was told Him by certain which said, Thy mother and Thy 
brethren stand without, desiring to see Thee. And He answered and said unto them, 
My mother and My brethren are these which hear the word of God, and do it.  
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
