--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 28th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER PITIRIM, BISHOP OF TAMBOV 
AT LITTLE VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: 
Come, ye faithful, let us glorify God, the Bestower of all good things, Who hath 
given us a wonderworker, the holy hierarch Pitirim, who prayeth without ceasing for 
us all. (Twice)  
Rejoice, O region of Tambov, for from thee hath shone forth a new beacon of 
grace which driveth away the darkness of temptations and misfortunes from those 
who cry out with faith: O holy hierarch, father Pitirim, entreat God on behalf of us 
all!  
Great are the signs of faith! By a spring of water are wonders wrought, the vesture 
of the holy hierarch worketh miracles, and his tomb leadeth to life all who venerate it 
with faith!  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
O brethren, let us praise the holy hierarch Pitirim today, and with spiritual odes let 
us cry out to him: Rejoice, our good shepherd, who hast assembled the people of 
God for thy festival! Rejoice, thou who hast joined angels and mortals together in 
glorification! Rejoice, adornment of hierarchs and ornament of priests! Rejoice, 
healing of the sick and consolation of the sorrowful! Rejoice, thou fervent intercessor 
for us all!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Rejoice, O Theotokos Mary, * thou indestructible and surpassingly holy temple; * 
as the prophet crieth out: ** Holy is thy temple, wondrous in righteousness!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Rejoice, O blessed father Pitirim! * for, having cleansed soul and body of the 
passions through fasting and vigil, * and adorned thyself with the beauty of the 
virtues, * thou wast a habitation of the Holy Spirit, * and now abidest in the heavenly 
mansions, praying for those who honor thee.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
O holy hierarch, father Pitirim, * joining chorus now with the angels in heaven, * 
and standing with the choirs of the saints * before the throne of the King of glory, * 
pray thou for the salvation of our souls.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
O Pitirim our father, look down from heaven upon us on earth * who have been 
beset by infirmities, * and who honor now thy holy memory; * and entreat the 
heavenly Father, * that He turn us from our iniquities and lead us to a place of 
blessedness with thee.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Come, ye pious people, let us set forth a splendid feast; for Pitirim, the holy 
hierarch of God, standeth today before the throne of grace, healeth our infirmities, 
and prayeth for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Rejoice, O cloud of Light! * Rejoice, radiant candlestick! * Rejoice, jar wherein the 
Manna was kept! * Rejoice, staff of Aaron! * Rejoice, bush un-burnt! * Rejoice, bridal-
chamber! * Rejoice, thou throne! * Rejoice, holy mountain! * Rejoice, refuge! Rejoice, 
divine table! * Rejoice, mystic portal! ** Rejoice, thou joy of all!  
After “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace ...,”  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Teacher of faith and piety, * beacon of the Church, * example for monastics, * O 
most wise and holy hierarch Pitirim: * piously hast thou tended thy flock and led it to 
Christ. * Wherefore, though adorned in the highest with a crown of glory, * thou dost 
abide with us on earth in spirit, * radiating miracles. ** Entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved. (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS 
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy hierarch: 4 in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
A day of splendid festivity hath dawned; the angels join chorus in heaven; mortals 
rejoice on earth; and the whole assembly of the Church is glad, glorifying God Who is 
wondrous in His saints, Who hath revealed the holy hierarch Pitirim as a new 
wonderworker and intercessor for the Russian land. (Twice)  
Rejoice, O land of Russia! Be glad, O city of Tambov! Adorn thyself, O assembly 
of the pious! For today the Master and Lord of all, our Savior, the heavenly High 
Priest, crowneth with an everlasting crown His faithful servant, the holy hierarch 
Pitirim, the good shepherd who prayeth fervently for his flock.  
 
Come, O ye pious people, and behold a multitude of miracles today: by the mere 
invocation of the holy hierarch of God the afflicted recover their health, the demons 
are driven away, the sorrowful receive assuagement, and the assembly of the faithful 
who have come together for his memorial is filled with joy.  
And 4 Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Today the city of Tambov is glad as is meet, having the holy hierarch Pitirim as its 
helper, and with it the whole land of Russia rejoiceth in spirit; wherefore, O ye 
faithful, assembling to chant psalms and hymns, let us praise the most wondrous 
Pitirim, the treasure of mercy and purity, the most radiant beacon of the Church, the 
inexhaustible wellspring of miracles and dependable intercessor before God for those 
who honor his holy memory with faith and love. (Twice)  
Thou wast shown to be a faithful keeper of the commandment of the Gospel not 
to lay up for thyself treasures upon the earth, O holy hierarch, wisely distributing thy 
possessions, building churches of God and monasteries, feeding the hungry and 
clothing the naked; wherefore, He Who beggared Himself for our sake hath received 
thee into the eternal mansions. Him do thou entreat, that He grant remission of sins 
unto those who with faith and love honor thy holy memory.  
In the throes of death thou didst utter a mighty cry unto the Lord, and thou wast 
heard in thy reverence; for Christ Himself appeared to thee on a cloud, indicating 
with His blessing that thou art His faithful servant and imparting healing unto thee. 
Him do thou beseech, O holy hierarch who didst behold God, that we also may meet 
Him on the clouds with all the saints when He shall come in glory to judge the whole 
world.  
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
As in the days of the apostles the handkerchiefs and aprons of Paul wrought 
miracles, so today also the vestments of Pitirim, the holy hierarch of God, who was 
illumined with the spirit of the apostles, when placed upon the afflicted, impart the 
ability to walk unto the lame, the recovery of sight unto the blind, strength and power 
unto the paralyzed, consolation to those who weep, hope to the despairing, and great 
mercy to all the faithful.  
Both now ..., the Dogmaticon, in Tone V: 
In the Red Sea of old * an image of the Bride who knew not wedlock was 
depicted. * There Moses was the one who parted the sea, * here Gabriel is the 
minister of the miracle. * At that time Israel marched dry-shod through the deep, * 
now the Virgin doth seedlessly give birth to Christ. * The sea after Israel’s passage 
remained impassable; * the Immaculate one after bearing Emmanuel remained 
incorrupt. * O God, who doth exist and is pre-eternal, * and hath appeared as man, 
** have mercy upon us. 
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons: 
A READING FROM PROVERBS 
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS 
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace; but the mouth of the 

--- PAGE 5 ---
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple 
mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul 
pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This 
the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds; that His 
grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone III: 
Today the multitude of the faithful join chorus: the company of hierarchs and 
priests, the assembly of monastics and laity, the elderly and children, the young and 
the widowed, literate and simple alike, glorifying the Lord with mouth and heart; Who 
hath revealed the new intercessor and wonderworker and granteth great mercy to the 
world.  
Assembling today with faith and love, O brethren, let us praise the object of our 
festivity: Rejoice, O holy hierarch Pitirim, steadfast pillar of the Church! Rejoice, 
protector of the Russian land! Rejoice, splendid adornment of the city of Tambov! 
Rejoice, meek and merciful father! Rejoice, feeder of widows and orphans! Rejoice, 
quick intercessor for the oppressed! Rejoice, healer of the sick who exactest no fee! 
Rejoice, O thou who prayest fervently for us all!  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Wondrous things are wrought today in the city of Tambov: the blind recover their 
sight, the lame walk again, the mute speak, the deaf hear, the paralyzed arise and the 
poor prosper through the intercession of the holy hierarch and wonderworker 
Pitirim; and they cry aloud and say: Glory to God our Savior!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to 
thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of 
our souls! 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O venerable father Pitirim, * who now dost hymn the Holy Trinity * with the 
angels and the choirs of the saints, * and in thy love hast not withdrawn from us: * be 
thou mindful of the flock * which thou didst gather together, O wise one, * 
preserving it from the soul-destroying wolves, * and invisibly leading it ** into the 
fold of the kingdom of heaven.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
In thy lifetime thou didst become a habitation of the Holy Spirit, * O Pitirim our 
father, * having first cleansed thyself by faith and love; * and, standing now before the 
throne of Christ, * the heavenly Master of the house, * pray thou earnestly to Him, * 
that He cleanse us of the passions which harm the soul * and make His abode in our 
hearts with the Father and the Spirit, ** and lead us to the kingdom of heaven.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
O Pitirim our father, * honored scion of the city of Vyazma, * which was 
transplanted by the right hand of God to the city of Tambov, * watered by the grace 
of the Holy Spirit * and adorned with the fruits of the virtues: * pray for us to Christ 
God, * that He not hew us down like the barren fig-tree, * but cause us to dwell ** 
where the light of His countenance doth shine.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Open wide the gates of heaven, O ye princes! Ye angels, bow your heads! For the 
King of heaven and earth Himself cometh forth and leadeth into celestial glory His 
faithful servant, the venerable Pitirim, the good shepherd and divinely wise teacher 
who, during his life, acquired angelic purity by much sweat and toil, and who spurned 
the corruptible glory of the world, desiring the kingdom of heaven.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O all-pure 
one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign Lady, ** 
the intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 
After “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace ...,”  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Teacher of faith and piety, * beacon of the Church, * example for monastics, * O 
most wise and holy hierarch Pitirim: * piously hast thou tended thy flock and led it to 
Christ. * Wherefore, though adorned in the highest with a crown of glory, * thou dost 
abide with us on earth in spirit, * radiating miracles. ** Entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved. (Twice)  
Then “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...”: (Once) 
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Teacher of faith and piety, * beacon of the Church, * example for monastics, * O 
most wise and holy hierarch Pitirim: * piously hast thou tended thy flock and led it to 
Christ. * Wherefore, though adorned in the highest with a crown of glory, * thou dost 
abide with us on earth in spirit, * radiating miracles. ** Entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
As of old the ailing were healed by merely touching the hem of the robe of Christ, 
so now also the sick are cured when they touch the vestments wherein thou didst 
stand before the throne of grace, O hierarch of God, Pitirim our father. Wherefore, 
we glorify God and cry out to thee: Heal also our infirmities of soul and body, we 
pray thee, O holy one!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VII: 
O Lady, thou art a rampart and shelter, a calm haven for all who find themselves 
amid tribulations and have recourse to thine aid with faith. Wherefore, we also cry out 
to thee with boldness: Save us from misfortune and sorrow, O merciful Mother!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
“I shall build My Church, and the gates of Hades will not prevail against it,” Thou 
didst say to Thy disciples of old, O Savior; and now we see the fulfillment of these 
words: for when unbelief and superstition arose against Thy Church, Thou didst raise 
up a new wonderworker who confirmed the holy Faith by his pious life and many 
miracles and put its enemies to shame. Wherefore, rejoicing, we cry out to Thee: 
Wondrous art Thou in Thy saints, O Lord!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II: 
With the holy hierarch Pitirim do thou beseech Him to Whom thou didst give 
birth without seed through the Holy Spirit, that He make us steadfast in Orthodoxy 
and oneness of mind, O most pure Virgin who knewest not wedlock.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Pitirim, and 
we honor thy holy memory, for thou dost entreat Christ God on our behalf.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
When thou wast set upon the candle stand of the Church of Tambov, thou gavest 
no sleep to thine eyes, neither slumber to thine eyelids, saving thy reason-endowed 
sheep, strengthening the weak, healing the infirm, setting aright those astray, and 
humbling the unruly by thy meekness. And now, O Pitirim our father, cease thou 
never to entreat Christ the Savior, that He grant to the pastors of the Church zeal and 
vigilance for souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O most pure Virgin Theotokos, beseech thy Son and our God, that He cleanse us 
of our iniquities and grant the joy of salvation unto us who kiss the precious image of 
the venerable Pitirim and cry aloud: Glory to Thy condescension, O Lover of 
mankind!  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN, §36 (10:9-16) 
I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and 
out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to 
destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more 
abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. 
But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth 
the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and 
scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for 
the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As 
the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the 
sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and 
they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
With what hymns of praise shall we bless the holy hierarch Pitirim: the preserver 
of the Orthodox Faith and denouncer of unbelief, the champion of piety and 
fearsome reproof of iniquity, the guide of monks and laymen, the adornment of 
hierarchs and priests, for whose sake Christ granteth peace and great mercy unto the 
Russian land?  
Canon of the Theotokos (the Paraklisis), in Tone VIII, with 6 Troparia, including the 
Irmos; and 2 canons of the holy hierarch, with 8 Troparia: 

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE I 
Canon I of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
O Christ, the true Light, illumine mine understanding and cleanse my heart, that I 
may glorify the memory of Thy favorite, the God-bearing Pitirim.  
O venerable father Pitirim, standing before the fiery throne in the highest, 
illumined with the radiance of the threefold Sun, illumine thou the abyss of mine 
evils, that I also may chant: For gloriously hath He been glorified!  
As of old Moses the God-seer saved Israel from the hands of Pharaoh, so also do 
thou free me from slavery to the enemy, O God-bearing father, that rejoicing, I may 
glorify God Who is wondrous in His saints.  
Theotokion: O Lady, Mother of the Redeemer, by thine intercession entreat thy 
Son, that He destroy the sin which dwelleth within me and lead me forth into the 
freedom of the glory of His children.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Standing before the face of God in light unapproachable, O divinely wise and holy 
hierarch, illumine the darkness of our souls, and grant us utterance, that, rejoicing, we 
may praise thy memory, O all-blessed one.  
From thy youth didst thou subject the wisdom of thy flesh to thy spirit, O 
venerable one, and, clothed in dispassion, thou wast shown to be a chosen vessel of 
the grace of the priesthood and a true shepherd for thy flock. Pray thou, O father, 
that we be saved.  
Thy life was blameless, and thy repose is with the saints, O father; and thy memory 
is celebrated with hymns of praise. Pray thou to Christ on our behalf, asking that 
which is profitable for us; for the effective prayer of the righteous man is able to 
accomplish much.  
Theotokion: The threefold waves of evil thoughts and passions and the abyss of 
sins have engulfed my wretched soul. Extend unto me a helping hand, O Virgin 
Theotokos, thou refuge of the faithful.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth..., 
ODE III  
Canon I  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
As the righteous Hannah of old gave up her child, thou didst give thyself as a gift 
to God, O father Pitirim. Establish me also upon the rock of His commandments, 
that I may cry: None is as holy as our God!  
By thy supplications, O father Pitirim, establish our mind and heart in the Lord; 
exalt the horn of Orthodox Christians, that the mouths of the enemies of the Faith 
may be shut and we may rejoice in our salvation.  
On the feast of the new wonderworker let not the mighty one boast in his 
strength, nor let the wise man boast in his wisdom, nor yet the rich man boast in his 
wealth, but let him boast who boasteth of understanding and knowing the Lord and 
acquiring the riches of His grace.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, Mother who knewest not wedlock, by the grace 
of thy Son show forth my barren soul as fruitful, through the supplications of the 
new wonderworker Pitirim, that I also may cry out with all the faithful: None is as 
holy as our God!  
Canon II 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Emulating John the Almsgiver, O venerable one, in thy life thou didst show thyself 
to be merciful to those in need and a true father to the poor; and, dwelling now in the 
highest, be thou merciful unto us who call thee blessed.  
Of old many of the sick who touched the garments of Christ became well; and 
now those who place the vestments of the holy hierarch upon themselves and touch 
them for a blessing receive healing of all manner of ailments. Wherefore, O brethren, 
in accordance with the Gospel let us glorify God Who hath given such authority unto 
mankind.  
As thou wast a good helmsman of the ship of Christ’s Church, O father, deliver 
thy flock from the tempest of sins, tribulations and sorrows, guiding us to the calm 
haven of the will of God.  
Theotokion: With hymns let us honor the most pure Mother and Virgin through 
whom heaven and the courts of the Lord have been opened unto mankind, chanting: 
There is none as pure as thee, O most pure one, and none more immaculate than 
thee, O Lady!  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: 
Even though thy body descended beneath the earth, yet hath it shone forth like 
the sun from behind the clouds, emitting rays of grace. Wherefore, celebrating thy 
memory, we fervently entreat thee as our common father; from misfortunes and 
grievous circumstances deliver all who honor thee!  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, taking Pitirim as thy fellow suppliant, 
entreat Him to Whom thou hast given birth in a manner past understanding and all 
telling, that He grant us forgiveness of transgressions and correction of life, that we 
may ever hymn thee who hast magnified our race.  
ODE IV 
Canon I  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
From thy youth thou didst emulate the angels in the virginal purity of thy life, 
serving the salvation of mankind, O father Pitirim, and crying out to God, saying: 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Like an angel in the flesh thou didst burn with the life of love for Christ, O holy 
one, illumining with the knowledge of the Son of God the people entrusted to thee, 
who cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
O earthly angel and heavenly man, ask salvation for us sinners from Christ God, 
that we also may cry out with thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: O Mother of the Word and Virgin, preserve us from shameful 
passions, that we may chant unto Christ Who dwelleth within us: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
We who find ourselves amid sorrows have acquired thee as a most fervent 
intercessor for us and a most ready helper, O father; for thou dost preserve from 
every evil not only the people of thy flock in thy city, but also those afar off who 
invoke thy name.  
Thou didst desire Christ alone, and wast wholly Christ-like, O venerable one. Him 
didst thou unwaveringly follow in thy life; Him didst thou strive to reach. Wherefore, 
having now found the One desired by thee, by thy supplications join us to the flock 
of the elect.  
As a faithful servant of the Holy Trinity, illumine my wretched soul with the three 
divine virtues; faith, hope and love, and grant that I may behold the Triune God in 
the age to come.  
Theotokion: Having given birth unto the Lord, the Joy of the world, O all-praised 
Virgin, make us partakers of the joy of heaven, that we may cry out to thee with the 
voice of the archangel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
O Lord Who hast illumined the whole universe with Thy light, enlighten my 
darkness and dispel the gloom of my soul, on the honored day of the 
commemoration of Thy favorite Pitirim.  
As thou art a lamp-stand of the Sun of righteousness, ever illumined with never--
waning light, O Pitirim our father, shed light upon our mind and heart, that, rejoicing, 
we may chant unto our Savior: We know none other God than Thee!  
What shall we offer Thee, O Christ our Savior! What hymns shall we chant unto 
Thy compassion? For Thou hast shone forth upon us the light of salvation and 
deliverance from our iniquities, through the many miracles of the holy hierarch 
Pitirim.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, holy Mother who hast given birth unto the Light 
unapproachable: disdain not the entreaties of thine unworthy children who languish 
in the darkness of sin, but illumine us with the light of the knowledge of God, that, 
rising early, we may glorify thee.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
Foreseeing the beauty of thy soul, Christ, the Chief Shepherd, showed thee forth 
as a good shepherd and excellent teacher for His flock; wherefore, He hath received 
thee into His heavenly bridal-chamber with the holy hierarchs whose life thou didst 
wisely emulate. With them, therefore, pray in the heavens for us all.  
Bodily infirmities assail us, and tribulations surround us on every side. Wherefore, 
rescue us from them by thy supplications, O holy hierarch; for thee do we have as a 
divinely given physician amid our ailments and a comforter amid sorrows.  
Having kept the commandments of Christ and taught them to thy flock, thou art 
fittingly called great in the kingdom of heaven. Hasten thou, O father, and lead us 
also into the courts of the Lord; for we are thy children and the sheep of thy reason-
endowed flock.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, glory of those in heaven and joy of those on 
earth: as thou art a Queen, with all the saints pray thou unceasingly for us to thy Son; 
for in thee, after God, have we set all our hope.  
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VI 
Canon I  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
The abyss of mine evils troubleth me and drags me down into the depths of 
despair. But do Thou, O God, as the unfathomable Abyss of mercy, extend to me a 
helping hand, as Thou didst to Peter, through the intercession of Thy merciful 
favorite Pitirim, and save me.  
O Lord, Abyss of mercy and compassion: take pity on us, Thy fallen creation; still 
the waves of our passions, and lead us to the harbor of salvation, through the 
entreaties of the holy hierarch Pitirim.  
O Pitirim our father, faithful servant of the merciful God: entreat His beneficence, 
that by the judgments He knoweth, He may save us who are perishing and show us 
almighty aid through thine intercession.  
Theotokion: O most holy Lady, Mother of mercy: the enemies of our Faith have 
surrounded us, and, as there is none to help us, we are perishing; for torrents of 
iniquities have overcome us, and we are in despair. But in thy maternal compassion 
do thou incline thy Son to mercy, that He may save us from misfortunes, as He did 
Jonah from the whale.  
Canon II  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
O good shepherd who instructed the people of Christ with divine teachings and 
edified them with the virtues of thy soul: leave us not to perish in our sins, but as 
thou thyself wast tempted as a man therein, help us now who are tempted.  
O great wonder! The tomb of the holy hierarch hath become a common hospital 
for all, truly accessible and free of charge. Come, ye people, and with fear and faith 
freely receive health for your souls and bodies, glorifying the Lord and blessing His 
favored one.  
Be thou an aid to thy city, O holy father, and with thine invincible intercession 
protect our whole country, that we may all cry out to thee with gladness: Rejoice, O 
ever-memorable Pitirim, thou boast of Tambov!  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: Beneath thy shelter all mortals flee, O Lady, and we cry out to thee 
with compunctionate souls: by thine almighty mediation, O Mother of God, render 
Christ our God, to Whom thou hast given birth in a most pure manner, merciful unto 
us.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Assembling together, let us hymn Pitirim: the excellent instructor of monks, * the 
holy hierarch who is merciful to all, * the most wondrous worker of miracles, * the 
tireless intercessor for us, ** the boast of the land of Tambov.  
Ikos: O ye faithful, in hymns and spiritual odes let us hymn today the great and 
holy hierarch: Rejoice, O God-bearing father Pitirim, thou most honored scion of the 
land of Smolensk, who by the grace of God wast planted in the city of Vyazma and 
blossomed like a lily, enriching the region of Tambov with the fruits of the virtues; 
Rejoice, good pastor who didst illumine the darkness of ungodliness with the light of 
piety and the planting of the true Faith! Rejoice, thou who didst convert many of the 
unbelieving and lead them to Christ through thy salvific labors and struggles; Rejoice, 
thou who didst leave to the city of Tambov as a legacy a miraculous icon of the 
Mother of God through which divers healings have poured forth! Rejoice, thou who 
with thine own hands didst dig a well of ever-abundant water, through which those 
who drink thereof receive healing of infirmities and release from soul-destroying 
passions; Rejoice, thou who didst make fragrant the vales and forests of Tambov by 
thy visitation with thy friends, the holy hierarch Metrophanes and the God-loving 
Basil! Rejoice, thou who didst thereby make a beginning for the monastic life in that 
place, and didst set an example of true friendship for those who live in the world! Re-
joice, thou boast of the land of Tambov!  
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
O Lord our God, ineffable Love, Thou hast adorned mankind, made of dust, with 
Thine image beyond gold and silver, and hast enriched him with all manner of gifts 
and many miracles. Wherefore, celebrating the memory of Thy wonderworker 
Pitirim, we cry out to Thee: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou! 
 O venerable father Pitirim, having cleansed the image of thy Creator in thy soul 
from the passions, aflame with the love of God thou didst commit thyself to the 
service of Russ will, ever crying aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Like the pious youths in Babylon of old, thou didst establish the true Faith in the 
region of Tambov and didst denounce impiety, O father Pitirim, ever laboring, 
preaching the Gospel, praying and chanting: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O most holy Lady and Theotokos, thou didst give thy precious image 
to the city of Tambov as a blessing and mighty protection, through the hands of the 
holy hierarch Pitirim, that through thee we may glorify Christ our mighty God.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Thou didst exercise diligent care for thy flock, guiding all well to the path of 
salvation by thy life and word. Wherefore, as a compassionate shepherd, do thou now 
seek out me, thy sheep, who am lost in the ways of perdition and cry out: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
The words of the Lord, that the pure of heart shall see God, have been fulfilled in 
thee, O holy father; for with the eyes of thy body thou didst behold Christ the Savior, 
Who hearkened to thy supplication when thou didst cry out to Him: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
At the site of thy feats of prayer thou didst dig a well of grace-filled water, from 
whence reverent people draw off the healing of their infirmities if they ask thine aid 
and repent, crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Wake thou from the sleep of sin, O my wretched soul, and cry out to 
the only helper of all: O Mother and Virgin, by thy supplications save me and grant 
the portion of the elect unto me who cry: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages!  
ODE VIII 
Canon I  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
O Lord my God, Who of old transformed the flames of fire into dew for the pious 
youths, quench Thou the flame of my passions with the dew of the supplications of 
the pious and holy hierarch Pitirim, that with him I also may exalt Thee throughout 
all ages.  
O Pitirim our father, with the torrents of thy tears thou didst extinguish the fiery 
temptations of the passions and lusts of the flesh, and in thy pure heart thou didst 
ever dance as in a meadow, chanting: All ye works, bless and hymn the Lord!  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Standing now in thy pure and God-loving soul with the angels before the fiery 
throne of God, illumined with the never-waning beams emitted therefrom, and 
shining upon us with many miracles, O father Pitirim, enlighten the darkness of 
unbelief and superstition which surrounds us, that we may hymn and bless God, Who 
is wondrous in His saints, throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: Consumed by the passions as by a fiery furnace, I cry to thee, 
prodigal that I am: O pure Lady, Mother of the Almighty, save and deliver me from 
fiery damnation!  
Canon II  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thou didst present the icon of the Mother of God to thy city, O father, as a 
sanctification, protection and defense, which hath been shown to be a source of 
grace-bearing healings and a mighty shield against all dangers for those who cry: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thou art a swiftly responding helper amid sorrows and sickness, O venerable one, 
for those who invoke thee with faith, manifesting thyself to some in dreams, clearly 
appearing before others, and doing good secretly to yet others who cry out: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Rising from thy tomb, thou didst manifestly appear to the audacious temple 
robber in thy church, O holy hierarch, calling him to repentance with an awesome 
admonition. Pray thou that, before the end, repentance also be given to us who cry: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: All generations of mankind call thee blessed, for without father thou 
didst give birth in the flesh to the Son Who before time began was the Son of God 
begotten without mother. To Him do we cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord!  
ODE IX 
Canon I  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
O Word of the beginningless Father, only begotten Son: desiring to renew fallen 
mankind, thou didst manifest Thyself as the Son of the Virgin; and assuming the sins 
of the whole world, Thou didst take up the Cross, and from thence gather the 
scattered children of God with Thine outstretched arms. Wherefore, bound by the 
bond of Thy love today, we magnify Thy wondrous favorite Pitirim and her who hath 
given birth to Thee.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Emulating the incarnate Son of God, thou didst humble thyself more than others, 
O venerable father Pitirim. Wherefore, thou hast acquired the love of God and led 
the lost children of God to the heavenly Father, to glorify His compassion.  
Full of the love of Christ, O Pitirim our father, thou didst teach thy flock with thy 
word and life, to look after the orphaned, to feed the poor and to console the 
sorrowful. Beseech Christ the Savior, that on this day of thy commemoration we may 
adorn ourselves with sympathy and almsgiving, as beloved children of God.  
Theotokion: O holy Mother, Virgin who kneweth not a man, who in thy womb 
didst unite God and man in one; grant that we who are scattered may be united in the 
one Christ, thy Son, on Whom the Church hath been founded which magnifieth thee.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Aflame with pastoral zeal, other sheep, not of thy flock, didst thou lead to Christ, 
admonishing the heretics and illumining the unbelieving with the light of the 
knowledge of God, that, in the words of the Savior, there may be one flock and one 
Shepherd.  
Earnestly do we entreat thee as a heavenly physician who hath received from the 
lord the gift of healing, O holy hierarch: With the heavenly treatment of thy prayers 
heal thou the cruel afflictions of our souls and bodies.  
Disdain not this the hymn of thanksgiving of thy children, O favorite of God, but 
accept it in thy compassion and offer it to the Creator of all, that He may be merciful 
to those who honor thee.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, save thy servants from misfortune, and free them 
from the passions, through the supplications of thy holy hierarch Pitirim; for all who 
grieve have thee as an unassailable rampart, in that thou hast given birth to our 
salvation.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars ...”: 
He Who established the lights in the heavens hath revealed thee to His Church as 
a new and most radiant star, illumining us with the splendor of the Spirit and the 
brilliance of miracles, and putting the impious to shame, O holy hierarch, father 
Pitirim, our ever-vigilant intercessor.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O most pure Mother who hast given birth to the ineffable Light: show us to be 
children of the Light, and grant that we behold the blessedness of heaven, that, 
rejoicing, we may cry out with thee and the venerable Pitirim: O Christ our God, 
Bestower of light, glory be to Thee!  

--- PAGE 19 ---
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: 
Come, all ye nations! Understand ye a mystery of our Faith! Pitirim, the holy 
hierarch of God, the preserver of spiritual gifts, who hath departed bodily into the 
earth, remaineth even today with the faithful through the spirit of Christ’s love and 
joyfully saveth from every misfortune, working divers wonders: by the mere 
invocation of his name raising up healthy from their beds those who suffer from 
grievous afflictions, strengthening the doubting in the Faith, correcting those in error, 
saving those who are in danger of drowning during their travels, that they may ever 
thank God Who is beneficent unto them and glorify now His favorite wonderworker 
Pitirim. (Twice)  
O divinely blessed father Pitirim, spurning all the beauties of this world and loving 
the law of God, thou didst lay waste to thy flesh by fasting; and by the keeping of 
vigils, adorned thyself with humility and meekness, patience and love, living 
angelically upon the earth. Wherefore, thou hast shone forth in many miracles as a 
most brilliant beacon, and hast been revealed to be wellspring of the great gifts of 
God. Entreat the Lord Who hath glorified thee, that He illumine the darkness of our 
sins and iniquities and grant peace and great mercy to the land of Russia.  
O God-bearing father Pitirim, ascending the mountain of exalted virtues bearing 
God within thy soul as in a temple, thou didst lead thy flock up from earth to heaven 
with the teachings of the commandments of Christ as by a ladder. Wherefore, thou 
didst found monastic communities and adorn the churches of God with 
magnificence, teaching those who pray therein. By thy supplications make us also 
temples of the Holy Spirit, in that thou art our intercessor, O great Pitirim.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
We honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks and a great assembly of 
the people, and we glorify thee as a divinely wise teacher, O Pitirim our father; for 
during thy lifetime thou didst diligently guide all on the path of salvation, and now in 
thy love thou dost embrace all and pourest forth streams of divine mercy upon those 
who with faith approach thy precious and much-healing tomb. Pray for us, O most 
sacred father, that we may be deemed worthy of the kingdom of heaven, where thou 
shinest forth in unwaning glory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  
Great Doxology. Troparion of the holy hierarch. Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion. 
Litanies, and dismissal. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I of the holy 
hierarch, and 4 from ODE VI of Canon II.  
As the righteous Hannah of old gave up her child, thou didst give thyself as a gift 
to God, O father Pitirim. Establish me also upon the rock of His commandments, 
that I may cry: None is as holy as our God! (Twice) 
By thy supplications, O father Pitirim, establish our mind and heart in the Lord; 
exalt the horn of Orthodox Christians, that the mouths of the enemies of the Faith 
may be shut and we may rejoice in our salvation.  
On the feast of the new wonderworker let not the mighty one boast in his 
strength, nor let the wise man boast in his wisdom, nor yet the rich man boast in his 
wealth, but let him boast who boasteth of understanding and knowing the Lord and 
acquiring the riches of His grace.  
O good shepherd who instructed the people of Christ with divine teachings and 
edified them with the virtues of thy soul: leave us not to perish in our sins, but as 
thou thyself wast tempted as a man therein, help us now who are tempted.  
O great wonder! The tomb of the holy hierarch hath become a common hospital 
for all, truly accessible and free of charge. Come, ye people, and with fear and faith 
freely receive health for your souls and bodies, glorifying the Lord and blessing His 
favored one.  
Be thou an aid to thy city, O holy father, and with thine invincible intercession 
protect our whole country, that we may all cry out to thee with gladness: Rejoice, O 
ever-memorable Pitirim, thou boast of Tambov!  
Theotokion: Beneath thy shelter all mortals flee, O Lady, and we cry out to thee 
with compunctionate souls: by thine almighty mediation, O Mother of God, render 
Christ our God, to Whom thou hast given birth in a most pure manner, merciful unto 
us.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Teacher of faith and piety, * beacon of the Church, * example for monastics, * O 
most wise and holy hierarch Pitirim: * piously hast thou tended thy flock and led it to 
Christ. * Wherefore, though adorned in the highest with a crown of glory, * thou dost 
abide with us on earth in spirit, * radiating miracles. ** Entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Assembling together, let us hymn Pitirim: the excellent instructor of monks, * the 
holy hierarch who is merciful to all, * the most wondrous worker of miracles, * the 
tireless intercessor for us, ** the boast of the land of Tambov.  
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
Me?  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, §335 (13:17-25) 
Brethren, obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they 
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and 
not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, that 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work 
to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, §24 (6:17-23) 
At that time: Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and 
Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that were 
vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to 
touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his 
eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. 
Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: 
for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall 
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as 
evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, 
your reward is great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto the 
prophets.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
