--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 21st DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHERS, SYMEON, THE FOOL FOR 
CHRIST’S SAKE, & JOHN, HIS COMPANION. COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY 
PROPHET EZEKIEL  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the venerable ones, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Having made your abode in the wilderness * in oneness of mind, O blessed ones, 
* by fasting, prayer and radiant visions * ye manifestly caused the uprisings * of the 
flesh to fall away, * and made your hearts splendid, * rendering them pleasing 
through spiritual surrender, * O Symeon and John, ** confirmation of monastics.  
With foolish behavior * thou didst render foolish the malice of the wise, O blessed 
father, * working most glorious miracles, * causing signs to show forth, * expelling 
demons, * and illumining those who are caught in the night of sin. * And in the midst 
of tumults * thou didst preserve thy mind untroubled, O Symeon, ** receiving 
dispassion from God.  
Humble in wisdom and merciful, * God-loving and full of love * wast thou 
revealed to be, O divinely inspired one, * compunctionate and meek, * going about 
the earth like an angel, * possessed of a heavenly life. * Wherefore, the Father, the 
Son and the Holy Spirit * rested in thee, O blessed Symeon, ** as in a place of purity.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy prophet, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O divinely blessed and wondrous Ezekiel, * having cleansed soul and body, * and 
thy mind with purity, * thou didst noetically behold * the ineffable glory of the Lord 
* which is more brilliant than a lightning-flash, * passing understanding, * for He 
surpasseth and exceedeth the divine seraphim, ** and is hymned by ten thousand 
mouths.  
O God-pleasing Ezekiel, * as an emulator of Christ * thou didst endure the 
oppression of the alien’s debt, cruelly tortured, * prefiguring the salvation and 
deliverance * which were to come unto the world * through the precious Cross, * O 
thou who wast revealed by God. * Pray thou that all who hymn thee now ** may 
partake thereof.  
O divinely inspired Ezekiel, * receiving a scroll * from the hands of the Almighty, 
* thou didst become a God-seeing theologian, * manifest in sacred manner * and 
godly in appearance, O glorious one, * whose lips were truly sweeter than honey, * 
imparting wisdom ** unto the enraged synagogue.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Rejoice, enlightenment of souls, * forgiveness of the sinful, * correction of the 
negligent! * Rejoice, consolation, joy and helper of the sorrowful! * Rejoice, O 
blessed one, * thou healing of the souls of the infirm! * Rejoice, mediator and 
reconciler of mankind to God, * O pure one who art more holy ** than all the 
seraphim!  
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all? * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  
Troparion of the holy prophet, in Tone II:  
Celebrating the memory of Thy prophet Ezekiel, O Lord, * through him do we 
entreat Thee: ** Save Thou our souls!  
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable ones, in Tone IV:  
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, and two canons of the saints, each with 4 Troparia. 
ODE I  
Canon of the venerable fathers, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Through communion with God thou didst become light, O venerable father 
Symeon, and by uttermost desire thou didst set thyself apart for Him, and received 
the fulfillment of thy goodly hopes.  
Afire with desire for God, thou didst forsake the world, O father, taking the 
glorious John as thy companion; and with him didst tread the path of salvation, 
rejoicing.  
In nowise desiring to become rich in superfluous things, O wise ones, with valiant 
mind ye spurned wealth and fleeting glory, transitory food and a worldly inheritance.  
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be comely, chosen and most honorable, O most 
immaculate one, the Son of God became thy Son, and through grace He hath made 
those who honor thee as the Theotokos His own children.  
Canon of the prophet, in Tone VIII 
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
O Benefactor, grant the gift and grace of the Spirit unto me who desire to praise 
Ezekiel Thy prophet.  
Having had noetic ascents, the sacred Ezekiel was an eye-witness of ineffable 
things, and illumined by the glory of the Lord.  
Having set thy life aright and made the uprising of thy flesh subject to thy mind, 
thou hast been revealed to be a God-pleasing prophet.  
Theotokion: Wholly illumined, O divinely inspired one, thou didst prophetically 
describe the Virgin as the supremely hymned door facing East.  
ODE III 
Canon of the venerable ones 
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
By zeal thou wast attracted to noetic works, O Symeon, vanquishing the hordes of 
the enemy by thine alliance with the Spirit. 
  

--- PAGE 4 ---
With the plagues of prayer and the blows of abstinence, O venerable father John, 
thou didst smite the Egypt of the passions.  
O Master Jesus, joyously desiring Thy life-bearing mortality, Thine ascetics slew 
the enemy.  
Theotokion: O pure and all-immaculate one, thou hast given birth to the Cause of 
all, Who hath delivered mankind from the grievous fall into disobedience.  
Canon of the holy prophet 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Having achieved the mortification of the passions, O glorious one, as a prophet 
thou didst behold, and write beforehand of the resurrection of the dead.  
Showing mercy to His creation, O thou who wast divinely revealed, God made 
thee manifest as divine understanding for the erring.  
The effulgence of the Godhead Who sitteth upon the cherubim, O glorious and 
divinely eloquent one, made thee radiant, having appeared to Thee.  
Theotokion: With prophetic eyes Thy prophet, O Benefactor, beheld the pure one 
as a meadow, and an entry-way of virginity preserved for Thee.  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...,” 
Thou hast been revealed to be a prophet of God, * O wondrous Ezekiel, * and 
hast proclaimed unto all the incarnation of the Lord, * the Lamb and Creator, the Son 
of God ** Who hath revealed Himself throughout the ages.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable ones, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
Illumined by divine accord, O venerable fathers, with faith ye trod the paths which 
lead to divine effulgence; and having eluded the assaults of the enemy, O divinely 
blessed John and Symeon, ye have been revealed to be children of the light and of the 
day.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy prophet, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity” 
Illumined by the divine Spirit, thou didst shed light beforehand concerning the 
incarnation of the Word, O divinely inspired Ezekiel, great among the prophets of 
God. Wherefore, in a sacred manner we bless thee as a prophet and celebrate thy 
memory today, crying together to thee, O wise one: Entreat Christ, that He save our 
souls!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Beyond understanding and unapproachable is the dread mystery of God wrought 
in thee, O divinely joyous sovereign Lady; for having conceived the Infinite One, 
thou didst give birth to Him, clad in the flesh taken from thy most pure blood. Him 
do thou ever entreat as thy Son, O pure one, that our souls be saved.  
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure unwedded Mother, O Christ, * upon seeing Thee 
hanging dead upon the Cross, * said, weeping maternally: * “How hath the iniquitous 
and thankless council of the Jews * repaid Thy many and great wonders, O my Son, * 
Thou Who hast filled them with Thy gifts? ** I hymn Thy divine condescension!”  
ODE IV 
Canon of the venerable ones 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
United on the path of righteousness, O venerable ones, ye entered into the divine 
fold of the God-bearing Nikon, and by his instructions ye were enriched by the 
radiance of salvation.  
The God-bearing and venerable one, seeing the two of you reasoning together 
venerably as with a single mind; adorned you with godly words and the godly raiment 
of monastics.  
The grace of the Holy Spirit, finding thy heart to be a blank tablet, inscribed 
perfect dispassion, faith and love unfeigned thereon, O father.  
Theotokion: Our supremely glorious God, Who sitteth on the exalted throne of 
the cherubim, had thee as a throne, when resting in thine embrace, O Mary Bride of 
God.  
Canon of the holy prophet 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
The hand of thy Master, the Almighty, rested on thee, teaching thee ineffable 
things and illumining thee with divine precepts.  
When thou wast deemed worthy to behold divine visions, thou didst fall prostrate 
in awe, and hear the voice of the divine Spirit.  
The scroll placed by the hand of the Lord in thy mouth sweetened thy heart, O 
excellent one, and made thee a prophet of God.  
Theotokion: Ezekiel beheld the radiant and divine portal through which the Lord 
hath passed, keeping it closed.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE V 
Canon of the venerable ones 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Receiving radiance of surpassing brightness, O John, thou wast shown to be like 
the sun, dispelling the darkness of the demons, O right glorious one.  
Having furnished themselves with wings in their desire for Thee, O Christ, the 
venerable ones wisely shook off the desires of the flesh as though they were the foam 
of the sea.  
Having strengthened your souls with divine power, O divinely wise fathers, 
rendering the passions barren, ye made your abode in the wilderness.  
Theotokion: The course of corruption hath come to an end, for the Virgin hath 
incorruptibly given birth to God the Word, remaining a virgin in a manner 
transcending nature and speech.  
Canon of the holy prophet 
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
O blessed and God-pleasing Ezekiel, by thy words thou hast instructed all sinners 
to turn from their ways.  
The prophet emulated the Lord in all things; for he made entreaty concerning the 
sins of others.  
Even the tongues of orators cannot praise thee; for thou hast been adorned with 
splendor surpassing that of the heavens.  
Theotokion: The divine Ezekiel beheld thee, the door through which the Lord, the 
Bestower of light, hath shone upon us.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the venerable ones 
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Straining with thy whole mind towards God, with unceasing asceticism thou didst 
not spare carnal love, O Symeon, winning for thyself the acquisition of good things.  
Living in the midst of the world, O blessed one, thou didst receive neither spot 
nor wrinkle; rather, with pure supplications thou dost wash away the spiritual 
defilements of those who have recourse unto thee.  
Transcending the understanding of the flesh, thou wast not wounded in mind 
when thou didst go about naked in the midst of women; for thou wast arrayed in the 
vesture of dispassion, O Symeon.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: With mouth, mind and heart we profess thee to be the Theotokos, O 
most pure one; for through thee we have been reconciled with God, who of old 
through the disobedience of our forefather were cast out.  
Canon of the holy prophet 
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Thou wast deemed worthy to behold God, O wondrous and most blessed 
prophet, having been cleansed of every material desire.  
Having risen above the flesh, thou wast taken up by the supremely exalted power 
of the Spirit, and hast been filled with pure light.  
Possessed of a most honorable life, thou didst behold the heavenly chorus 
emitting the hymnody of the cherubim to the Almighty.  
Theotokion: In an image thou didst behold the true Virgin Mother, the most 
splendid portal, the mediatress between God and mankind.  
Kontakion of the venerable ones, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”: 
Let us praise the God-bearing Symeon, * the peer of the angels, * who appeared in 
the flesh as one incorporeal, * and with him the ever-memorable John: * for with 
faith and love * they entreat the Lord unceasingly ** on behalf of us all.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the venerable ones 
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Embraced by the divine love of Christ, thou didst joyously give thyself over wholly 
to the salvation of others, O father, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of 
Thy glory, O Lord!  
Thou receivest food given thee from the heavens, O father, and therewith didst 
feed all who right dutifully accepted thy precepts and forsook sin, which dragged 
them down, O blessed one.  
Following the Traditions of the fathers, O wise father, the command to flee the 
impious heresy of Origen didst thou give to those who cry: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O hallowed and divine dwelling-place of the Most High! For 
through thee, O Theotokos, joy hath been given to those who cry: Blessed art thou 
among women, O all-immaculate Lady!  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Canon of the holy prophet 
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Thou hast been shown to be an animate temple of God, O most blessed God-
bearer, mystically acquiring knowledge of the full measure of the Church, and crying 
out in the Spirit: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Wholly awestruck, thou wast once translated to the holy city, where thou wast 
taught divine mysteries through revelation, learning to chant: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Manifest as a priest of God, O right wondrous one, thou dost offer up sacrifices 
and entreaties to the Master for the people who stand forth and chant: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: The supremely divine Word desired to save human nature, and issued 
forth from the portal of the Virgin, arrayed in flesh through her. O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the venerable ones 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Thou wast a most radiant star, leading to life those mired in the passions; for thou 
didst inspire the lewd women to live chastely, and didst drive away cruel infirmities, 
crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
As one whole of mind, O venerable one, amid an abundance of wise miracles thou 
didst draw many to become fools for Christ’s sake, knowing that they would be 
mocked, and crying out with a most pure soul: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord!  
The Lord of glory, Who alone resteth perfectly among His own as is meet, O 
venerable one, with splendid angelic discourse honoreth thee who wast taken away 
and confined to a tomb, yet who cried: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: The Lord Who hath delivered us shone forth from thee, O pure 
Virgin. Him do thou entreat, O Lady, that He illumine those who hymn thee and 
deliver from every evil circumstances those who cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord!  
Canon of the holy prophet 
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sacredly adorned with the prophetic priesthood of prophecy, O prophet, thou 
didst shine forth, hymning Christ the Bestower of light throughout all ages.  
In that Thou art good, accept Thou Ezekiel, the beholder of Thy glory, who 
kneeleth down in supplication for the world, that we may hymn Thee throughout all 
ages.  
Afire with divine desire, thou didst learn mysteries which surpass understanding, O 
Ezekiel, crying aloud: Thee, O Christ, do we supremely exalt throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Rising at dawn out of the night, and beholding the stream of 
forgiveness and virginity, Ezekiel cried aloud unto the Lord: Thee do we supremely 
exalt throughout the ages!  
ODE IX 
Canon of the venerable ones 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Relying zealously upon the Trinity with all your heart, and having thankfully 
received the beams thereof, ye became radiant and joined chorus with the angels.  
United by divine desire, and illumined by abstinence, ye have already received the 
good things for which ye hoped and have obtained blessed delight, O divinely blessed 
ones.  
Partaking of gladness which hath no end, O venerable Symeon and glorious John, 
in that your pangs and exertions have been received, be ye unceasingly mindful of us.  
Theotokion: Save me, O thou who hast given birth to the Redeemer and 
Benefactor of all! Dispel the clouds from my soul, O holy and Sovereign Lady, thou 
cloud of the Light, and make me powerful against the passions which war against me.  
Canon of the Prophet 
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire of 
the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the salvation 
of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we magnify thee. 
Shining with the radiance of piety, O prophet, thou wast deemed worthy to behold 
Him Who appeared of old to Moses in the fire and the bush, and who mystically 
taught thee ineffable things.  
Thou wast shown to be a priest, an initiate of the mysteries, a giver of laws, a most 
wise prophet, an emulator of the Master, in that thou didst partake of sufferings; and 
now thou hast been revealed to be His heir.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
O the ineffable and divine effulgence which thou now enjoyest, O blessed one! 
For thou dost gaze from afar upon the Son and the Spirit in the Father, the three 
Hypostases of the Godhead.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou art our weapon and rampart, thou art the help of 
those who set their hope on thee! And we now move thee to make supplication, that 
we may be delivered from our enemies.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy prophet, in Tone II:  
Celebrating the memory of Thy prophet Ezekiel, O Lord, * through him do we 
entreat Thee: ** Save Thou our souls!  
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable ones, in Tone IV:  
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast been revealed to be a prophet of God, * O wondrous Ezekiel, * and 
hast proclaimed unto all the incarnation of the Lord, * the Lamb and Creator, the Son 
of God ** Who hath revealed Himself throughout the ages.  
Kontakion of the venerable ones, in Tone II: 
Let us praise the God-bearing Symeon, * the peer of the angels, * who appeared in 
the flesh as one incorporeal, * and with him the ever-memorable John: * for with 
faith and love * they entreat the Lord unceasingly ** on behalf of us all.  
 
