--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR HERMOLAUS 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O Most Glorious Wonder ...”:  
O Divinely-wise, and blessed Hermolaus, * brightening thy sacred and divine 
vestments * with the purple of thy blood, * thou didst ascend * from strength to 
virtuous strength * and from glory to greater glory; * do thou now entreat the Lord * 
that peace and great mercy ** may be granted to our souls.  
As a truly lawful priest * thou didst first offer unto God * the bloodless sacrifice, 
* then as a most true Martyr * by the spilling of thy blood * thou didst offer thyself 
unto Christ * as a whole-burnt and acceptable sacrifice, * O godly-spoken and all-
honored one ** entreat Him on behalf of those who hymn thee.  
By thy precepts and teaching, * O holy Father, * thou hast brought unto Christ 
legions of martyrs, * not only by instructing and teaching in word, * but by offering 
thyself as an example, * O divinely-wise one; * pray together with them * that peace 
and great mercy ** be granted to our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Tempest-tossed on the abyss of transgressions, * fleeing to the calm haven * of 
thy most pure supplication, * I cry out to thee, O Theotokos: * Save me, O all-
immaculate one, * extending thy mighty right hand ** unto thy servant!  
Stavrotheotokion: Standing at the foot of the Cross * of thy Son and God, * and 
looking upon His long-suffering, * O pure Mother, * weeping, thou didst say: * “Woe 
is me, O my sweetest Child! * How is it that Thou sufferest these things unjustly, * O 
Word of God, ** that Thou mayest save mankind?”  
 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, In Tone IV: 
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Hermolaus, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion. 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS 
The Canon of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Refrain: Holy Hieromartyr Hermolaus pray to God for us 
Enlightened by the light of Christ, do thou, O glorious Hieromartyr Hermolaus, 
enlighten by thine intercessions my darkened soul, that I may hymn thee, O most 
blessed one.  
Thy pure heart like an untarnished mirror reflecting the rays of divine 
enlightenment emitteth knowledge upon all through thy salutary preaching, O blessed 
Father.  
By fasting, thou didst subdue the activity of the passions, by abstinence thou didst 
transform thy desire, and by manifold ascetic exploits thou didst attain to the height 
of dispassion.  
Theotokion: God who existed before all ages and before the creation of every 
creature, became incarnate from thee without seed or the confused desire of man; 
Him we have come to know, wherefore we hymn thee as the true Theotokos .  
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
With the conscience of a Martyr, as one who suffered in the ascetic life, thou hast 
presented thyself unto Christ through Martyrdom as an all-perfect living sacrifice.  
By thy sacred life, through thy divine words and with thy divine deeds didst thou 
make ascent in thy heart attaining to the true contemplation of God.  
In a divinely-wise manner didst thou direct thy words in accordance with the 
commandments of the Savior, wherefore thou wast revealed to be an invincible 
defender of the faith.  
Theotokion: By giving birth to Immortality thou hast relieved our minds of the 
thought of our mortality, and with thy birth-giving O Virgin thou hast woven for us a 
vesture of incorruption.  
The Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone III: 
O Hieromartyr Hermolaus, * enlightened by the Divine Spirit and through thy 
great wisdom and pastoral boldness * putting to shame the ferocity of Godless 
tyrants, * thou didst traverse the abyss of temporal life, * reaching the divine refuge. * 
O holy Father Hermolaus ** entreat Christ our God to grant us His great mercy.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Whither doth each one who is saved, * rightly have recourse; * and to what other 
such refuge can there be * which doth protect our souls like thee, ** O Theotokos?  
Stavrotheotokion: Having obtained the Cross of thy Son as a staff of strength, * 
O Theotokos, * therewith we cast down the arrogance of the enemy, ** and with love 
unceasingly magnify thee.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
As a divine whole burnt-offering and a pure sacrifice thou wast brought before 
the Savior of all, O most wise Hierarch.  
Instructing the flock of Christ in the light of the knowledge of God, thou hast 
driven away the darkness of godlessness.  
With the streams of thy sweat, O Father and Hierarch, thou hast dried up the 
depths of godlessness.  
Theotokion: With thy light do thou, O most pure one, enlighten my darkened 
soul, since thou hast given birth unto the One Hypostatic Light.  
ODE V 
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
Christ, the true wisdom, seeing Thine exceeding love for Him, hath granted thee 
O blessed one, both riches and glory, length of days, and eternal life.  
With the staff of faith thou didst drive away the snares of heresies and uniting thy 
flock in the bonds of love, thou hast, by love and faith preserved it unharmed.  
By thy strict ascetic life, refusing temporal food, thou hast satisfied the needs of 
thy soul with the food of unceasing prayer, instruction, and humility by which one is 
raised on high to God.  
Theotokion: We have acquired in thee, O pure one, our protection, a sure hope, a 
mighty shelter, a wall of refuge, and a bridge that leadeth into the Kingdom of 
heaven.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Both a sacrifice and a priest, thou hast wholly given thyself unto God for the sake 
of the faith, and thus preserved undefiled the fulfillment of thy ministry unto Him.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
A spectacle seen as slain by the world, yet remaining alive in God, thou O godly-
spoken one, passed over to Christ enriched by the life of incorruption.  
Passing from earthly life into the never-waning glory, do thou, O holy one, by thy 
supplications fervently heal and cleanse my soul savaged by the passions.  
Theotokion: O most pure and all-immaculate one, who didst conceive Christ, 
Who taketh away the sins of the world, cease not to entreat Him that remission of 
sins be granted unto thy servants. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: 'O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.' 
Appearing unto all as a wellspring of wisdom full of virtue, by thy preaching and 
sublime life thou hast gathered thy flock, O divinely-wise one, and having well tended 
it, together with them, thou dost cry out: “Blessed is the God of our Fathers.”  
O Father thou hast passed over from this temporal life and entered into the 
temples and habitations of honor, and now dwelling with the Angels therein thou 
rejoiceth with them; wherefore honoring thee, O most blessed one, we with boldness 
cry aloud: “Blessed is the God of our Fathers.”  
Blessed art thou and well it is with thee, for now, in thy heavenly dwelling where 
the legions of the righteous, the multitude of the Martyrs and the choirs of the most 
wise Apostles abide, thou dost with them cry aloud: “Blessed is the God of our 
Fathers.”  
Theotokion: Thou alone, O most pure Virgin, hath become known as a Mother 
who knew not wedlock, and the Mother of Him Who created everything in His 
wisdom; wherefore we fervently call unto thee, saying: “Blessed art thou who hast 
given birth to God in the flesh.”  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
With fervor didst thou execute the ministry of the mysteries of Christ, and like a 
spiritual lamb offered thyself unto Him as an acceptable and well-pleasing sacrifice, 
perfected with the spilling of thy blood, O most blessed one.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Adorning thy Hierarchical vestments with virtues, O most wise one, thou didst 
manifest thyself as a guardian of chastity, a partaker of the true food of abstinence, a 
teacher of prayer, and an instructor of repentance and law, unto eternal life.  
At the time of our oblation, let us always bring forth fruit worthy of repentance, 
since the barren fig-tree lives ever threatened of being cut off; Fear such a curse O my 
soul, and worthily receive Christ, the abundant fruit of virtue.  
Theotokion: O most venerated defender of Christian peoples, do not despise the 
voice of us thy servants and deliver us, O holy Virgin, from every danger and from 
every cruel advance of the enemy, for thy motherly intercessions ever incline God to 
mercy.  
ODE IX 
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God's ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin's womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
Thou, O Father, hast destroyed the many and varied arrows of the enemy by the 
fire of abstinence, burning up the corruption of the flesh with the coals of chastity, 
wherefore thou wast gloriously deemed worthy of the true purity that exists on high.  
Thy radiant memory, O Father, hath shone forth, illuminating the souls of those 
who reverently celebrate it, rendering them, O right wondrous one, partakers of the 
divine light; wherefore we offer thee hymns, O divinely-wise one.  
Thou, O Father, having received from the right hand of God the reward of thy 
victory art now adorned with the crown of martyrdom, for finishing thine exploits 
and resplendent with the divine light, we the faithful now offer thee unto Christ as 
our fervent intercessor.  
Theotokion: O Virgin and Mother of the Word, the true Theotokos, our 
mediatrix, thou hast brought forth unto us the eternal Life of God and the Sun of 
righteousness, Whom we the faithful with one mind magnify in spiritual songs.  
 
AT THE LITURGY 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, In Tone IV: 
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Hermolaus, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
 
