--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 24th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY NEW-HIEROMARTYR MAXIMUS SANDOVICH, 
PROTOMARTYR OF THE LEMKO PEOPLE  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
O holy martyr Maximus, as thou didst receive the grace to confront death with 
bravery and to confess the Holy Faith in the face of the heretics, entreat Christ, we 
pray, that He make us steadfast in Orthodoxy. (Twice)  
Having proclaimed the sanctity of the Orthodox Faith, when thou wast felled by 
the weaponry of the cruel heretics thou didst surrender thy soul into the hands of the 
Savior. And soaring aloft to the heavens, thou now abidest in never-waning light, O 
Maximus. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O wondrous hieromartyr, persecuted and imprisoned for the sake of Orthodoxy, 
thou didst provide an example for all by meekness, love and humility; and the Holy 
Spirit taught thee what to say while the heretics slew thy body.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Like the Archangel, * let us the faithful hymn the bridal-chamber of heaven, * the 
portal truly sealed: * Rejoice, for whose sake hath budded forth unto us Christ the 
Savior of all, * the Bestower of life and God! * With thine arm O Lady * cast down 
the tyrants, our godless foes, * O most pure one, ** O thou hope of Christians!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Ye mountains of Carpathia, leap for joy at the memorial of thy pious son, the 
hieromartyr Maximus, the protector of his people, who prayeth to Christ God for all 
who honor him.  
Verse: The righteous shall flourish like a palm-tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Magnify the Lord, ye Lemko people, and together with the ranks of angels, 
celebrate the memory of your kinsman Maximus, who watcheth over you from on 
high, where he standeth with the incorporeal hosts before the throne of the Godhead.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, * in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
All ye who love the feasts of the Church, with gladness let us assemble today, to 
keep festival in memory of Maximus, the protector and defender of the Orthodox, 
who, undaunted, faced death with courage, and was put to death for the Faith.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Xenophobia, the cruel and bitter hatred of thy race and Faith, enraged the Austrian 
authorities against the Slavic peoples, and the ancient foe of mankind inspired them 
to slaughter the meek and humble Lemko people. Then wast thou again cast into 
prison, and taken from thence to be slain for the Orthodox Faith. Wherefore, O holy 
Maximus, having stood steadfast for the Truth, thou hast received recompense in the 
heavens.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
I flee to thy protection, O holy Virgin Theotokos, * for I know that through thee I 
shall obtain salvation; ** for thou art able to help me, O pure one.  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
Moved by the providence of God to go to Mount Pochaev, * there to learn the 
rightness of the Orthodox Faith, * thou didst attain unto true teaching in the city of 
Zhitomir, * and didst return to thine own country as a brave warrior of Christ. * For 
Orthodoxy and thy people thou didst receive the crown of martyrdom, * and thereby 
hast made thy native land steadfast in the Holy Faith. ** O hieromartyr Maximus, en-
treat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr: 4 in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Under thy heavenly protection do we sinners flee, begging thee to intercede with 
the Lord on our behalf, for, beset by storms of temptations and the hatred and malice 
of our enemies, our feeble powers are exhausted, and we barely have the strength to 
stand fast for the Truth. But do thou help us in our struggle, O holy Maximus. 
(Twice)  
Spurning the heresy of the Latins, thou didst flee to Mount Pochaev, the bastion 
of pure Orthodoxy; and with the holy hierarch Anthony as thy teacher, thou didst 
study the doctrines of piety and the dogmas of truth. And after thine ordination to 
the priesthood, thou didst return to thy native land, where thou didst nurture thy 
pious flock in the pastures of righteousness. Pray thou, that we all be saved.  
Exult thou, O divinely preserved Lavra of Pochaev, blessed home of the Mother 
of God, and resting place of the venerable Job! For thy long struggle in defense of the 
True Faith hath produced a glorious victory, the martyrdom of the priest Maximus, 
whom Christ, the Judge of the contest, hath crowned with a heavenly diadem for his 
unwavering confession.  
And 4 Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Now is the village of Zhdynya glad, for it witnessed the birth of the holy 
hieromartyr, a beacon leading his people, who were languishing in error, to the True 
Faith! And they cry out to God with compunction: O Lord Almighty, God Most 
High, through the prayers of our father Maximus, have mercy upon us and grant us 
Thy grace!  
The city of Zhitomir is exalted, for therein the holy hieromartyr Maximus studied 
diligently the commandments of the Lord, the writings of the holy fathers and the 
precepts of the Faith, storing these up in the coffer of his heart, that with these 
priceless treasures he might ransom his flock from slavery to heresy and error.  
Rejoice, O village of Grab, for thou didst call the holy hieromartyr Maximus to the 
pastoral ministry, and he blessed thee with the grace of the Holy Mysteries, that thy 
people might make spiritual ascents, from glory to glory, and attain unto the mansions 
of heaven, where the righteous dwell with the angels of God.  
Every Orthodox Christian praiseth thee, O city of Gorlitsa, for within thee the 
holy Maximus triumphed over the wiles of the enemy and held fast to the confession 
of the Orthodox Faith. Wherefore, exult thou exceedingly, for thy stones have been 
sanctified by the blood of the martyr, who dyed his vesture therein, that, splendidly 
arrayed, he might join his Master at the heavenly wedding-feast.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
After God and His most holy Mother it is to thee that the Lemko people flee amid 
their tribulations and sorrows. For, though oppressed and afflicted by their enemies, 
yet have they not lost hope in the mercy of God; and placing their trust in the 
supplications of the holy Maximus, they pray with compunction, that the Most High 
may have mercy upon them and save their souls.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone II: 
The shadow of the law hath passed now that grace hath come, * for as the Bush 
wrapped in flame was not consumed, * so didst thou bear a Child O Virgin * and 
remained a Virgin; * in place of a pillar of fire, the Sun of righteousness hath dawned, 
* instead of Moses, Christ is come, ** the salvation of our souls. 
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with His right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 

--- PAGE 5 ---
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and this Stichera, in Tone III: 
Thou didst hasten to the Lavra of Pochaev, fleeing the errors of the Latins as Lot 
fled Sodom; and in that tranquil monastic haven thou didst find the pearl of great 
price - the holy Orthodox Faith - which thou didst purchase with thy blood in 
martyrdom. Wherefore, O holy Maximus, the faithful honor thy holy memory with 
love.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
Having left the dark West of the setting sun, thou didst move toward the Sun of 
righteousness in the East; and having been illumined there by the never-waning 
radiance of divine light, thou didst shine upon thy much-suffering people, who had 
languished long in the darkness of Latin domination. Entreat Christ God, that He 
enlighten and save our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Ever-virgin, immaculate Mother of God, who without seed hast given birth to 
thine own Creator, add thine entreaties to the supplications of the holy Maximus, that 
the Lord may have mercy upon His sinful servants.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Merciful and all-loving is the good Shepherd, Who left the flock and searched for 
thee, the lost sheep, in the mountains of Carpathia; and He brought thee back into 
the fold of the Orthodox Church, from whence thine ancestors were stolen away by 
false-shepherds and hirelings, betrayed to the ravening wolves of heresy. Beseech 
him, O holy hieromartyr, that He deliver us from our transgressions.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Verse: The righteous shall flourish like a palm-tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Eyes uplifted to the heavens, thou didst cry out, “Bless, O Lord!”, when the 
ungodly aimed their weapons at thee. But thou didst not fear those who killed thy 
body, for they were unable to kill thy soul, and it took flight to the refuge of heaven, 
where it resteth in the bosom of Abraham with all the saints of God, O valiant martyr 
Maximus.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, * in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
Returning to thy homeland after thy priestly ordination, thou didst lead thy people 
out of bondage to Latin error, as Moses led the children of Israel forth from Egyptian 
slavery; and they entered into the promised land of Holy Orthodoxy. Look down 
from heaven, O right glorious martyr, and by thy supplications unto God ask that we 
may receive His grace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Come, ye lovers of the martyrs, and let us extol the holy hieromartyr Maximus, the 
glory of Carpathia, the boast of the Lemko people, the adornment of the Orthodox 
Church, the good shepherd who laid down his life for his sheep; and with hymns and 
spiritual songs let us sing his praises, for, dwelling with the ranks of angels on high, he 
prayeth unceasingly for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
In thee have we placed our trust, O Theotokos. * That we not fall way, save us 
from perils, * O helper of the tempest-tossed, * and confound the counsels of the 
adversary, ** for thou art our salvation, O blessed one.  
After the Blessing of the Loaves, Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Moved by the providence of God to go to Mount Pochaev, * there to learn the 
rightness of the Orthodox Faith, * thou didst attain unto true teaching in the city of 
Zhitomir, * and didst return to thine own country as a brave warrior of Christ. * For 
Orthodoxy and thy people thou didst receive the crown of martyrdom, * and thereby 
hast made thy native land steadfast in the Holy Faith. ** O hieromartyr Maximus, en-
treat Christ God, that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
Moved by the providence of God to go to Mount Pochaev, * there to learn the 
rightness of the Orthodox Faith, * thou didst attain unto true teaching in the city of 
Zhitomir, * and didst return to thine own country as a brave warrior of Christ. * For 
Orthodoxy and thy people thou didst receive the crown of martyrdom, * and thereby 
hast made thy native land steadfast in the Holy Faith. ** O hieromartyr Maximus, en-
treat Christ God, that our souls be saved. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Full of the grace of God, thou didst blamelessly minister to thy flock, confirming 
the words of thine instruction with works of the virtues; and inspiring all to mercy 
and loving-kindness, thou didst teach them not to take the broad way which leadeth 
to destruction, but to tread the straight and narrow way whereby we may attain unto 
the heavenly homeland.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Unvanquished by the hordes of the enemy is the fortress of thine intercession, O 
all-immaculate one; for thou didst conceive the Lord and Master of all without 
knowing a man, and without experiencing the pangs of childbirth didst give birth to 
Him. Wherefore, as our heavenly intercessor, shelter and protect our souls, that we 
may obtain great mercy.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Leaving thy parents and the home of thy childhood, thou didst risk arrest by 
traveling to Mount Pochaev, seeking safe harbor amid the raging storms of life. And 
arriving at the holy Lavra thou didst find tranquility of soul, and wast nurtured with 
pure Orthodox dogmas and the living water of true piety; so that when the time came 
for thee to suffer for the Faith, thou didst possess the spiritual strength to endure to 
the end.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Jesus most sweet, the only-begotten Son of the Father, Who was conceived within 
thy womb through the activity of the Holy Spirit, received thine immaculate soul in 
His most pure hands, and bore it up to the heavens, from whence thou dost look 
down upon us, thy lowly servants, and intercedest at His fiery throne, that He deal 
with us according to His infinite mercy. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hieromartyr 
Maximus, and we reverence thine honored sufferings, which thou didst endure 
for Christ.  
  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Our God is refuge and strength, a helper in afflictions which mightily befall us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Even the most eloquent of orators cannot praise thy valor and endurance as is 
meet, O holy hieromartyr; for, unafraid, thou didst face thine executioners, and with 
courage didst pray that the Holy Faith be established. Great is the reward thou hast 
received for thy steadfastness, O Maximus, from the right hand of the Judge of the 
contest.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Storm-tossed upon the sea of life, the ship of my soul is foundering, heavy laden 
with a burden of un-repented sins, and the billows of the passions unceasingly buffet 
it. But do thou save me from perishing in my transgressions, O Theotokos, thou 
good pilot of my soul, and steer me to the shelter of the safe harbor of thine 
intercessions.  
Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 38 (MT. 10: 32-38)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him will 
I confess also before My Father Who is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny Me 
before men, him will I also deny before My Father Who is in heaven. Think not that I 
am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am 
come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, 
and the daughter in law against her mother in law. And a man’s foes shall be those of 
his own household. He that loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy of 
Me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me. And he 
that taketh not his cross, and followeth after Me, is not worthy of Me.”  
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
Unto thee, the intercessor for the Lemko people, do we cry aloud in prayer: Help 
us, O father Maximus, for our enemies are more than the sands of the sea, and they 
persecute and oppress the little flock of Christ; but extend to us thy strong right arm, 
and save us from perishing.  
Canon of Supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; And that of the holy hieromartyr, with 8 Troparia, in Tone III:  
ODE I  
Irmos: To God, Who alone saved His people in the sea * and engulfed the 
adversaries, * let us sing, for He hath been glorified.  
Sanctify my tongue with the burning coal of Thy grace, O Word of God, that I 
may worthily hymn the glory of the holy hieromartyr Maximus.  
Thou hast led thy lowly people across the sea of temptations, and hast restored 
them as the New Israel, in the promised land of Orthodoxy.  
Heavenly angels and earthborn men join chorus together in honor of thy 
martyrdom, O holy hieromartyr Maximus, for thou didst struggle well to the end.  
Theotokion: After God it is in thee that the Orthodox set their hope, O 
Theotokos. Protect us from all evils and afflictions by thine intercession.  
Katavasia: According to the Typicon  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou hast broken the bow of the enemy * and hath crushed their 
shields by Thy might, * O Christ our Master. * O Lord, our confirmation, * 
holy art Thou!  
The mountains of thy homeland leap for joy over thy wondrous martyrdom, O 
holy one, for the Lord hath made thee heir to the throne of His glory.  
How great is the power of thy mediation before the Most High, O Maximus, for 
in heaven the Lord hath exalted the horn of His anointed priest.  
Elijah the Prophet mounted to heaven on a chariot of fire, and thou didst ascend 
on the chariot of thine own blood, for thou didst show that the mighty were not 
strong in their own strength.  
Theotokion: Holy is the Lord, O most pure Virgin. For in His boundless 
compassion He worketh judgment and righteousness in the midst of the earth.  
Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII: 
All the forests and glades of Carpathia clap their hands in gladness, and its 
mountains and hills leap for joy; for the child of their bosom now standeth in 
supplication before the Almighty, making earnest entreaty on behalf of all who honor 
his sufferings and undeserved death. Wherefore, let the whole world rejoice exceed-
ingly, having gained a new and bold intercessor, a mediator for peace and great mercy. 
  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Virgin and Mother wast thou shown to be by thine Offspring, O all-immaculate 
one; and even after giving birth thou didst remain a virgin, as thou wast before. 
Wherefore, as thou hast maternal boldness before Christ, thy Son and God, 
unceasingly entreat Him to grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Habakkuk foresaw the overshadowed mountain, * even thine 
immaculate womb, O pure one. * Wherefore he cried; God shall come forth 
from Thaeman, * and the Holy One from a mountain * densely overshadowed. 
Every tongue is at a loss how to praise thy martyric struggle as is meet, O 
hieromartyr Maximus, for, standing firm, thou didst await the executioners’ blows, 
and with thy dying breath didst bless the holy Orthodox Faith.  
Maximus the wise, who though young had mastered the wisdom of the aged, shed 
his blood for his people, and cried out to the tyrants: “Long live Holy Orthodoxy!” 
Wherefore, he now abideth in the heavens.  
Every Orthodox Christian is astonished by the endurance and confession thou 
didst show the world at the time of thy murder, O holy martyr, for thou didst love no 
one more than the Lord Almighty.  
Theotokion: Round about the throne of the most holy Trinity the ranks of angels 
chant in chorus the thrice-holy hymn; and we on earth joyously repeat the cry of the 
archangel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!  
ODE V  
Irmos: We rise at dawn unto Thee, O Christ God, * the Dawn of truth * Who 
hast shone forth upon us from the Virgin, * and with divine knowledge hast 
illumined us * who are in the darkness of ignorance.  
Chosen by God as an enlightener for His people, and ordained for them by His 
most holy Spirit, thou didst wake their slumbering spirit unto the dawning of His 
never-waning light.  
Ye who are oppressed, remember the Lord in tribulation, and be mindful of the 
affliction which the holy one endured for the sake of His Savior; for through his 
mediation your nation shall not perish utterly.  
O the majesty of thy holiness, O holy Maximus our father! For through thine 
instructions zeal laid hold upon an uninstructed people, as saith Isaiah the prophet.  
Theotokion: Now let us hold excellent festival, O ye Christian people, proclaiming 
the Mother of God to be the Virgin who gave birth to the timeless God, our Light 
and Joy.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I am held fast in the depths of sin O Savior, * and am overwhelmed by 
the sea of life, * but as Jonah was delivered from the sea-monster, * so also 
deliver me from the passions, * and save me.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
How have those who observe vain and false things abandoned mercy for 
themselves, thou didst say with the prophet Jonah, O holy one; but thou didst 
sacrifice unto the Lord in purity and truth.  
In the earth were thy precious remains interred, O holy father, but the earth 
surrendered its priceless treasure when, moved by the supplications of the faithful, 
the Holy Church glorified thee.  
Sacred and all-hallowed is thy holy memory, O Maximus, and the sound of thy 
holy confession was borne forth to thy suffering people, filling their hearts with love 
for the Lord, and for thee, His faithful servant.  
Theotokion: Soon each man must needs depart this vale of tears, and go whither 
his faith and deeds lead him; but do thou, O Theotokos, ask mercy of the Lord, that 
we not be condemned to darkness and flame forever.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
Our people were enlightened and moved by thy martyrdom, * toward the 
Orthodox Faith; * For giving up thy life for Christ God, * thou didst endure tortures 
and sufferings in prison. ** Pray for us, and for thy native land, before Christ our 
God.  
Ikos: Resting with the saints in the bosom of Abraham, thou dost ascend unto the 
Lord from glory to glory, O holy hieromartyr Maximus; for in accordance with thy 
name, thou didst prove to be a champion most great, steadfast in thy confession of 
the triune God, faithfully opposing the errors of the Latin-minded. Wherefore, 
assembling this day to celebrate thy holy memory, we entreat thee: Pray for us, and 
for thy native land, before Christ our God.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Proud was the tyrant; * yet he was as a plaything for the children; * for, 
trampling underfoot the flame heated sevenfold, * they chanted: Blessed art 
Thou, * O Lord God of our fathers!  
Virtue and goodness made their abode in thy heart, O blessed Maximus, and 
meekness and charity dwelt likewise within thee. These things do thou instill in the 
hearts of those who honor thee.  
Every tongue is at a loss how to praise thy martyric struggle as is meet, O 
hieromartyr Maximus, for, standing firm, thou didst await the executioners’ blows, 
and with thy dying breath didst bless the holy Orthodox Faith.  
Maximus the wise, who though young had mastered the wisdom of the aged, shed 
his blood for his people, and cried out to the tyrants: “Long live Holy Orthodoxy!” 
Wherefore, he now abideth in the heavens.  
Theotokion: Thou alone, O most pure Virgin, hath become known as a Mother 
who knew not wedlock, and the Mother of Him Who created everything in His 
wisdom; wherefore we fervently call unto thee, saying: ‘Blessed art thou who hast 
given birth to God in the flesh’.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the flame, * 
the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all ye works of 
the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
With fervor didst thou execute the ministry of the mysteries of Christ, and like a 
spiritual sheep offered thyself unto Him as an acceptable and well-pleasing sacrifice, 
perfected with the spilling of thy blood, O most blessed one.  
Adorning thy Hierarchical vestments with virtues, O most wise one, thou didst 
manifest thyself as a guardian of chastity, a partaker of the true food of abstinence, a 
teacher of prayer, and an instructor of repentance and law, unto eternal life.  
At the time of our oblation, let us always bring forth fruit worthy of repentance, 
since the barren fig-tree lives ever threatened of being cut off; Fear such a curse O my 
soul, and worthily receive Christ, the abundant fruit of virtue.  
Theotokion: O most venerated defender of Christian peoples, despise not the 
voice of us thy servants and deliver us, O holy Virgin, from every danger and from 
every cruel advance of the enemy, for thy motherly intercessions ever incline God to 
mercy.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: New is the wonder and befitting of God: * for the Lord clearly passes 
through the closed gate of the Virgin: * naked at His going in and God 
bearing flesh at His coming out, * while the gate remaineth closed. * As 
ineffably the Theotokos and Mother of our God we magnify her. 
Thou, O Father, hast destroyed the many and varied arrows of the heretics by the 
fire of abstinence, burning up the corruption of the flesh with the coals of chastity, 
wherefore thou wast gloriously deemed worthy of the true purity that exists on high.  
Thy radiant memory, O Father, hath shone forth throughout the land of the 
Lemko people, illuminating their souls, rendering them, O worthy of all admiration, 
illumined with divine light; wherefore we render unto thee veneration in spiritual 
song, O Divinely-wise one.  
Thou, O Father, having received from the right hand of God the reward of thy 
victory art now adorned with the crown of Martyrdom, for finishing thine exploits 
and radiating with the fullness of the divine light we the faithful now offer thee unto 
Christ as our fervent intercessor.  
Theotokion: O Virgin and Mother of the Word, the true Theotokos, our 
mediatress, thou hast brought forth unto us the eternal Life of God and the Sun of 
righteousness, Whom we the faithful with one mind magnify in spiritual songs.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hieromartyr: 
As a Hieromartyr with power to bind and to loose, do thou, O blessed one, loose 
the bonds of my evil deeds and with those beloved of God do thou number me and 
through thine intercessions make me a partaker of the Kingdom of God.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Do thou, O pure one, illumine my soul darkened by the multitude of my many 
transgressions and through thine intercession deliver me from the eternal flame and 
darkness, that I may with joy praise thy majesty. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
Spiritual grace shining forth upon thee, O Father Maximus, greatly illumined thee; 
wherefore the night of passion was quickened within thee and the daylight of 
dispassion dawned within, Illumined thereby, thou dost now delight in the rewards of 
thy Godly confession, we beseech thee, O Godly-spoken Hieromartyr, forget not 
those who in faith hymn thy memory. (Twice) 
As one possessing heavenly grace, O Hieromartyr Maximus thou didst abandon all 
earthly possessions; and like an Angel, didst desire the enjoyment of eternal spiritual 
food, wherefore thou didst boldly confess Thine orthodoxy before the heretical Latin 
tyrants, and now, O God-pleasing one, thou dost enjoy the spiritual fruits of paradise.  
Giving thy body, covered with wounds from beating and exposure to fire, over to 
the insults of the mindless heretics, thou didst preserve thy mind in purity, wherefore 
thou wast deemed worthy to behold the beauty of the divine Bestower, and didst 
become an embellishment of the Martyrs, and an adornment of Hierarchs, O Martyr 
Maximus, friend of the Angels.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Most holy is the Spirit Who proceedeth from the Father alone, and Who spake 
within thee when thou wast brought before the judges for the sake of Christ, having 
been delivered up by the enemies of the Holy Church, and hated unjustly for His 
name’s sake. Yet thou didst endure to the end and wast saved, and at that same hour 
wast taught by the Spirit what to say, to confound the wicked plans of the ungodly.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Come ye all, and let us glorify the Mother of Light, crying out with unceasing 
hymns, for she gave birth unto our Salvation! And let us offer her the salutation, 
“Rejoice!”, as to her who alone gave birth unto the ultimate Author of all things, Who 
was God before the ages. Rejoice, thou who hast set fallen Eve aright again! Rejoice, 
O most pure Virgin who knewest not wedlock!  
Great doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the holy hieromartyr.  
The mountains of thy homeland leap for joy over thy wondrous martyrdom, O 
holy one, for the Lord hath made thee heir to the throne of His glory. (Twice) 
How great is the power of thy mediation before the Most High, O Maximus, for 
in heaven the Lord hath exalted the horn of His anointed priest.  
Elijah the Prophet mounted to heaven on a chariot of fire, and thou didst ascend 
on the chariot of thine own blood, for thou didst show that the mighty were not 
strong in their own strength.  
How have those who observe vain and false things abandoned mercy for 
themselves, thou didst say with the prophet Jonah, O holy one; but thou didst 
sacrifice unto the Lord in purity and truth.  
In the earth were thy precious remains interred, O holy father, but the earth 
surrendered its priceless treasure when, moved by the supplications of the faithful, 
the Holy Church glorified thee.  
Sacred and all-hallowed is thy holy memory, O Maximus, and the sound of thy 
holy confession was borne forth to thy suffering people, filling their hearts with love 
for the Lord, and for thee, His faithful servant.  
Theotokion: Soon each man must needs depart this vale of tears, and go whither 
his faith and deeds lead him; but do thou, O Theotokos, ask mercy of the Lord, that 
we not be condemned to darkness and flame forever.  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
Moved by the providence of God to go to Mount Pochaev, * there to learn the 
rightness of the Orthodox Faith, * thou didst attain unto true teaching in the city of 
Zhitomir, * and didst return to thine own country as a brave warrior of Christ. * For 
Orthodoxy and thy people thou didst receive the crown of martyrdom, * and thereby 
hast made thy native land steadfast in the Holy Faith. ** O hieromartyr Maximus, en-
treat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
Our people were enlightened and moved by thy martyrdom, * toward the 
Orthodox Fait; * For giving up thy life for Christ God, * thou didst endure tortures 
and sufferings in prison. ** Pray for us, and for thy native land, before Christ our 
God.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The saints shall boast in glory, * and they shall 
rejoice upon their beds.  
Verse: Sing unto the Lord a new song; His praise is in the Church of the saints.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY, § 292 (II TIM. 2: 1-9)  
Timothy my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things 
that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful 
men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a 
good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs 
of this life; that he may please Him Who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a 
man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The 
husbandman who laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; 
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the 
seed of David was raised from the dead according to my Gospel: wherein I suffer 
trouble, as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the Word of God is not bound. 
Therefore I endure all things for the elects’ sakes, that they may also obtain the 
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation 
for Himself.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 36 (MT. 10: 16-32)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of 
wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: 
for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a 
testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake: but he who endureth to the end 
shall be saved.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
