--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 27th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
THE HOLY MARTYR AND UNMERCINARY HEALER PANTELEIMON 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy unmercinary, three in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
O thou that wast rightly called Panteleimon: * when thou didst extend to all * the 
loving care of souls, * showing forth healing of their bodies, * thou wast enriched 
with a fitting name, * discovering the reward of virtue * and the recompense of 
piety, O martyr, * revealing thyself as a crowned * and invincible warrior of Christ 
our God, * Whom do thou entreat ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
O thou who dost ever draw forth * the grace of divine healing * from the 
immaterial well-springs of the Savior, * and pourest it forth abundantly, * granting it 
to those * who have recourse to thee, O all-blessed one: * all who faithfully celebrate 
thy glorious, * most sacred and radiant festival * do thou manifestly illumine with 
divine grace, * O thou who hast been anointed * with a God-like name and with 
goodness. * And pray thou that grace ** be given to all who hymn thee.  
Cruelly assaulted by sea and fire, * with many torments thy fiery love for Him * 
Who is Desire was itself tested. * Wherefore, thou didst cast down * the author of 
evil, * clearly receiving the richly bestowed * and life-bearing activity of the 
Comforter. * Thereby thou didst most gloriously show forth * the dead man as alive, 
O divinely blessed one, * and didst effect diverse healings, ** O most blessed one.  
And 3 Stichera, in Tone II:  
Without fee hast thou given grace to all, O glorious martyr Panteleimon, * 
expelling evil spirits by the invocation of Christ, * and granting sight to the blind, for 
thou art His true favorite. * Entreat thou the Physician, O all-blessed one, * that He 
grant the world steadfast peace, ** and great mercy to those who love thee. 
The faith of thy pious mother didst thou desire, * and thou didst correct the 
godlessness of thy father; * for, confirmed by the teachings of Hermolaus, * thou 
wast baptized by him, O glorious martyr Panteleimon. * Entreat thou our merciful 
God, the Physician of the infirm, * the Dispeller of the passions, * that those who 
celebrate thy most honored memory with faith ** be delivered from temptations.  
The deception of thy father didst thou reject, O all-glorious one, * taking to heart 
the words of thy mother. * Thou didst bring forth fruit more precious than gold, as 
the Lord hath said, * revealing thyself to be an exemplary physician, O glorious 
martyr Panteleimon. * Traveling the path of grace, thou didst come upon a child 
who had been bitten by a viper, lying on the ground; * and, having prayed to God, 
and earnestly entreating Him, * thou didst straightway raise up the child and thereby 
cut asunder the beast. * Wherefore, be thou mindful of us who keep thy memory 
with faith, ** that we many find mercy on the day of Judgment.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Today hath the precious memory of the unmercenary one shone forth, * 
summoning the faithful to a mystical banquet, * and leading the assemblies of those 
who love the feasts of the Church to the festive solemnity. * For a wonderworking 
physician hath arisen among us, healing the infirmities of all: * Panteleimon, the 
steadfast sufferer. * And earnestly doth he pray to the Lord, * that our souls be 
saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having laid aside ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: A sword pierced thy heart, * O most pure Sovereign Lady, * as 
Symeon said, * when thou didst behold Him Who shone forth from thee ineffably, * 
condemned by the iniquitous * and lifted up upon the Cross, * tasting vinegar and 
gall, * His side pierced, * His hands and feet run through with nails; * and, 
lamenting, thou didst exclaim, crying out maternally: * “What is this new mystery, * 
O my Child most sweet?” 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Having come to love the piety of thy mother and to disdain the godlessness of 
thy father, thou didst become a warrior of the Physician of souls and didst instruct 
thyself in the healing arts. Well skilled in both, thou wast shown to be a destroyer of 
sufferings and a physician of souls. And as thou didst acquire steadfastness in 
suffering and perseverance in prayer, O Panteleimon, thou martyr of Christ, 
earnestly pray that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...,”: 
The unblemished heifer, * beholding her Bullock * willingly nailed upon the Tree, 
* cried out aloud, lamenting piteously: * “Woe is me, O my most beloved Child! * 
How hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, * desiring to leave me 
childless * and bereft of Thee, ** O my most beloved Child?”  
 The Troparion of the holy unmercinary, in Tone III: 
O holy passion-bearer and healer Panteleimon, * intercede with our merciful God 
* that He may grant to our souls ** the forgiveness of our sins. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion. 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
 The two Canons from the Oktoechos, excluding that for the martyrs: and the 
Canon of the holy unmercinary, in Tone II, with 6 Troparia: 
ODE I 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Having earnestly drawn nigh unto Christ before thy repose in Christ, thou didst 
first raise up a dead man. And now by thy prayers do thou enliven me who have 
been slain by the sting of sin, O most noetically rich Panteleimon.  
Like a star didst thou shine forth, having in thy youth a mature and divinely wise 
mind. And having acquired beauty of soul with comeliness of body, thou didst 
appear before the most glorious Word as most splendid.  
Having died to the world, O blessed one, and put on Christ through the font of 
baptism, thou didst become a God-bearing instrument and a receptacle of the 
activity of the Spirit, pleasing to all and healing the afflictions of all.  
Having made wisdom thy sister, and become known as a partaker of life, thou 
wast honored by her, and wast adorned with a crown of gifts, shining with the 
radiance of divine splendor, O blessed one.  
Theotokion: O most holy and pure one, who hast given birth to Christ, with 
blessings hast thou crowned our nature which was expelled by the Creator for 
disobedience, freeing it from corruption. Wherefore, rejoicing, all of us the faithful, 
bless thee.  
ODE III 
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a lily 
* at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established 
Hearkening to the words of the Spirit, thou didst become like good and fertile 
land, receiving the precious Seed and giving rise to the salvation of souls, O thrice-
blessed one.  
Having been reborn in a divinely inspired manner, thou didst slay the arrogance 
of the serpent’s sting and didst restore a soul to life; and thou standest before the 
King of all.  
Thou didst put to shame the godless edict of the tormentors, and didst hasten to 
Christ. Having purchased Him with all thou didst posses, thou didst become a great 
merchant, O divinely wise one.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
 Glory ..., Loving the piety of thy mother, O glorious one, thou didst despise the 
greatly vexing godlessness of thy father; for, possessed of reason, thou didst choose 
that which is better.  
Theotokion: The Lord, Who holdeth all creation in His divine hand, hath been 
borne on thine arm, O Virgin. Him do thou now entreat, that He deliver from 
misfortunes those who hymn thee.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy unmercinary, in Tone IV:  
O ye faithful, with psalms, hymns and spiritual odes let us render brilliant praise 
to Panteleimon, the valiant contender for Christian piety; for through him the 
tyranny of the invisible foe hath been trampled down by divine might, and the 
healing of infirmities hath been richly bestowed by the Lord upon those who 
faithfully celebrate his divine and honored festival.  
Glory ..., Thou didst obey the words of the wise Hermolaus, O martyr, and 
straightway forsook earthly activities as abominable, impotent and pernicious, having 
in thy heart the sufferings of Christ as the teachings of life, granting health to the 
incurably ill, O Panteieimon. Wherefore, pray thou on behalf of those who celebrate 
thy memory with love.  
Both now ..., Tempest-tossed by the threefold-waves of the passions, * I who 
lack a conscience fervently call upon thee, O most pure one: * Disdain me not, lest I 
perish, wretch that I am, * O thou who hast given birth to the Abyss of mercy; * for 
I have no other hope than thee. * Let me not become a joy unto mine enemies, * 
nor a byword, for I trust in thee. * For whatsoever thou desirest thou canst do, ** in 
that thou art the Mother of the God of all.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the 
whole man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Following the Master in love, thou didst distribute thy wealth among the 
destitute, laying thyself bare to suffering, through which thou didst pass, foreseeing 
hope eternal.  
Thou didst offer a sacrifice of praise unto God, openly reviling the worship of 
idols; and all the insolence of the ungodly didst thou trample underfoot, O passion-
bearer.  
Thou didst set invincible might against those who were devoured by jealousy and 
assailed by wrath, O martyr; and having armed thyself, thou didst overcome ungodly 
despondency.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
He Who was held in the arms of the Elder Simeon did by the words of an elder 
lured thee to divine knowledge, O Panteleimon, unto the salvation and deliverance 
of many.  
Theotokion: Young men and virgins make haste to follow in thy steps, seeing 
thee to be a virgin and maiden as well as mother; for thou alone hast ineffably 
combined both into one, O Bride of God.  
ODE V 
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness 
of sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
Joyously didst thou take up the struggles of torture, protected by power divine; 
and steadfastly receiving torments with patience, thou didst cry aloud, rejoicing: We 
know none other God than Thee!  
Possessed of the mettle of youth and having acquired uprightness through 
steadfastness of soul, thou didst courageously endure every wound with manly 
intent, O blessed one, strengthened by the grace of the divine Cross.  
With heavenly teaching did the athlete thrust aside the contrary preaching of 
those who were in error and, strengthened by Thine activity, O Christ, he became 
for many the cause of most glorious salvation.  
Theotokion: All the sayings of the most wise, the exceedingly glorious images, 
and prophecies of the prophets, in latter times clearly prefigured thee, the 
Theotokos; for we know none other who is pure save thee.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable 
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
False idols didst thou spit upon, and thou didst cast down vaunted delusion, 
working wonders and effecting cures, O divinely wise one.  
Thou wast shown to be a crown bearer, O most eminent one, for thou didst pass 
through fire and water. And, bound to the wheel, thou didst most gloriously destroy 
the mindless ones.  
Having set at naught the arrogance of the tormentors, thou didst with effort 
endure the beating of thy body, O divinely wise one, bearing the blows with spiritual 
strength and grace.  
Theotokion: Him Who as God doth hold the ends of the earth together was held 
in thine arms, O pure one; He Who is infinite in His divine form hath been 
contained in a body. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 Kontakion of the holy unmercinary, in Tone V: 
Emulating the Merciful One, * and receiving from Him the grace of healing, * O 
passion-bearer and martyr of Christ God, * by thy supplications heal thou our 
spiritual infirmities, * ever driving away the temptations of the foe ** from those 
who faithfully cry out: Save us, O Lord!  
Ikos: O ye who love Christ, let us piously hymn the memory of the unmercenary 
one, the valiant spiritual athlete, the faithful healer, that we may receive mercy 
though, like me, we have defiled our bodily temples; for He granteth healing to soul 
and body, O beloved. Wherefore, let us strive, O faithful brethren, to have in our 
hearts the strength of Him Who delivereth from deceit those who cry: Save us, O 
Lord!  
ODE VII 
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of 
the flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Thou didst suffer lawfully, and, having conquered the foe, hast become a calm 
haven for those who are tempest-tossed upon the sea of life, O glorious one; and, 
being a light unto those who are in the darkness of this life, thou hast taught us to 
sing: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Blessed art thou, and well is it now with thee, O most blessed one, who hast 
received thy most rich and blessed hope, that which hath been prepared for those 
who cry out to the Lord in faith: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The souls of the saints, the choirs of the righteous and the angelic ranks of the 
bodiless hosts have received thee into their number, O blessed one. For, having 
been beheaded with a sword, thou dost sing, rejoicing: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: The weapon which aforetime warded us away from the Tree of Life 
is now withdrawn, marked with the Blood which flowed from the side of thy Son, O 
most immaculate one. Blessed art thou who hast given birth to God in the flesh!  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew 
children, * and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and 
supremely exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
The skill of thy talents healed the spiritual blindness of thy father, granting light 
through faith to those who have recourse thereto, O most blessed one, guiding all to 
Christ the Savior.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Slain for Christ, thou didst pass over to eternal life, and wast shown to be divinely 
named with the name of God, O divinely wise one. Wherefore, we honour thee and 
supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages.  
Having dispelled the skillful prating of the learned rhetors by the invocation of 
Christ, thou doth cut short the assaults of painful sufferings, healing those who 
supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: We know thee to be a ray of the Source of immortality, O 
Theotokos, for thou hast given birth to the immortal Word of the Father, Who 
delivereth from death all who supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
ODE IX 
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Rejoicing, thou didst pass on to thine ultimate desire, where, having made thine 
abode, O most blessed one, thou wast truly deemed worthy to receive a blessed end, 
being with thy Master for endless ages.  
Thou didst receive thy desire and the fulfillment of thy love which doth yet shed 
drops of thy warm blood which was shed for Christ. And rejoicing, thou hast 
received crowns from Him for thy struggles.  
Like Daniel of old, thou didst shut the mouths of the lions and the jaws of wild 
beasts; For even irrational nature doth know enough to stand in awe of virtue, O 
martyr. Wherefore, assembling, we bless thee, O most glorious one.  
Christ granteth abundant goodness, bestowing upon us a treasury of healing in 
thee and giving thee, who art all-merciful of intent, to all who sorrow as a calm 
haven, and intercessor and protector.  
Theotokion: Like the fleece, O all-immaculate one, thou didst bear the Rain of 
heaven, having conceived in thy womb Him Who granteth peace unto those who 
chant to Him as God and proclaim thee to be the all-hymned Theotokos.  
Exapostilarion of the holy unmercinary: 
God foresaw thy merciful soul and proclaimed thee to be Panteleimon, which 
signifieth full of mercy, for thou dost pour forth healing upon those who are in 
need, O holy one, having overcome the audacity of the tormentors by thy patience.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Theotokos, with never silent hymns we reverently hymn thee, chanting: 
Rejoice thou holy Mount, rejoice thou fiery throne of the King of all, Rejoice thou 
praise of the Angels, and glory of the Saints. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
The working of the providence * of the Most High * which was upon thee was 
radiantly shown forth; * for, manifestly taught to heal bodily sufferings, * O 
Panteleimon, * thou hast been found to be * an exemplary physician of souls, * 
healing all with the word of grace, ** and delivering from dark deceit those who 
have recourse unto thee. (Twice) 
Emulating the mercy of God, * thou wast rightly called Panteleimon, * receiving a 
second name and a like concern. * For as thou art sympathetic * thou takest pity on 
all, * granting them twofold healing, * nourishing, curing, and guiding them to divine 
knowledge, * O most glorious and noetically rich unmercinary, ** and to the 
exceedingly radiant Christ.  
In Tone V: Bodily comeliness didst thou courageously exchange * for spiritual 
beauty, O divinely wise one, * and the beauty of the flesh * for mental prowess; * 
and radiating signs and wonders, * thou didst amaze those who beheld thee, O 
martyr, * having received in the bloom of thy youth * the mind of those who are of 
advanced age, ** enlightened with faith and grace.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Today the memory of the passion-bearer hath shone forth. Come, ye faithful, let 
us be glad in spirit, and let us crown him with hymns, for with the power of the 
Cross hath he manfully conquered the invisible foe; fearing not the boundless 
torments of the torturers, he hath rightly received the honour of an exalted name. 
And he now abideth eternally with the angels. O Panteleimon, martyr of Christ, 
physician of the afflicted and haven of the tempest-tossed: Cease thou not to entreat 
the merciful God, that our souls be saved!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or the following in Tone IV: 
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of mankind, 
crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What is this, O my 
Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou 
hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** 
I marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  
On the Aposticha, from the Oktoechos, with the following Stichera of the martyr, in 
Tone I: 
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Composition of Byzantius: All of us, the faithful, praise thee as an invincible 
warrior of Christ and a most valiant champion, O beauteous adornment of the 
martyrs, celebrating thy holy memory with faith, O all-praised martyr. And together 
we glorify thine honored struggles, O wise one, and magnify Christ our Savior.  
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
Composition of Byzantius: Thou didst suffer manfully for Christ; and, having 
preached the Faith to thy father, thou didst draw him forth from the pit of 
ungodliness, O all-praised one. Undaunted by the impious reasoning of the 
tormentors, thou didst put to shame the impotent audacity of the demons. 
Wherefore, thou didst obtain from Christ the grace to heal infirmities and to expel 
evil spirits, O all-praised Panteleimon. Pray thou to Christ God, that He grant 
forgiveness of transgressions unto those who celebrate thy holy memory with love.  
 Both now ..., the Theotokion, or the following Stavrotheotokion, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing her Lamb hastening to the slaughter * the Ewe-
lamb eagerly followed Him crying aloud: * ‘Whence goest Thou, O my sweetest 
Child? * O most beloved Jesus, * sinless Lord, rich in mercy, * O longsuffering 
Christ, * why dost Thou so swiftly and so fearlessly proceed? * Speak to me Thy 
handmaiden, * O my well-beloved Son: * pass not by me, Thy Mother, without a 
word, * O all-compassionate God, ** who grantest the world great mercy.’ 

--- PAGE 10 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia from the canon of the holy unmercinary: 4 
from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI.  
Hearkening to the words of the Spirit, thou didst become like good and fertile 
land, receiving the precious Seed and giving rise to salvation of souls, O thrice-
blessed one.  
Having been reborn in a manner divinely inspired, thou didst slay the arrogance 
of the serpent’s sting and didst restore a soul to life; and thou standest before the 
King of all.  
Thou didst put to shame the godless edict of the tormentors, and didst hasten to 
Christ. Having purchased Him with all thou hadst, thou didst become a great 
merchant, O divinely wise one.  
Theotokion: Him Who as God doth hold the ends of the earth together is held in 
thine arms, O pure one; He that is infinite in His divine form hath been contained in 
a body.  
Troparion of the holy unmercinary, in Tone III: 
O holy passion-bearer and healer Panteleimon, * intercede with our merciful God 
* that He may grant to our souls ** the forgiveness of our sins. 
Kontakion of the holy unmercinary, in Tone IV: 
Emulating the Merciful One, * and receiving from Him the grace of healing, * O 
passion-bearer and martyr of Christ God, * by thy supplications heal thou our 
spiritual infirmities, * ever driving away the temptations of the foe ** from those 
who faithfully cry out: Save us, O Lord!  
 
The Prokeimenon in the Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God 
of Israel. 
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel 
 
SECOND EPISTLE TO ST. TIMOTHY (2:1-10 (§292)) 
My child Timothy: Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things 
that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful 
men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a 
good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs 
of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a 
man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The 

--- PAGE 11 ---
husbandman that laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; 
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of 
the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel: Wherein I 
suffer trouble, as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. 
Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sakes, that they may also obtain the 
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal Glory. 
 
Alleluia In Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like 
a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied. 
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our 
God shall they blossom forth. 
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST JOHN (JOHN 15:17-16:2 (§52)) 
The Lord said: These things I command you, that ye love one another. If the 
world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the 
world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have 
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word 
that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted 
me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours 
also. But all these things will they do unto you for my name’s sake, because they 
know not him that sent me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not 
had sin: but now they have no cloke for their sin. He that hateth me hateth my 
Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, 
they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both me and my 
Father. But (this cometh to pass), that the word might be fulfilled that is written in 
their law, They hated me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, whom I 
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from 
the Father, he shall testify of me: And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have 
been with me from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye 
should not be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time 
cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service. 
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; He 
shall not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
