--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MYRRH-BEARER & EQUAL OF THE APOSTLES 
MARY MAGDALENE 
COMMEMORATION OF THE RETURN OF THE RELICS OF THE HOLY 
HIEROMARTYR PHOCAS OF SINOPE  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the myrrh-bearer, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Bearing myrrh with tears, * O Mary Magdalene, * on reaching the divine sepulcher 
* thou didst see an angel of glory * who proclaimed the divine resurrection of the 
Bestower of life * and the deliverance of all. * Wherefore, thou didst hasten * to make 
announcement to the eleven, saying joyfully: ** “Leap up, for Christ hath arisen!”  
Serving Christ God, * Who had become like unto us for our sake, O all-praised 
one, * and setting thy soul and mind afire with continual radiance, * thou didst 
become light. * And, beholding the strange vision * of Him hanging upon the Cross, 
* thou didst say, weeping: * “How is it that Life ** now accepteth a voluntary death?”  
We celebrate thy sacred memory, * O thou who learned of Christ * and who 
preached His precepts * for the deliverance of men’s souls, * O most glorious Mary; * 
and we venerate with faith * the shrine of thy relics, * which poureth forth 
inexhaustible grace and enlightenment ** upon those who have recourse to it with 
love, O blessed of God.  
And 3 Stichera of the hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
Thou didst offer thyself wholly * unto Him Who, for thy sake, * endured His 
salvific suffering, O all-famed father, * and thou didst make haste with diligence * to 
be well-pleasing to Him in the blood of martyrdom * and to cleave unto Him. * 
Hence, crowned by Him, * thou hast been glorified ** and enriched by the working 
of miracles, O most wise one.  
By thine endurance of suffering, O Phocas, * thou didst cast down * the arrogance 
of the iniquitous * and the worship of the demons, * manifestly proclaiming the 
Savior of all, * illumining the thoughts of the faithful * and dispelling the darkness of 
the vanity of idolatry * with the enlightenment of thy miracles ** and the splendor of 
thy struggles, O blessed of God.  
We who are beset by misfortunes, * by the waves of life and the abyss of 
transgressions, * and are assailed by the tempest of grief, * having thee as a haven of 
salvation, * pray with faith: * by thy supplications save us * who honor thy holy 
memory * from every evil circumstance, ** entreating the Lord and Master, Who is 
the Lover of mankind.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VI: 
Being the first to behold the divine resurrection of the First Cause of good things, 
Who in the goodness of His heart hath deified our nature, O Mary Magdalene, thou 
didst show thyself to be also the first evangelist, crying out to the apostles: “Setting 
aside your grief, take courage! Come ye and behold the risen Christ Who granteth the 
world great mercy!”  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: When, of old, the unblemished ewe-lamb * and immaculate 
Sovereign Lady, * beheld her Lamb upon the tree of the Cross, * she exclaimed 
maternally, and marveling cried aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new 
and most strange sight I see? * How hath the thankless synagogue * betrayed Thee to 
the judgment-seat of Pilate * and condemned Thee to death, * Who art the Life of 
all? * Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, ** O Word!”  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VIII:  
As a disciple who faithfully ministered to Christ God, Who in the excess of His 
compassion willingly assumed my poverty, Mary Magdalene, when she beheld Him 
stretched out upon the Tree and enclosed in the sepulcher, cried aloud, shedding 
tears: “What strange sight is this, O Thou Who givest life to the dead? How is it that 
Thou art reckoned among the dead? What myrrh shall I bring to Thee Who hast 
removed from me the stench of the demons? What tears shall I shed for Thee Who 
hast wiped away the tears of our first mother?” Yet, O King of all, Thou didst appear 
as a gardener, taking away the burning heat with the dew of Thy words, and didst say 
to her: “Go to My brethren and declare to them the joy of glad tidings; for I shall 
ascend to the Father, My God and your God, that I may bestow great mercy upon the 
world!”  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Cross * and voluntarily accepting 
suffering, O Jesus, * Thy Virgin Mother, O Master, * cried aloud: Woe is me, my 
sweet Child! * How is it that Thou dost endure * unjustly inflicted wounds, * O 
Physician Who healeth the infirmities of mankind, * delivering all from corruption ** 
in Thy tender compassion?  
Troparion of the myrrh-bearer, in Tone I:  
The honorable Mary Magdalene followed after Christ, * Who for our sake was 
born of the Virgin, * keeping His precepts and laws. * Wherefore, celebrating thine 
all-holy memory today, * through thy supplications ** we receive remission of sins.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Phocas, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS 
One canon from the Oktoechos, and two for the saints.  
Canon of the holy myrrh-bearer, the acrostic whereof is: “With love do I hymn Mary 
Magdalene”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Adorned with godly beauties and divinely radiant splendors, O Mary, illumine my 
darkened heart by thy supplications.  
The Word of the Father sanctified thee, manifestly delivering thee from the malice 
of evil spirits. And, becoming His disciple, thou wast filled with the gifts of the Holy 
Spirit.  
Filled with life-creating waters from a never-failing Well-spring, the Master Who in 
His tender compassion appeared upon earth, thou didst dry up the muddy torrents of 
sin.  
Theotokion: We hymn thee, the Mother of the Creator of our nature, O Maiden, 
who hast reconciled fallen human nature with God, O all-immaculate Lady, 
Birthgiver of God.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, in the same tone:  
Irmos: To Him who crushed the enemy with His arm * and led Israel through 
the Red Sea, * to our Redeemer and our God let us sing, * for He hath been 
glorified. 
Standing before the unapproachable Light, O wise Phocas, illumine my thoughts 
and heart, I pray, that I may praise thy holy suffering today.  
From infancy thou wast adorned, possessing divine understanding, O most wise 
Phocas, having been deemed worthy of the grace to work signs and to cast out evil 
spirits.  
Full of grace, full of the knowledge of God, O divinely wise one, thou didst have 
the divine power of the Spirit living within thee; wherefore thou didst shine forth like 
the sun, illumining the faithful.  
Theotokion: Without knowing a man thou didst hold the infinite God fully 
contained within thy womb, O divinely joyous Birthgiver of God. Him do thou ever 
entreat on our behalf.  
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Canon of the myrrh-bearer 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Loving first the First Cause of good things Who in the goodness of His heart 
deified our nature, thou didst follow Him zealously, O Mary, submitting to His divine 
precepts.  
Lamenting, thou didst reach the tomb of the Redeemer, O maiden, and wast the 
first to behold the divine resurrection. Wherefore, thou didst show thyself to be a 
herald of the glad tidings, crying aloud: Christ is risen! Clap your hands!  
Theotokion: The Word Who was incarnate of thy most pure blood, O most pure 
one, in the richness of His goodness hath saved me, releasing me from the 
condemnation of the first fall. Him do thou unceasingly beseech, that He save thy 
flock.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: My heart is established in the Lord, * my horn is exalted in my God, * 
my mouth is enlarged against mine enemies, * and I rejoice in Thy salvation. 
From thy childhood thou didst have a mind sanctified, and even unto old age thou 
didst please God, O God-bearer, and thus received glory.  
The demon aboard the ship could not bear the great threat of thee, O God-bearer, 
and took to flight; and Christ is magnified by thy works, O wondrous one.  
O wondrous one, adornment and boast of martyrs, who can worthily praise thy 
mighty works, struggles, journeys and benefactions in all cities?  
Theotokion: As one more exalted than the angels, thou didst receive in thy womb 
the Master of the angels and of all creation, O most pure one; wherefore, we honor 
thee with faith.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Fulfilling His dispensation ...”:  
Offering up sacrifices as a high priest, * O father, in the end thou didst offer 
thyself as a living sacrifice, * bearing witness lawfully to Christ God, * accepting death 
and strengthened by angels, who cried out to thee: * Come with us, O Phocas, ** and 
no-one will be against us!  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Ikos: Desiring the life of heaven and spurning food on earth, let us cleanse our lips 
and tongue, that we may worthily fashion hymns and songs for Phocas the priest; for, 
entering through the portal of heaven, he found the way in unhindered, and gazeth 
upon the Desired One, Who is glorified by the angels. Thus he is able to entreat, on 
our behalf, the only Merciful One, the Healer of our souls’ infirmities, in that he 
endured tortures for Him. Wherefore, let us hymn him and cry aloud to him: 
Mercifully regarding us, O Phocas, come thou with us, and no one will be against us!  
Sessional Hymn of the myrrh-bearer, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Thou didst truly and manifestly, as a disciple, minister to the Word, Who had 
abased Himself in His surpassing loving-kindness, O Mary Magdalene; and beholding 
Him lifted up upon the Cross and laid in the tomb, thou didst lament, weeping. 
Wherefore, we honor thee and with faith observe thy solemnity. O glorious myrrh-
bearer, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who with love 
honor thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”  
O ye who love the feasts of the Church, the radiant festival, the commemoration 
of the divinely wise and holy hierarch Phocas, hath dawned, bringing gladness to the 
ends of the earth, shining forth with beams of miracles throughout the world, and 
bearing inexhaustible grace to all; for he prayeth to the Lord, that He save our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
most glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
Stavrotheotokion: O most immaculate Virgin Mother of God, a sword passed 
through thy most holy soul when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of His 
own will. Cease not to beseech Him, O blessed one, that He grant us forgiveness of 
our transgressions.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the myrrh-bearer  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Possessing a mind devoid of the tumult of worldly vanity, thou didst minister unto 
Him Who came to save the whole world from deception.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Bathed in thy tears thou didst reach the life-bearing tomb, O Mary, and didst 
behold the angel, who announced the resurrection of Christ.  
Thy heart was blameless in the precepts of Christ, and thou didst desire Him 
alone, Who is beautiful in comeliness, O right glorious one.  
Theotokion: O Maiden, the sleep of sin hath overtaken me through the slumber of 
slothfulness. By thy vigilant supplication do thou rouse me to repentance.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr 
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee O Lord, * and I was afraid, * for thy 
counsel is ineffable, * being the ever-existent God, * Thou didst come forth 
from the Virgin, * wherefore I hymn Thee: * glory to thy condescension, O 
Christ, * glory to Thy power.  
We know thee, O glorious one, to be a beacon of righteousness, resplendent in thy 
deeds and martyrdom, ever illumining the hearts of the faithful with brilliant radiance 
and dispelling the darkness of infirmities.  
Thou wast shown to be comely in the beauties of martyrdom, O Phocas; for the 
dove of God sat upon thine honored head, O wise one, telling thee through the Spirit 
that thou wouldst partake of suffering.  
Those who are at sea, ever having thy prayers to guide them, are delivered from 
grievous storms, hymning Him Who, for thy sake, bestoweth saving deliverance upon 
them.  
Theotokion: O undefiled, unsullied one, by the divine propitiation of the 
supremely good God cleanse my heart, which hath been defiled by harmful thoughts 
and besmirched with transgressions.  
ODE V  
Canon of the myrrh-bearer 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Our first mother, seeing the one who of old deluded her with his words and drove 
her from paradise, trampled underfoot by pure women who have acquired manly 
integrity, rejoiceth with them eternally.  
Wounded with love for Him Who died and was enclosed in a tomb, breathing 
forth life upon all, O honorable Mary Magdalene, thou didst offer myrrh for His 
sweet love, and poured forth the perfume of thy tears.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
After the divine suffering and the awesome ascension of the Savior, thou didst go 
forth, announcing the word in all places, as a glorious disciple of the Word, pursuing 
the many who were deceived by ignorance.  
Theotokion: He Whose good pleasure it was, in His boundless mercy, to be born 
of thee, O most holy Maiden, hath delivered me who have fallen into the cunningly 
wrought pitfalls of sin. Him do thou beseech, that those who hymn thee with faith 
may be delivered from all harm.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr 
Irmos: O Lord our God, bestow Thy peace upon us; * O Lord our God, take us 
for Thy possession; * O Lord, besides Thee we know none other: * and we call 
upon Thy Name. 
Passing through like a precious stone, O venerable one, by thy words and 
miraculous manifestations thou didst bring those who worshiped stones to the divine 
Faith.  
Thou wast shown to be venerable among the righteous and splendid among the 
martyrs, O glorious and wondrous Phocas, having suffering wondrously and 
vanquished the adversary.  
The angelic armies lifted their voices in song, beholding thee who suffered 
patiently, O blessed martyr, and, while yet in thy corruptible body, didst vanquish 
incorporeal demons.  
Theotokion: Save me who am tempest-tossed by the billows of life, O most pure 
one, and steer me to the calm haven of dispassion, O thou who art the help of all 
Christians and full of the grace of God.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the myrrh-bearer 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
The dew of thy words dispelled the burning heat of the disciples’ grief, O honored 
one, for thou didst cry out: “Christ hath risen! Our Life hath appeared! The brilliant 
Sun hath shone forth!”  
Behold, thy splendid commemoration hath shone forth, illumining the faithful 
who hymn thee thereon, dispelling the darkness of the temptations of the evil 
demons, O right wondrous one.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate one, thou hast been revealed to be a noetic and 
untouchable mercy-seat of sanctity, a lustrous candlestick, and a bridge leading to 
God those who confess thee to be the Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Canon of the holy hieromartyr 
Irmos: As Thou didst deliver the prophet from the depths * of the abyss, O 
Christ God, * so deliver me also from my sins, * O Lover of mankind, * and 
guide my life, I pray Thee.  
The dove sent to thee from on high related to thee, in a human voice, that which 
would come to pass, O most glorious one, telling thee to drain the cup of salvation.  
After the manifold drops of thy sweat and the measureless pangs of thy body, thou 
didst bow thy holy head under the sword and sanctify the ground with thy blood.  
Refusing to worship in dead temples, O most noetically rich hieromartyr, thou 
didst endure death and after death yet livest. Wherefore, we call thee blessed, O 
Phocas.  
Theotokion: He Who dwelleth in the highest made His abode within thy holy 
womb, appearing to the world in a fleshly likeness. Wherefore, we glorify thee, O 
pure one.  
Kontakion of the myrrh-bearer, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Standing before the Cross of the Savior with many others, * suffering with the 
Mother of the Lord and pouring forth tears, * the most glorious one made this 
offering as praise, saying: * “What is this strange wonder? * Is it Thy will to suffer, * 
O Thou Who sustainest all creation? ** Glory to Thy dominion!”  
Ikos: Without leaving heaven, Christ, the King and Master of creation, descended 
as He desired, and of His own will, took upon Himself animate flesh. Watching Him 
nailed to the Cross, His immaculate Mother stood nearby with the honored virgins. 
And Mary Magdalene was also there, weeping, who, ever showing most fervent faith, 
had followed Christ. And when she looked upon the tomb, she cried out in 
expectation: “Thy good pleasure it is to suffer! Glory be to Thy dominion!”  
ODE VII  
Canon of the myrrh-bearer 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Thou hast dispelled divers ailments, having the Word working within thee, before 
Whom thou now dost stand, O myrrh-bearer, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
our God, throughout the ages!  
Before the others thou alone didst behold Christ our life arisen, but thou didst 
suppose Him to be a gardener, and didst cry out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: Having conceived and given birth to the immortal God, O pure one, 
thou didst halt the course of death. To Him let us all chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
our God, throughout the ages!  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr 
Irmos: By an angel didst Thou refresh the Children in the furnace * 
transforming the roaring flames to dew. * O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Passing through the fire like the three youths, through the power of Christ Who 
dwelt within thee, in a manner past understanding thou didst remain unburnt, O 
martyr.  
Set aflame within by the fire of divine love, O wise martyr Phocas, thou didst 
remain unconsumed, though touched by material fire.  
Adorned with the divine beauty of thy wounds, thou didst hasten to God, the 
Judge of thy contest, receiving the crown of victory from Him.  
Theotokion: Delivered from all condemnation by thy wondrous birthgiving, O 
ever blessed Virgin, we hymn thee with joyful voices.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the myrrh-bearer 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Splendid was thy life, O Magdalene, for it shone forth with the rays of thy virtuous 
acts and thy divine preaching at God’s command, and with beams of love for the 
Creator, to Whom thou dost chant with the angels: Ye priests, hymn; ye people, 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou didst stand before the Cross, O glorious Mary, beholding the unjust 
slaughter of Him Who, in His ineffable mercy, abased Himself; and, overflowing with 
tears and sighs, thou didst cry aloud: “What is this strange mystery? How is He Who 
is by nature Life, and hath slain death, been Himself put to death and dieth?”  
Theotokion: With oneness of mind we glorify thee, the Mother of God, who art 
more exalted than all creation, O pure one; for in thee hath the condemnation which 
began with Adam been annulled, and the fallen nature of mankind been restored, 
which chanteth: Ye priests, bless; ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Canon of the holy hieromartyr 
Irmos: O Thou who dost cover Thy chambers on high with the waters, * Thou 
Who hast set the sands to bound the sea * and Who upholdest all things: * the 
sun doth sing Thy praises, * the moon giveth Thee glory, * every creature 
offereth a hymn unto Thee, * as their Fashioner, throughout the ages. 
God the Creator of all sanctified thee from thine earliest infancy, and, when thou 
didst attain the measure of age for Christian sufferings, thou also didst undergo 
suffering and overcame the power of the prince of evil; and, bearing thy crown, thou 
hast attained unto the habitation of the mansions on high.  
Those who sail ever invoke thee as an excellent helmsman, O wise martyr, and by 
thy right pleasing supplications are delivered from misfortunes at sea, hymning God, 
the King and Creator, throughout all ages.  
In thy profound and honored old age the enemies of the Lord slaughtered thee 
like an innocent lamb, O glorious Phocas, who dost ever slay our foe, the author of 
evil, with the sword of thy confession and boldness throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: Having given birth to the Lamb of God Who, in His utter loving-
kindness, taketh away the sins of all, thou hast become the cleansing of our fallen, 
corrupt nature. Wherefore, O Virgin Theotokos, we hymn thee with joy.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the myrrh-bearer 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Thou hast now been transported to divine joy, to the broad expanse of paradise, 
to the noetic and heavenly mansions, where the ranks of the venerable dwell, and 
where the voice of those who keep splendid festival is heard, O God-bearing Mary. 
Wherefore, we all call thee blessed.  
Naught didst thou prefer on earth to the love of Christ God, and consumed by 
His comeliness alone and following His steps, directly illumined by the rays He sent 
to thee, O most honored one, thou didst cry aloud: “Thee do I magnify, O greatly 
Merciful One!”  
Having received God-given deification, and having drunk of the torrent of grace, 
in a godly manner thou didst receive recompense for thy pangs, O Magdalene, 
disciple of the Word, and now numbered with the ranks of the angels, by thy 
supplications preserve those who honor thee with love.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: As the Mother of Him Who suffered for us, deliver me from soul-
corrupting passions; as thou art merciful, loose thou the bonds of mine offenses; and 
as thou art good, bless now my soul, which hath been vexed by the temptations of 
the demons, O Virgin Theotokos. 
Canon of the holy hieromartyr 
Irmos: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, * Who hath exalted the horn of 
salvation on our behalf * in the house of His child David, * wherein the 
Dayspring from on high hath visited us, * and guided us on the path of peace.  
Beaten, O Phocas, in the beauties of thy miracles thou hast been recognized as a 
heaven covered with stars, ever illumining the earth and dispelling the darkness of the 
passions and all wickedness. Wherefore, we hymn thee with faith.  
Thou didst tread the narrow path on earth, O martyr Phocas, in the hope of 
everlasting good things, and, expanding in piety, thou didst constrict all the evil 
schemes of the enemy.  
Now that thy hallowed solemnity and honored festival hath dawned, bringing us 
perfect joy, we beseech thee to remember us, O passion-bearer and martyr, for 
thereby thy mighty deeds and struggles are truly glorified.  
Theotokion: “Thou bearest my likeness while possessing the Father’s 
countenance, O my Son; for Thou dost manifestly desire to heal the ugliness of 
mortals!” the most pure one cried aloud, bearing Christ in her arms. Her do we hymn 
with never-ceasing voices.  
Exapostilarion of the myrrh-bearer:  
Spec. Mel.: “O immutable Light ...”: 
The never-setting Sun Who shone forth from the Father in the beginning, O 
maiden, was sealed in the tomb by the assembly of the Jews; yet thou, O Mary, didst 
behold Him risen and announced this to the disciples.  
Glory ..., that of the holy hieromartyr, in the same melody 
Thou hast been revealed to be an adornment of hierarchs, a helper of the poor and 
a pillar of the virtues, O divinely wise Phocas; wherefore, remember all of us who 
hymn thee.  
Theotokion: Daniel described thee beforehand as the unquarried mountain from 
whence the precious Stone was cut which hath broken asunder the temples of the 
idols, O Mary, Birthgiver of God.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, and Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
From thy childhood thou didst love the Lord, O all-blessed and wise Phocas; for, 
shouldering the Cross as a weapon, without wavering thou didst tread the path of the 
truth. Hence thou didst become beloved by the angels, an opponent of the demons, 
and an excellent intercessor for the world.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Both now ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VIII:  
As a disciple who faithfully ministered to Christ God, Who in the excess of His 
compassion willingly assumed my poverty, Mary Magdalene cried aloud upon 
beholding Him stretched out upon the Tree and enclosed in the sepulcher, shedding 
copious tears and saying: “What is this strange sight, O Thou Who givest life to the 
dead? How is it that Thou art reckoned among the dead? What myrrh shall I bring to 
Thee Who hast removed from me the stench of the demons? What tears shall I shed 
for Thee Who hast wiped away the tears of our first mother?” Yet, O King of all, 
Thou didst appear as a gardener, taking away the burning heat of her pain with the 
dew of Thy words saying to her: “Go to My brethren and declare to them the joy of 
glad tidings; for I shall ascend to the Father, My God and your God, that I may 
bestow great mercy upon the world!”  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY: 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Stichera: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the myrrh-
bearer; and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the holy hieromartyr.  
Loving first the First Cause of good things Who in the goodness of His heart 
deified our nature, thou didst follow Him zealously, O Mary, submitting to His divine 
precepts. (Twice) 
Lamenting, thou didst reach the tomb of the Redeemer, O maiden, and wast the 
first to behold the divine resurrection. Wherefore, thou didst show thyself to be a 
herald of the glad tidings, crying aloud: Christ is risen! Clap your hands! (Twice) 
The dove sent to thee from on high related to thee, in a human voice, that which 
would come to pass, O most glorious one, telling thee to drain the cup of salvation.  
After the manifold drops of thy sweat and the measureless pangs of thy body, thou 
didst bow thy holy head under the sword and sanctify the ground with thy blood.  
Refusing to worship in dead temples, O most noetically rich hieromartyr, thou 
didst endure death and after death yet livest. Wherefore, we call thee blessed, O 
Phocas.  
Theotokion: He Who dwelleth in the highest made His abode within thy holy 
womb, appearing to the world in a fleshly likeness. Wherefore, we glorify thee, O 
pure one.  
Troparion of the myrrh-bearer, in Tone I:  
The honorable Mary Magdalen followed after Christ, * Who for our sake was born 
of the Virgin, * keeping His precepts and laws. * Wherefore, celebrating thine all-holy 
memory today, * through thy supplications ** we receive remission of sins.  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Phocas, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VI:  
Offering up sacrifices as a high priest, * O father, in the end thou didst offer 
thyself as a living sacrifice, * bearing witness lawfully to Christ God, * accepting death 
and strengthened by angels, who cried out to thee: * Come with us, O Phocas, ** and 
no-one will be against us!  
Kontakion of the myrrh-bearer, in Tone III: 
Standing before the Cross of the Savior with many others, * suffering with the 
Mother of the Lord and pouring forth tears, * the most glorious one made this 
offering as praise, saying: * “What is this strange wonder? * Is it Thy will to suffer, * 
O Thou Who sustainest all creation? ** Glory to Thy dominion!”  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §141 
Brethren: The seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord. Mine answer to those 
who do examine me is this, Have we not power to eat and to drink? Have we not 
power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other apostles, and as the brethren of 
the Lord, and Cephas? Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear 
working? Who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth a vineyard, 
and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk 
of the flock? Say I these things as a man? or saith not the law the same also? For it is 
written in the law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth 
out the corn. Doth God take care for oxen? Or saith he it altogether for our sakes? 
For our sakes, no doubt, this is written: that he that ploweth should plow in hope; 
and that he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope. If we have sown 
unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? If 
others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless we have 
not used this power; but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was 
attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Verse: And He brought me up out of the pit of misery, and from the mire of 
clay.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §34 
 At that time, Jesus went throughout every city and village, preaching and showing 
the glad tidings of the kingdom of God; and the twelve were with Him, and certain 
women, which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary called Magdalene, 
out of whom went seven devils; and Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod’s steward; and 
Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto Him of their substance.  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
