--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 30th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER GERMANUS, 
WONDERWORKER OF SOLOVKI  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Assembling together with faith, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, with 
splendor let us celebrate today the memory of our venerable father Germanus, the 
dweller in the wilderness and instructor of monks, who, having struggled well on 
earth, receiveth the reward for his labors in heaven from Christ God, and prayeth for 
our souls.  
Thy most honored memory doth gladden ascetics and moveth the assembly of all 
the faithful to join chorus, O father Germanus; for thou didst live upon the earth like 
an incorporeal being, and now having joined chorus with the angels in heaven, with 
them beseech Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Mortifying the carnal passions through abstinence, thou didst make thy flesh 
subject to thy spirit, and didst destroy legions of demons, O divinely wise father 
Germanus; wherefore, thou hast received from Christ God the grace of incorruption 
and the gift of miracles. Him do thou entreat, that our souls find mercy.  
With the streams of thy tears thou didst water the field of thy soul, and, having 
rendered it spiritually fertile, thou didst bring to the granary of heaven the fruit of the 
virtues a hundredfold; wherefore, thou hast received rich rewards from Christ God, 
to Whom do thou unceasingly pray on behalf of our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Like a star of surpassing radiance hath thy sacred and most festive memory shone 
forth upon us, O venerable father Germanus, illumining the hearts of the faithful 
with the splendor of thy miracles and dispelling the clouds of noetic darkness from 
those who cry out with faith: O most blessed one who dwellest with the saints, O heir 
to the kingdom, entreat the Lord on our behalf, that He grant peace and great mercy 
to our souls!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: * Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
As a chosen vessel of God * thou wast shown to be * full of the grace of the Holy 
Spirit, * O venerable father, ** thou advocate for our souls.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Taking the Cross of the Lord * upon thy shoulders, * thou didst earnestly follow 
Christ, * O most blessed father, ** thou dweller in the wilderness and instructor of 
monks.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
The assembly of monks * is filled with joy for thy sake, * and the whole Church of 
the faithful keepeth festival, * O ever-memorable Germanus, ** thou favorite of the 
Holy Trinity.  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Come, ye choirs of monastics, and let us fall down today before the tomb of our 
venerable father Germanus, hymning his ascetic struggles in song and emulating his 
virtues, that by his supplications we may receive mercy and obtain grace as a timely 
aid.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
All my hope do I set on thee, O Mother of God; keep me under thy protection.  
Troparion, in Tone VIII:  
Aflame with spiritual desire from thy youth, O venerable Germanus, * thou didst 
follow the narrow path of life unto Christ, * and, having made thine abode on a 
desert island of the sea, as in a calm harbor, * thou didst dwell thereon for many years 
in asceticism; * and there thou didst have as thy companions the blessed fathers 
Zosimas and Sabbatius. ** With them entreat Christ God on behalf of us who honor 
thy holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”:  
Spurning passionate worldly attachments, and hating the pleasures of the flesh, 
thou didst love Christ alone, for Whose sake thou didst make thine abode upon a 
desert island, where by thy love of life in the wilderness thou didst show thyself to be 
a true emulator of the holy fathers of old, with whom, after thy repose, thou hast 
been shown to participate in the angelic choirs. O venerable father Germanus, pray 
thou for those who cherish thine honored memory. (Thrice)  
When divine love came upon thee, O venerable one, then, cutting thyself off from 
the tumult or life, and disdaining all that would draw thee down, thou didst depart to 
the wild coast, and, withdrawing to an island in the sea, thou didst patiently abide 
thereon for many years, manfully waging war against the invisible foe, whom thou 
didst vanquish with the power of Christ. Wherefore, thou hast received a crown from 
Christ God, to Whom do thou pray for those who cherish thine honored memory. 
(Thrice)  
Valiantly enduring the rigors of the wilderness, and emulating the way of life of the 
incorporeal ones, thou didst lay waste to thy body with fasting and vigils, and through 
unceasing prayer acquired the gifts of the Spirit, O venerable father Germanus; 
wherefore, with the venerable fathers Zosimas and Sabbatius, thou hast been shown 
to be the founder of the monastic life in the place of thine abode; and we who 
celebrate thy holy memory with love honor thee with them. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
With chanted praises let us hymn the adornment of the Russian land, the 
ornament of fasters, the speedy helper amid misfortunes, the miraculous healer of 
sicknesses and the undaunted advocate before God, saying: Rejoice, good instructor 
of the monastic life! Rejoice, most radiant beacon illumining the souls of the faithful 
with the splendor of thy miracles! Rejoice, thou who with the venerable fathers 
Zosimas and Sabbatius didst struggle industriously in this life, and after thy repose 
dost stand united with them before the Holy Trinity, Whom do thou entreat, O 
venerable Germanus, on behalf of us, thy children, who piously celebrate thy 
memory. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone I: 
Thy splendid festival hath arrived, O God-bearing Germanus, illumining the 
choirs of monastics, perfuming with the sweet fragrance of immortality and filling 
with spiritual joy all who have recourse unto thee with faith and who bless thee with 
love.  
Come, ye choirs of monastics, and let us fall down today before the tomb of our 
venerable father, as before an inexhaustible fountain of grace, that we may receive 
spiritual healing for our souls and the easing of our bodily ailments; for he poureth 
forth healings upon all who flee to him with faith.  
O ye faithful, let us all assemble here at the place where this valiant lover of piety 
lieth in blessed repose, and let us praise his life in the wilderness and venerate his 
precious and much healing relics; for by his mediation before God he obtaineth 
salvation for all who glorify him with love.  
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
Rejoice and dance now, O ye multitude of monastics, celebrating with splendor 
the day of the repose of our father, whereon he, as a faithful servant, entered into the 
joy of his Lord, and as a wise steward received his just reward from Christ, the Master 
of the house! And standing today around the precious shrine of his relics and 
venerating them with love, let us earnestly cry out to him: Be thou our intercessor, O 
Germanus - most spiritually rich, that by thy supplications we may all receive mercy 
and obtain grace as our timely aid.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, * and we, the faithful, glorify thee as is meet, * 
thou unassailable city, * impregnable rampart, ** and steadfast intercession and refuge 
of our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Thou didst live on the earth like an angel, O venerable father, mortifying thy flesh 
through asceticism and vigils; and occupying thyself continually with the thought of 
death, thou didst attain the perfect measure of dispassion and wast enriched with the 
gifts of the Spirit. Wherefore, thou hast received from God the grace to pray for our 
souls.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
  
Through attentiveness, prayer and the stillness of the wilderness thou didst obtain 
victory over the passions and didst put legions of the demons to shame, O most 
blessed father; and gladdening the angels, with whom thou hast the boldness before 
the Lord to pray for our souls.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Rejoicing in the expectation of good things to come, thou didst joyfully tread the 
narrow and difficult path, wandering in the groves of the wilderness and abiding in 
the mountains; wherefore, thou dost now delight in the beauty of paradise, O 
venerable father. Intercede for us, that we also be not deprived thereof, praying to 
Christ on behalf of our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
We honor thee, O Germanus our father, as the instructor of a multitude of monks, 
for through thee have we come to know how to tread the straight path. Blessed art 
thou who, having labored for Christ, didst set at naught the power of the enemy, O 
companion of the venerable Zosimas and Sabbatius. With them pray unto the Lord, 
that our souls find mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * Mother of 
God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, * 
granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting now our supplications, 
** pray thou that we all be saved. 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Aflame with spiritual desire from thy youth, O venerable Germanus, * thou didst 
follow the narrow path of life unto Christ, * and, having made thine abode on a 
desert island of the sea, as in a calm harbor, * thou didst dwell thereon for many years 
in asceticism; * and there thou didst have as thy companions the blessed fathers 
Zosimas and Sabbatius. ** With them entreat Christ God on behalf of us who honor 
thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...,” (Once) 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Aflame with spiritual desire from thy youth, O venerable Germanus, * thou didst 
follow the narrow path of life unto Christ, * and, having made thine abode on a 
desert island of the sea, as in a calm harbor, * thou didst dwell thereon for many years 
in asceticism; * and there thou didst have as thy companions the blessed fathers 
Zosimas and Sabbatius. ** With them entreat Christ God on behalf of us who honor 
thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Following the call of thy Lord, thou didst spurn all the beautiful things in this 
world, O Germanus our father; and making thine abode on a desert island with the 
blessed Sabbatius, thou didst become his fellow faster and companion. Glorified with 
him, pray thou for those who venerate thine honored memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Thou didst love the industrious godly life, O Germanus our father, and, living with 
our venerable father Zosimas in the wilderness of Solovki, thou didst share his labors 
and the Holy Mysteries with him. And with him also thou art glorified as an 
instructor of monks. Pray for us, thy children, who gloriously celebrate thy memory.  
Glory ...Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O Lady, we flee beneath thy protection. Disdain us not who are in need of thine 
aid and help, but in that thou art the Mother of the merciful God, deliver from 
misfortunes thy servants who ever set their hope on thee.  
Polyeleos, and magnification: We bless thee, O venerable father Germanus, and 
we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the 
angels.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
How shall we bless thee, O venerable Germanus? For from childhood thou didst 
choose the monastic life, and, forsaking thy homeland, thou didst withdraw to the 
environs of the frigid northern sea, where, having found Sabbatius, the lover of the 
wilderness, thou didst undertake the eremitic life with him on the solitary island of 
Solovki, and with Zosimas, the chosen of God, thou didst found a monastic 
habitation thereon. Wherefore, we ever magnify thy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
As an uncultivated vine, O Virgin, * thou didst sprout forth the most comely 
Cluster of grapes * Which poureth forth upon us the wine of salvation * making glad 
the souls and bodies of all. * Wherefore, ever blessing thee as the cause of good 
things, * with the angel we cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath ...,  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 43 (MT. 11: 27-30)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: 
and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, 
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and 
learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 
For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
When thou didst hear the voice of the Gospel calling thee to the kingdom of 
heaven, thou didst earnestly follow it; and accounting all the beautiful things of this 
world as but dung, thou didst desire the beauty of Christ alone, and by the example of 
thy virtuous life thou didst bring a multitude of monks to labor for Him, and wast for 
them an instructor and guide to salvation. Wherefore, praising thy struggles and 
labors in hymns, we beseech thee, O Germanus our father, that thou direct to the 
calm haven of salvation us, who are cruelly beset by many sins, asking peace and great 
mercy for us.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and 
that of the venerable one, with 8 Troparia, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
O Word of God, grant me discourse, that I may open my mouth and praise Thy 
favored one, the venerable Germanus, the dweller in the wilderness and instructor of 
monks, the confirmation of the Monastery of Solovki.  
Having loved the life of stillness from thy youth, thou didst seek a place in the 
wilderness wherein to dwell, O venerable one; wherefore, having attained thy desire 
with the blessed Sabbatius, thou didst show forth an angelic life.  
Thou wast shown to be the first inhabitant of the island of Solovki, the desert 
place chosen by God as a monastic habitation, O blessed Germanus, and wast the 
companion and fellow struggler with the venerable Zosimas, with whom thou didst 
found the monastery there.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, earnestly entreat Him to Whom thou hast given 
birth for the salvation of all the faithful, in that He is the Creator and God of all, that 
we, thy servants who confess thee to be the true Theotokos, may find mercy.  
ODE III  
Irmos: My heart is established in the Lord, * my horn is exalted in my God, * 
my mouth is enlarged against mine enemies, * and I rejoice in Thy salvation. 
Who can recount thy struggles and labors, O father Germanus? For, having 
entered the groves of the wilderness, thou didst labor day and night, laying waste to 
thy body with fasting and vigils.  
By prayer and the endurance of hardships thou didst uproot the passions of the 
soul, and by abstinence and the avoidance of evils thou didst destroy all carnal desires, 
O blessed one.  
The warfare of the demons was unable to vanquish thee in thy good volition, for 
with goodly hope and mighty endurance thou didst set all their machinations at 
naught.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady of the world, good helper, by thine omnipotent 
intercession cast down all the powers of the enemy which rise up against us, and 
uplift the horn of thy people.  
Sessional hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Ascending to the heights of the virtues, thou wast a model for thy disciples, 
guiding them to abstinence and meekness, humility and obedience; and going before 
thy flock like a shepherd, thou didst teach them to tread the hard path of life in the 

--- PAGE 10 ---
wilderness. Wherefore, we bless thy repose, O venerable Germanus. Entreat Christ 
God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy 
memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
All of us, the generations of mankind, bless thee who without seed hast given birth 
unto God in the flesh. Entreat thy Son, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those 
who with faith worship thy most holy birthgiving.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Watering thy soul with torrents of tears, thou didst render it fruitful and fertile for 
the cultivation of every virtue; wherefore, thou wast a guide to salvation for many.  
Even though thou didst dwell in the stillness of the wilderness with the blessed 
Sabbatius, yet didst thou converse solitarily there with God alone in unceasing prayer, 
O venerable one.  
Possessed of an intelligence made luminous by the purity of thy life, thou didst 
easily repel the assaults of the wicked demons, setting at naught all their machinations 
and snares.  
Theotokion: The choir of the righteous and the full assembly of the faithful bless 
thee, O most pure one, for in a manner past understanding and all telling thou hast 
given birth unto the Word of God.  
ODE V  
Irmos: My spirit riseth early unto Thee, O God, * Who wast ineffably begotten 
of the Father * and hast lifted up for our sake * the horn of salvation.  
While in the flesh thou didst emulate the way of life of the incorporeal beings, O 
blessed Germanus; wherefore, thou hast received from God victory over the 
incorporeal foe and a crown of glory.  
Loving voluntary poverty, without acquiring possessions thou didst live a life 
devoid of grief, amassing for thyself in heaven treasures which cannot be taken away, 
as saith the Gospels.  
Cleansing thyself of every passion of flesh and soul, thou didst become a 
receptacle of the most holy Spirit, by Whom thou wast enriched with spiritual gifts.  
Theotokion: Thee have we acquired as our hope of salvation, O Mother of God, 
and an invincible weapon against enemies, visible and invisible.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Thou didst weep and wast downcast over thy parting with thy companion, the 
blessed father Sabbatius, finding that he was no longer among the living upon thy 
return to the island from thy journey.  
Thou wast filled with joy and gladness when, after parting with Sabbatius, thou 
didst find the venerable Zosimas, with whom thou didst return to the island, directed 
by the providence of God.  
The words which the angel spake to the fisherman’s wife, that it was not meet for 
women to dwell on that island, thou didst recount to Zosimas, who beheld a 
wondrous church in the air.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, entreat God, to Whom thou hast given birth in the 
flesh, in that He is the Lover of mankind, that He take pity upon the sinful people.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Desiring that which is above, * thou didst hate all that draweth mankind down; * 
and, forsaking thy homeland, * thou didst depart to a deserted coast * where, 
withdrawing to an island of the sea, * thou didst labor for the Lord for many years. * 
Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, * we cry out to thee with love: ** Rejoice, O 
divinely wise Germanus our father!  
Ikos: Preparing thyself as a dwelling-place for the Holy Spirit, thou wast adorned 
by Him with all manner of divine beauties, and wast shown to be a guide for monks, 
O father, teaching thy children by good works. Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, 
we cry out to thee such things as these: Rejoice, O heavenly adornment of the 
divinely chosen island of Solovki! Rejoice, divine ornament of the monastic 
habitations! Rejoice, lover of the life of the wilderness! Rejoice, thou who didst bring 
the venerable Sabbatius to the island of Solovki and abide with him there! Rejoice, 
thou who didst serve the venerable Zosimas in the founding of a monastic house! 
Rejoice, thou whom we bless with those venerable fathers! Rejoice, thou who art 
glorified by Christ God with all the saints in the heavens! Rejoice, O divinely wise 
Germanus our father!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst prefer naught that is of earth to that which is heavenly, and wast tried 
like gold in the crucible, laboring in monastic tasks, and ever crying aloud: O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Cleaving unto the Lord with unceasing prayer, thou didst serve Him alone; and 
thou didst pass over from these earthly vales to the mansions of heaven by thy 
blessed repose, joyfully chanting: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thy tomb, O venerable one, hath been revealed to be full of healing by the grace 
of Christ; and hastening to it with faith and receiving healing, we cry aloud to Him 
Who glorifieth His favored ones: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: Blessed is the Fruit of thy blessed womb, Whom the heavenly hosts 
and the assemblies of the venerable bless, and Who hath delivered us from the 
ancient curse, O blessed one.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Seated upon the throne of glory, * and unceasingly glorified as God, * 
O ye angels and heavens bless, ** hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!. 
Having struggled well upon the earth and vanquished all the actions of the enemy, 
thou wast crowned with glory in heaven, and didst join the choir of the saints.  
  
The incorruption of thy relics, O venerable one, showeth that thou hast found 
grace with God, and hast an inheritance with the saints and a place in the choirs of 
the angels.  
The grace of miracles hath been given thee after death, as to one enriched by all 
the virtues during thy lifetime; and thou pourest out healings upon those who bless 
thee with faith.  
Theotokion: Save me, O Mother of God, who hast revealed the Author of 
salvation to the world, delivering me from the threefold waves of the passions and 
from every sorrow, that I may glorify thee throughout the ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, * Who hath exalted the horn of 
salvation on our behalf * in the house of His child David, * wherein the 
Dayspring from on high hath visited us, * and guided us on the path of peace.  
Appearing to a pious priest in thy homeland, thou didst command him to paint 
thine image and to compose hymnody to thee; and this he did with all diligence, for 
thy praise, and unto the glory of Christ God, Who glorifieth His favored ones.  
Thine icon, whereon thou wast depicted with the venerable fathers Zosimas and 
Sabbatius, was shown to be miraculous, that thy holiness might be made manifest, 
and that thy memory may be honored with that of the saints.  
Even though thou didst not repose in the place of thy struggles, O venerable 
father, yet were thy precious relics translated to thy monastery, where, in the temple 
erected to thy name, they rest in sanctity.  
Theotokion: O wonder surpassing all the wonders of old! For the Virgin, without 
knowing a man, received in her womb Him Who by His word created all things, and 
gave birth unto Him without suffering corruption.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one: 
O venerable Germanus, thou hast truly been shown to be a guiding star for our 
blessed fathers Zosimas and Sabbatius, and with them a multitude of monks, leading 
them to the tranquil harbor of the island of Solovki, with the splendor of thy life 
illumining the ways of life in the wilderness for us who honor thy holy memory. 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, we cry unto thee, O blessed Virgin Theotokos, for through thee have we 
come to share in everlasting joy! For thou hast given birth unto the hypostatic Life, 
for the salvation of all who hymn thee.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
O venerable Germanus, from childhood thou didst desire to cleave unto God, and 
accounting all the beautiful things of this world as but dung, thou madest thine abode 
in the wilderness, where, laboring long in great patience, thou didst reach the resting-
place of life eternal. Wherefore, we beseech thee: Entreat Christ God, that He save 
our souls, in that He is full of loving-kindness! (Twice)  
O divinely wise father Germanus, taking thy cross upon thy shoulder from thy 
youth, thou didst follow after Christ with unwavering intent; and, full of all the 
virtues, thou didst truly become a model for monks. Wherefore, thou art resplendent 
with miracles, even after thy death, God glorifying thee. Him do thou entreat, we pray 
thee, that He save our souls, in that He is full of loving-kindness.  
O God-bearing father Germanus, as a vessel chosen by God from thine earliest 
infancy, thou wast shown to be full of the grace of the Holy Spirit, and even after 
death pourest forth healings, receiving authority over unclean spirits, to expel them 
from all. Free us also from their tyranny, praying earnestly unto the Lord, that He 
save our souls, in that He is full of loving-kindness.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Come, ye assemblies of monks, and with hymns let us crown our ever-memorable 
father. For he hath been shown to be a fruitful olive tree in the house of God, 
pouring forth the oil of healing upon those suffering from divers ailments; like a 
palm-tree he hath flourished in the incorruption of his relics; like a cedar of Lebanon, 
watered by the streams of his tears, he hath increased the number of his children in 
the wilderness; and like a lily hath he blossomed through the grace of Christ our God.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
All my hope do I set on thee, O Mother of God; keep me under thy protection.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI.  
Who can recount thy struggles and labors, O father Germanus? For, having 
entered the groves of the wilderness, thou didst labor day and night, laying waste to 
thy body with fasting and vigils. (Twice) 
By prayer and the endurance of hardships thou didst uproot the passions of the 
soul, and by abstinence and the avoidance of evils thou didst destroy all carnal desires, 
O blessed one.  
The warfare of the demons was unable to vanquish thee in thy good volition, for 
with goodly hope and mighty endurance thou didst set all their machinations at 
naught.  
Thou didst weep and wast downcast over thy parting with thy companion, the 
blessed father Sabbatius, finding that he was no longer among the living upon thy 
return to the island from thy journey.  
Thou wast filled with joy and gladness when, after parting with Sabbatius, thou 
didst find the venerable Zosimas, with whom thou didst return to the island, directed 
by the providence of God.  
The words which the angel spake to the fisherman’s wife, that it was not meet for 
women to dwell on that island, thou didst recount to Zosimas, who beheld a 
wondrous church in the air.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, entreat God, to Whom thou hast given birth in the 
flesh, in that He is the Lover of mankind, that He take pity upon the sinful people.  
 Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Aflame with spiritual desire from thy youth, O venerable Germanus, * thou didst 
follow the narrow path of life unto Christ, * and, having made thine abode on a 
desert island of the sea, as in a calm harbor, * thou didst dwell thereon for many years 
in asceticism; * and there thou didst have as thy companions the blessed fathers 
Zosimas and Sabbatius. ** With them entreat Christ God on behalf of us who honor 
thy holy memory with love.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Desiring that which is above, * thou didst hate all that draweth mankind down; * 
and, forsaking thy homeland, * thou didst depart to a deserted coast * where, 
withdrawing to an island of the sea, * thou didst labor for the Lord for many years. * 
Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, * we cry out to thee with love: ** Rejoice, O 
divinely wise Germanus our father!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  

--- PAGE 15 ---
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, § 213 (GAL 5: 22-6: 2) 
Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And those who 
are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the 
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye who are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (LK. 6: 17-23)  
At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre 
and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who 
were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude 
sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He 
lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the 
kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye 
that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when 
they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your 
name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, 
behold, your reward is great in heaven. 
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
