--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 30th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR JOHN THE WARRIOR 
AT VESPERS 
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy martyr: 4 in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
When on earth thou wast a soldier of a corrupt king, * thou wast a warrior faithful 
to God, O John, * and then, receiving help from Christ the King, * aiding the martyrs 
of Christ * thou didst vanquish the enemy, visible and invisible; * and now thou 
joinest chorus with the angelic hosts and the armies on high. * Wherefore, O blessed 
passion-bearer, * pray thou to the Savior of us all, ** that He save our souls. (Twice)  
Desiring to leave the earthly army, * thou didst take care * to please Christ the 
King of heaven; * for, having armed thyself * with faith in Him, * thou wast found to 
be a mighty warrior, O John, * protecting the martyrs of Christ * from the ungodly 
tyrant ** by thy prayers to God, O blessed one.  
When by faith in Christ and by prayer * thou didst desire to obtain the portion of 
the righteous, * thou didst then aid those persecuted for their faith in Christ. * 
Therefore, Christ the Lord * hath enriched thee with gifts of miracles; * for unto 
those who call upon thee amid divers tribulations * thou showest thyself to be a 
speedy helper. * Wherefore, pray thou unto God ** on behalf of us who observe thy 
most honored memorial.  
And 4 Stichera, in the same tone: 
Spec. Mel.: “With what crowns of praise ...”: 
Come, ye who love what is holy, * let us all be glad in spirit and hold festival, * 
glorifying Christ our God, * for today He hath prepared a most abundant banquet for 
us, * the memorial of the glorious martyr and valiant warrior John, * a helper for all 
amid tribulations, * denouncer of evil deeds * and revealer of lost and hidden things 
** for those who call upon his assistance. (Twice)  
O most blessed and right victorious John, * mighty warrior of our God, the 
Creator of all, * as one chosen by God * thou didst preserve thy nobility of soul; * 
and having disdained the vanity and deceptions of the world, * thou didst lovingly 
show sympathy for those in torment. * And now thou abidest sweetly with Christ in 
the heavens, * from whence look thou down upon and preserve all who call upon 
thee ** in time of battle and all manner of misfortunes.  
What shall we offer unto Thee, O God our Creator? * What manner of thanks 
shall we give Thee? * For Thou hast given Thy people true grace, * the holy John, a 
pious warrior and bestower of alms, * a helper of soldiers in battle, * a consoler of 
sorrows, * who doth pray fervently to Thee for our salvation. * Wherefore, for the 
sake of Thy mercy, ** save us, O Master and Lover of mankind!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Having struggled zealously for Christ, O John, with the Christian martyrs, helping 
Christians in the pious Faith, thou wast an exemplary soldier of thy Master. Feeding 
the needy and preparing abundant alms for the poor, thou didst reject the commands 
of the iniquitous Emperor Julian; and, destroying the vessels of His tyranny, thou 
wast shown to be a victor excellent in thine Orthodoxy. Wherefore, thou hast passed 
over to the mansions of heaven, and there dost most joyously behold Christ, Who 
hath crowned thee with an imperishable crown. Him do thou unceasingly entreat, O 
most blessed one, that those who honor thee be deemed worthy of everlasting 
blessedness.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in the same tone: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons: 
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH 
Thus saith the Lord: all the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be 
gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things 
from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let 
them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith 
the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, 
and understand that I am He; before Me there was no other God, and after Me there 
shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have 
saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My 
witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that 
can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the 
Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 

--- PAGE 3 ---
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the grey hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his 
soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds, that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple; 
 And these Stichera of the martyr, in Tone VIII: 
O all-praised John, martyr of Christ, thou didst count as naught a violent death, 
and the assaults of the wicked and tyrannical emperor, having right boldly arrayed 
thyself for combat with manly wisdom. Wherefore, crowned with the glory of victory, 
thou hast been numbered among all the righteous; and, praising thee with them, we 
call thee blessed.  
O most blessed John, martyr of Christ, seeing the martyrs of Christ led to the 
slaughter, thou didst aid them with fraternal love. For, exhorting them to suffer even 
to the shedding of their blood and unto death, thou didst say: “Our suffering here is 
naught compared to the reward which awaiteth us in the heavens!” And thou didst 
thyself strive to suffer with them for the sake of thy Creator’s love. Wherefore, having 
received the gift of miracles from Christ God, thou helpest those who suffer amid 
divers trials, rescuing from cruel misfortunes those who glorify the Lord and honor 
thy sacred sufferings with love.  
O invincible John, martyr of the Lord, bearing the name which signifieth grace, 
thou bestowest grace and mercy upon those who with faith call upon thee with 
prayer, bringing joy to the divinely wise people who with faith call upon thee for aid 
amid their trials and who honor thy memory with sacred joy. Wherefore, entreat 
Christ, that He save us from all misfortunes, in that He is omnipotent.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Who doth not marvel, who doth not render glory, who doth not hymn the 
miracles of John, the glorious warrior of Christ, who is wise in the faith? For even 
after his repose, he bestoweth a great many healings upon all who diligently have 
recourse unto him. For his precious and holy relics pour forth grace, abundantly 
fulfilling profitable requests. Wherefore, we piously cry out to him: Unceasingly 
beseech the Lord, that He save our Orthodox hierarchs and all who with faith have 
recourse to thy holy temple and ask thy fervent intercession before God: for thee do 
we have as an earnest mediator and intercessor for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to thee with 
faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of our souls! 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
The cruel tyrant * gave thy holy body over to be executed * by multifarious 
tortures; * yet thou, O John of godly mind, * didst not deny Christ, * nor didst thou 
sacrifice to idols, * but valiantly endured all, * trusting in the future reward ** of 
never-ending delight in the Lord.  
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
By thy virtuous life * thou didst spurn the world, * O wonder-worker John, * and, 
showing great loving-kindness for Christians * in the command of thine army, * thou 
didst set them at liberty. * And having thereafter suffered thyself for Christ God * in 
the Orthodox Faith, ** thou didst receive the inheritance of eternal blessedness.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, * in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
Thy relics, O glorious one, * pour forth the gift of healings * upon those who 
honor thee diligently, * drowning the passions * and curing ailments, O John; * 
putting hordes of wicked demons to flight, * and watering the hearts of the faithful, * 
producing the divine fruits of the virtues ** and the understanding of piety.  
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Come, ye Christ-loving people, and with understanding let us contemplate the 
good fight and generous courage attained upon the right path; for John, who is newly 
crowned, the great intercessor and martyr, crieth thus to the iniquitous Julian, an 
emperor loathsome to God: “Thou canst not lure me with thy words of evil or by the 
luxury of this vain world, nor shalt thou separate me from the love of my God, the 
Creator of all! For, lo! I place my trust in Him, and on Him do I set all my desire, that 
I may become an heir to His heavenly kingdom!” Wherefore, glorifying Christ the 
King, let us praise the martyr, and make earnest entreaty on this the day of his 
commemoration: O holy John, pray thou continually, that peace be granted to the 
world and great mercy to our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief. 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
O wonder-worker John, * thou hast been shown to be a right faithful servant and 
warrior of God, the supremely good King; * for, having manfully suffered for the 
Faith * and finished thy course in blessedness, * in the heavens thou dost most 
splendidly behold the Lord and Creator of all, * and helpest those who suffer amid all 
manner of trials. * Thou dost strengthen soldiers in battle, * rescuing them from 
capture by the enemy, * from wounds, sudden death and cruel misfortunes. * 
Wherefore, entreat Christ the Master, O ever-memorable one, * that He deal 
mercifully with us in every circumstance, * that He lead us not into temptations, ** 
but save our souls, in that He is the Lover of mankind.  
Glory ..., another Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Loving the blessedness of the Gospel, O divinely wise John, * thou didst honor 
purity with virginity of heart; * wherefore, spurning the vanity of this world, thou 
didst hasten to behold God, * Who hath glorified thee with miracles in the healing of 
those who suffer divers ailments. * Therefore, we beseech thee: Entreat Christ God, * 
that He grant us deliverance from all tribulations, ** that we may receive the kingdom 
of heaven.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
But if a vigil be celebrated, we chant the first Troparion, (Twice): 
and “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice”, (Once) 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord “, the Troparion of the holy martyr in Tone VIII: 
O wonder-worker John, * thou hast been shown to be a right faithful servant and 
warrior of God, * the supremely good King; * for, having manfully suffered for the 
Faith * and finished thy course in blessedness, * in the heavens thou dost most 
splendidly behold the Lord and Creator of all, * and helpest those who suffer amid all 
manner of trials. * Thou dost strengthen soldiers in battle, * rescuing them from 
capture by the enemy, * from wounds, sudden death and cruel misfortunes. * 
Wherefore, entreat Christ the Master, O ever-memorable one, * that He deal 
mercifully with us in every circumstance, * that He lead us not into temptations, ** 
but save our souls, in that He is the Lover of mankind. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Having beheld the sufferings of the honored martyrs, and kissed their fetters, thou 
didst ascend the heights of witness, O most wondrous one; and setting all thy desire 
on Christ, thou didst become a merciful helper for all, assisting the suffering and 
nurturing the hungry, until thou didst commit thy soul into the hands of the Lord, O 
much-suffering John. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Pleasing the immortal King of the ages, thou didst not sacrifice to graven images, 
but didst spurn all the wicked counsels of the iniquitous emperor, O glorious one. 
Wherefore, thou didst offer thyself as a sacrifice unto the Word Who was sacrificed; 
for which cause thou pourest forth streams of miracles upon those who suffer amid 
trials, O merciful intercessor who prayest to God, O great John, soldier of the King, 
Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, that He grant remission of sins unto those 
who honor thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O undefiled, blameless and all-immaculate Lady, thou cloud of the noetic Sun and 
golden candle-stand of the light of God: with the radiance of dispassion illumine my 
soul, which hath grown dim through the blindness of the passions, I pray; with 
torrents of compunction enlighten my polluted heart, and with tears of repentance 
cleanse me of the mire of my evil deeds, that with love I may cry out to thee: O Ever-
virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me forgiveness of my 
transgressions; for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope. 
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy passion-bearer 
John, and we reverence thine honored sufferings, which thou didst endure for 
Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Our God is refuge and strength. A helper in afflictions which mightily befall 
us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
We cry out to thee, O John, as to a valiant athlete, and mighty soldier of Christ, the 
King of all: Rejoice, adornment and splendor of martyrs! Rejoice, radiant star of the 
Church and rampart and haven for those who have recourse unto thee, O glorious 
great-martyr John the warrior! Through thy supplications save those who hymn thee 
from all harm by the alien and deliver them from cruel afflictions. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
We, thy sinful servants, falling down cry out to thee with compunction, as to the 
Queen surpassing the hosts of heaven, the Mother of Christ our God, the mighty 
helper of our race: O Mary Theotokos, Virgin, and Lady, guide us to the will of the 
Lord, the King of heaven all the days of our lives, and preserve us from all trials and 
afflictions of body and soul, entrusting us not to the aid of men; and have mercy on 
us, O all-hymned one.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, * 
and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God 
they shall blossom forth. 
 
Let every breath ..., 
  

--- PAGE 8 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN, §51 (JN 15:9-16) 
The Lord said to His disciples: “As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you: 
continue ye in my love. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even 
as I have kept my Father’s commandments, and abide in his love. These things have I 
spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full. 
This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you. Greater 
love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Ye are my 
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth I call you not servants; for 
the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all 
things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you. Ye have not 
chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring 
forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the 
Father in my name, he may give it you.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Today, the universal festival of the passion-bearer calleth us together. Come, ye 
who love God, let us with splendor celebrate his memory, saying: Rejoice, O great-
martyr John, invincible warrior of the King of heaven, for thou didst manfully spurn 
the mindless command of the lawless Emperor Julian the idolater! Rejoice, O blessed 
one, helper of the spiritual athletes of Christ, for thou didst make them steadfast in 
the Orthodox Faith during persecution by the iniquitous, and with love didst suffer 
with them! Wherefore, Christ hath enriched thee with gifts of miracles. Entreat, then, 
the supremely good God, that He save our souls.  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos, and two canons of the holy martyr, with 8 Troparia. 
ODE I 
Canon I of the holy martyr, in Tone II 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Thy splendid feast doth joyfully summon us to a spiritual banquet, O holy John; 
and thereat thou dost honor with gifts all who have recourse to thee, fulfilling our 
profitable requests.  
Having fought the good fight on earth, O most blessed John, protecting the 
martyrs of Christ from the evil tyrant, thou hast received heavenly life from Christ 
God; wherefore, grant us help amid misfortunes.  
Having spurned the tyranny of the iniquitous emperor as a true soldier, O divinely 
wise one, and distributed thy wealth to the poor for Christ’s sake, thou didst receive 
the gift of miracles from God; and reproving wicked men, thou didst give aid to the 
pious.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: In the excess of His love for mankind, the incorporeal Word became 
incarnate of thee in a godly manner, O most pure Virgin. Him do thou entreat, O 
Lady, that He grant us everlasting blessedness.  
Canon II of the holy martyr, in Tone I 
Irmos: I shall exalt Thee, O God my Savior, * for Thou hast arisen from the 
dead, * trampling down death.  
O Jesus our Savior, grant us the disposition to thank Thee for all things, and to 
praise John, Thy favored one.  
O glorious spiritual athlete John, with a divinely wise mind thou didst do battle for 
God, the Creator of all; wherefore, thou hast conquered all our enemies.  
O all-praised warrior, who hast been deemed worthy to behold the incarnate God, 
we beseech thee: By thine entreaties deliver us from all misfortunes.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mary, divinely joyous palace of the pre-eternal Word, in thy 
tender compassion make our hearts ever glad in God, even in the midst of 
tribulations.  
ODE III  
Canon I 
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
Having acquired a sure faith with the martyrs, and become a soldier of Christ 
Jesus, O courageous one, thou wast enriched with the virtues. Wherefore, ever grant 
goodly enlightenment unto those who celebrate thine honored memory.  
Thou hast revealed thyself to be an invisible persecutor of those who wickedly 
work evil, O martyr of Christ, exposing thefts which are done in secret. For thou hast 
received from God the power to do for everyone all things which are conducive to 
salvation.  
Possessed of a heart like an immovable pillar, O most honored John, thou didst 
show love for the martyrs of Christ, undaunted by the cruelty of the emperor. 
Wherefore, help us, that we be rendered steadfast in the love of the Lord.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, Mother of Jesus the Lord, entreat Him with all the 
saints, that He deliver us from all misfortunes and sorrows, that all who do evil to thy 
servants may be put to shame; and grant that we may ever praise thee and thy Son.  
Canon II 
Irmos: O Lord and Master, Who hast by Thy word * made steadfast the whole 
world, * that I not be shaken, establish our mind in the fear of Thee.  
Falling down before Thee, our God and Creator, in every evil circumstance, we 
pray: Through the entreaties of Thy martyr establish us in Thy will and in love.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
With steadfast mind thou didst rely on the uprightness of the knowledge of God, 
O divinely blessed John; wherefore, make our souls steadfast, that we may set our 
hope in the Lord in all things.  
Having spurned the lust of thy flesh, the lust of thine eyes and the pride of life, O 
martyr, thou wast established in the love of Jesus. Help us also to attain this.  
Theotokion: O most blessed Lady who hast given birth unto Christ Who 
establisheth all things: ever strengthen us, that we may remain in His providence.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Ever pleasing the King of heaven and Creator of the ages, thou didst spurn the 
malicious and abominable counsels of the lawless tyrant Julian, O glorious one, 
refusing to offer sacrifice unto inanimate idols; and thus thou didst commit thy soul 
into the hands of the Lord God. Him do thou beseech, O holy John, that He grant 
remission of sins unto us who honor thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
In Thee, O Full of grace, * doth all creation rejoice, * the ranks of Angels and the 
race of mankind; * O all-hallowed Temple and spiritual Paradise, * boast of Virgins. * 
For from thee God became incarnate * and He who is our God before the ages 
became a child. * He hath made thy womb a throne and rendered it wider than the 
heavens. * In thee, O Full of grace, doth all creation rejoice; ** glory be to thee. 
ODE IV 
Canon I 
Irmos: Thou hast come forth from the Virgin, not as a mediator, nor as an 
angel, but Thyself, incarnate, O Lord, and hast saved me, the whole man. 
Wherefore, I cry unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, a Lord!  
Thou didst emulate Christ God, Who of His own will was crucified on the Tree, O 
most honored one, crucifying thyself with Him by all manner of abstinence, prayer, 
almsgiving and many benefactions.  
Lo! even to thy death thou didst humble thyself, O martyr John; for thy holy relics 
were hidden at a place where strangers were buried. Wherefore, the Lord hath 
glorified thee throughout all the world.  
Having command of the corruptible army of the Emperor Julian the apostate, 
thou wast dispatched to put Christian martyrs to death; yet, preserving them, O 
blessed one, thou didst keep them in the Faith, that they might chant: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Doubt of my salvation assaileth me, O most pure one, because of the 
evils which surround me; wherefore, quickly deliver me from them, granting me 
goodly knowledge, for to thee alone have I fled, O Mother of God.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Canon II 
Irmos: I have understood Thy dispensation, * O Almighty one, * and have 
glorified Thee with fear, O Savior.  
Great is Thy dispensation in all the world, O Lord, to Whom we ardently commit 
ourselves, praying to Thee with the saints.  
Having finished the good fight in suffering, O martyr, help us with goodly 
understanding to glorify the Lord in fear.  
Casting aside all fear of tyrants, thou didst render brotherly assistance to the 
people of God in the time of persecution, O John. Drive from us the fear of dangers.  
Theotokion: Thou wast deemed worthy to be the Queen and Mother of the 
almighty King. Grant that we may glorify His merciful dispensation toward us.  
ODE V  
Canon I 
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Experiencing the divine mysteries in understanding, O John, thou didst proclaim 
the nativity of God, saying in the presence of all: “I know none other God than the 
Creator of all!”  
“Love the Lord Who loveth you!” thou didst say to the suffering martyrs, O 
passion-bearer; made steadfast in His love, thou wast enriched with miracles, healing 
many sicknesses.  
For the sake of Christ’s glory thou didst consider the glory of this world to be as 
naught, O divinely wise warrior; wherefore, having completed thy contest and been 
deemed worthy of divine glory, pray that we also receive it.  
Theotokion: Glorifying thy tender compassion toward us, O Lady, we entreat thee: 
Free us from all tribulations, O Mary, and help us to rise early unto God, that we may 
be deemed worthy of everlasting blessedness.  
Canon II 
Irmos: O Lord, Who from the night of ignorance * hath illumined the ends of 
the earth, * illumine me with the dawning of Thy love for mankind.  
O Master Who lovest mankind, enlighten us on the day when Thy spiritual athlete 
is commemorated in prayer, that with reverence we may rise early unto Thee.  
Thou wast enlightened with God-given miracles, O martyr John; wherefore, rescue 
those who glorify thee from evil people, from loss and from pain.  
Valiantly conquering all the soul-destroying enemies with the luminous dawn, draw 
us out of the darkness of grievous passions into the light of joy.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin who hast given birth to God in our flesh, 
extending thy mercy unto all, entreat Him, that we be illumined with heavenly light.  
ODE VI  
Canon I 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Strengthened by the power of God, O John, thou glory of the martyrs, thou didst 
pay no heed to the threats of the impious; and, gazing joyously now upon God, 
deliver us from evils.  
With supplications, fasting and all manner of abstinence in chastity, O most 
honored one, thou didst please God. Looking down from on high, free us from 
tribulations.  
Thou grantest the petitions of those who honor thee with faith, O blessed one, 
denouncing evil people, and praying to God for the penitent.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos who hast given birth for us to Christ the Physician, heal 
thou the sufferings of our souls and bodies, and put to shame the evil machinations 
of the enemy by thy tender compassion.  
Canon II 
Irmos: With Jonah I cry to Thee, O Lord, * praying with a voice of praise: * 
Lead my life up from corruption!  
We will not cease to beseech Thee, the most compassionate Lord, moving Thy 
faithful warrior to pray with us: Rescuing us from sin, make us to dwell in heavenly 
life.  
Thou dost praise God in the highest, O holy John, having served Him faithfully 
here on earth; wherefore, that hast drawn nigh also unto us who praise thee, for our 
salvation,  
Having endured sufferings for Christ’s sake, O all-praised one, thou hast received 
most joyful blessedness; wherefore, accept thou our entreaties, and lead us into joy.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, who hast saved the world from pernicious 
corruption, deliver us from every evil circumstance.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone VI: 
Let us right worthily praise John the warrior with hymns, * the pious soldier of 
Christ, * who with divine wisdom * vanquished enemies, spiritual and corporeal; * for 
working wonders, he bestoweth abundant healings * upon suffering people, * and he 
entreateth the Lord God * to save the Orthodox faithful, ** from all misfortunes.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Ikos: Who can recount thy struggles and sufferings for thy faith in the Lord Jesus? 
With what praises can we crown thee for thy courageous stand in the law of the Lord 
and true piety? For, armed with chastity and all manner of good works, thou didst 
trample underfoot all the wiles of the soul-destroying foe; and hating wealth, glory 
and harmful lust, thou didst love poverty and affliction for Christ’s sake, helping the 
suffering amid their tribulations. Wherefore, having made thine abode in the 
tabernacles of heaven, thou hast been enriched with the gifts of most glorious 
miracles. Therefore, O blessed one, watch over those who have recourse unto thee, 
rendering them aid, and saving the Orthodox from all misfortunes.  
ODE VII  
Canon I 
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Abrogating the ungodly command of the iniquitous tyrant, O passion-bearer John, 
thou wast shown to be a pious warrior of the almighty King; and, bedewed with 
grace, thou didst chant with the people of God: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
The sweet, great and joyful festival which the chaste John, the most valiant of 
martyrs, hath organized, hath now illumined the people of the Lord; for he poureth 
forth healings upon those who pray to the Lord with faith and cry aloud: O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
As thou hast boldness before the Master of all, O holy John, in that thou art His 
dear favorite, intercede before Him for us in the midst of our perils, and help us to 
find deliverance from sins, that with godly mind we may chant: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: A most glorious mystery hath been accomplished in thee, O Mother 
of God; for without seed thou didst conceive thy Son Who hast abolished the burden 
of our sins. Wherefore, placing our hope in thee and looking to thy help, we cry out 
with fervor: Blessed art thou, O Virgin Lady! 
 Canon II 
Irmos: All Thy works are true, * and Thy paths are straight, * O God of our 
fathers.  
O John, physician who taketh no fee, by thy supplications heal the infirmities and 
sufferings of the souls and bodies of those who cry out to the Lord: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst set about doing the work of every virtue, and offered thyself to the 
Creator of all as a living sacrifice, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Having pleased the supremely good God in purity, with prayer and fasting, O 
martyr, grant that we may cry out in a God-pleasing manner: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Virgin who hast given birth to Christ, the way and 
the truth, direct us to the life on high, to the God of our fathers.  
ODE VIII  
Canon I 
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Seeking the highest, thou didst hate delusion on earth, O blessed of God. 
Wherefore, united spiritually in love with the martyrs of Christ, thou didst boldly 
preach Jesus, the God-man, of Whom thou didst cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
Providing in abundance what was needed, O John of pious mind, thou wast a 
nurturer of the poor; and watching over us who now have recourse unto thee, fulfill 
our requests, that we may cry out with joy: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Seeing thy zeal and thy perfect faith, O John, God Who beholdeth all things 
glorified thee with everlasting glory. Him do thou expediently entreat, that He take 
pity upon us who chant with reverent mind: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: O Mary, Bride of God, we flee unto thee and, falling down before 
thee, we pray: Look upon our sorrow and the affliction wrought upon us by our 
enemies, O Lady, and render peaceful the life of us all, in that thou hast given birth to 
the Lord, Whom we bless throughout the ages.  
Canon II 
Irmos: Jesus of Nazareth, the King of glory * and the Vanquisher of death, * 
exalt ye supremely throughout all ages!  
O King of heaven, Who hast granted victory over the power of the enemy to thy 
holy martyr, grant that, delivered from all want, we also may glorify thee throughout 
all ages.  
Joyfully, O blessed one, thou hast gazed upon the King and Lord in the highest. 
Pray thou, that with a pure heart we may supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
O warrior who reignest with Christ, vanquish all barbarians and destroy the 
counsels wickedly devised against us, that we may supremely exalt the Lord 
throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: O almighty Queen, maternally entreat God the King, that we may 
supremely exalt Him in every place, and hymn thee the Sovereign Lady throughout all 
ages.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE IX  
Canon I 
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Thou wast revealed to be a good ally of the people of God, O most glorious one, 
protecting the persecuted, and even now aiding the faithful with miracles; wherefore, 
we magnify Christ God at the memorial of thy benefactions.  
Thy wonders are proclaimed throughout all the world, O most blessed John; 
wherefore, assembling today, we send up glory to Christ Who hath glorified thee.  
Hearken today unto us who praise thee and ask thy help, O martyr of Christ, and 
cease not to guide us toward those things which are profitable, showing thyself to be 
a most fervent intercessor and mediator before our God.  
Thou hast shown thyself to be an excellent physician of the hearts of mortals, 
helping all the pious with miracles, O John; wherefore, hymning thee, we magnify 
Christ.  
Theotokion: We never cease to hymn thee, O Virgin, our helper, protection, 
speedy aid and unashamed intercessor. Preserve thy servants from all afflictions, and 
ever free us from the machinations of the evil one.  
Canon II 
Irmos: The incorporeal minister stood before her who is full of grace, * saying 
the Lord is with thee, * whom we magnify.  
O Lord of hosts, be Thou with us, strengthening our civil authorities, our 
hierarchs and all Thy people, and saving them by the supplications of Thy saint, that 
we may magnify Thee and the Theotokos piously and without ceasing.  
Pray thou to God in Trinity, O holy John, that He deem those worthy, who 
believe on His name with a proper understanding, to ever magnify Him as the 
Creator of all.  
By thine intercessions, O favorite of the Lord, free from grief those who celebrate 
thy memory, and give us joy to drink, that we may magnify the Lord and the Mother 
of God.  
Theotokion: O Mary full of grace, regard all thy servants with mercy, that in joy we 
may magnify thee without ceasing.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples ...”: 
O holy crown-bearer, standing before the throne of Christ with the angels, and 
filled with light therefrom, win peace for the world by thy supplications, O spiritual 
athlete, and salvation for us who piously celebrate thy memory and have recourse to 
thee amid tribulations, O spiritually rich John.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Glory ..., Another Exapostilarion: 
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”: 
By knowing thyself, thou didst come to know God, the all-creating Cause, in 
Whom thou didst believe; and, having confessed Him, thou dost illumine the world 
with miracles, O divinely blessed John.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Desiring to recall the perishing world out of corruption, O Theotokos, the Lord 
made His abode within thy womb, as thou didst know. Wherefore, having obtained 
salvation, we all cry out to thee: O most hymned Virgin who hast given birth to the 
Joy of the whole world, fill us with joy, ever preserving us from the evils committed 
by the enemy.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Beholding the sufferings * of the right victorious martyrs, * full of divine boldness 
* thou didst not fear * the tyrannical and ungodly emperor, * but, approaching them 
with zeal, * thou didst strengthen them for their contest. * With them entreat the 
Lord, * O athlete John, ** that our souls be saved.  
Beholding the flesh and flowing blood * of the many saints * who were suffering * 
at the hands of the iniquitous Emperor Julian * for Christ our God, * thou didst help 
them, O blessed one, in their chains and afflictions, * consoling them with goodly 
discourse, * that they not lose their goodly hope, * but await their future reward ** 
and the joy of heavenly crowns.  
By thy patience, * O John most praised, * thou didst obtain thy reward, * 
committing thy soul * into the hands of the Master of all; * and thou hast been 
enriched by Him * with gifts of miracles. * Wherefore, beseech Christ God * on 
behalf of those who honor with love ** thy holy memory.  
A pious woman * was deemed worthy to behold thee. * And, appearing to her, O 
martyr, * thou didst command * that thy precious relics be glorified. * And she, 
receiving them with joy, * set them forth in the church with sweet fragrances. * O 
spiritual athlete, entreat Christ God, * that He grant great mercy ** unto those who 
hymn thee.  
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
Let us hasten with faith and with love give voice to festive hymns, and let us join 
chorus, rejoicing, on the present festival of the all-praised John, the warrior of Christ. 
Let kings and princes come together, let choirs of hierarchs hymn the feast of the 
spiritual athlete with song, and let the armies of the angels be glad, looking on. For we 
know him to be our intercessor amid tribulations, the true joy of the despondent, the 
enricher of the poor, the comforter of all who find themselves in grief, who fervently 
anticipateth the needs of all in every place. To him do we now say: O John, warrior of 
Christ, by thy supplications save those who with faith have recourse to thy sacred 
temple.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Let us sound the trumpet of hymnody! For the Queen of all, who is both Mother 
and Virgin, hath been revealed from on high, and with blessings crowneth those who 
hymn her. Let those who exercise dominion assemble and in hymns praise the Queen 
who hath given birth unto the King Who before was well-pleased, in His love for 
mankind, to deliver those held fast by death. Ye pastors and teachers, assembling, let 
us praise the most pure Mother of the good Shepherd, the golden lamp-stand, the 
Light-bearing cloud, her who is more spacious than the heavens, the animate ark, the 
fiery throne of the Master, the golden jar which received the Manna, the gate of the 
Word which was shut, the refuge of all Christians; and praising her with divinely 
eloquent hymns, let us say thus: O palace of the Word, vouchsafe the kingdom of 
heaven unto us, the lowly, for naught is impossible for thy mediation.  
Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the first canon of ODE III, and 4 from 
the second canon of ODE VI.  
Having acquired a sure faith with the martyrs, and become a soldier of Christ 
Jesus, O courageous one, thou wast enriched with the virtues. Wherefore, ever grant 
goodly enlightenment unto those who celebrate thine honored memory. (Twice) 
Thou hast revealed thyself to be an invisible persecutor of those who wickedly 
work evil, O martyr of Christ, exposing thefts which are done in secret. For thou hast 
received from God the power to do for everyone all things which are conducive to 
salvation.  
Possessed of a heart like an immovable pillar, O most honored John, thou didst 
show love for the martyrs of Christ, undaunted by the cruelty of the emperor. 
Wherefore, help us, that we be rendered steadfast in the love of the Lord.  
We will not cease to beseech Thee, the most compassionate Lord, moving Thy 
faithful warrior to pray with us: Rescuing us from sin, make us to dwell in heavenly 
life.  
Thou dost praise God in the highest, O holy John, having served Him faithfully 
here on earth; wherefore, that hast drawn nigh also unto us who praise thee, for our 
salvation,  
Having endured sufferings for Christ’s sake, O all-praised one, thou hast received 
most joyful blessedness; wherefore, accept thou our entreaties, and lead us into joy.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, who hast saved the world from pernicious 
corruption, deliver us from every evil circumstance.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
O wonder-worker John, * thou hast been shown to be a right faithful servant and 
warrior of God, * the supremely good King; * for, having manfully suffered for the 
Faith * and finished thy course in blessedness, * in the heavens thou dost most 
splendidly behold the Lord and Creator of all, * and helpest those who suffer amid all 
manner of trials. * Thou dost strengthen soldiers in battle, * rescuing them from 
capture by the enemy, * from wounds, sudden death and cruel misfortunes. * 
Wherefore, entreat Christ the Master, O ever-memorable one, * that He deal 
mercifully with us in every circumstance, * that He lead us not into temptations, ** 
but save our souls, in that He is the Lover of mankind.  
Another Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Loving the blessedness of the Gospel, O divinely wise John, * thou didst honor 
purity with virginity of heart; * wherefore, spurning the vanity of this world, thou 
didst hasten to behold God, * Who hath glorified thee with miracles in the healing of 
those who suffer divers ailments. * Therefore, we beseech thee: Entreat Christ God, * 
that He grant us deliverance from all tribulations, ** that we may receive the kingdom 
of heaven.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone VI: 
Let us right worthily praise John the warrior with hymns, * the pious soldier of 
Christ, * who with divine wisdom * vanquished enemies, spiritual and corporeal; * for 
working wonders, he bestoweth abundant healings * upon suffering people, * and he 
entreateth the Lord God * to save the Orthodox faithful, ** from all misfortunes.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS, §116 (Rom 15:1-7) 
Brethren: We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to 
please ourselves. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification. 
For even Christ pleased not himself; but, as it is written, The reproaches of them that 
reproached thee fell on me. For whatsoever things were written aforetime were 
written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might 
have hope. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be likeminded one 
toward another according to Christ Jesus: That ye may with one mind and one mouth 
glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore receive ye one 
another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, §69 (MT 16:24-28) 
The Lord said to His disciples: “If any man will come after me, let him deny 
himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me. For whosoever will save his life shall 
lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for My sake shall find it. For what is a man 
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man 
give in exchange for his soul? For the Son of man shall come in the glory of His 
Father with His angels; and then He shall reward every man according to his works. 
Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till 
they see the Son of man coming in His kingdom.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
