--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 31st DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY 
 FOREFEAST OF THE PROCESSION OF THE PRECIOUS & LIFE-CREATING CROSS 
OF THE LORD 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY & RIGHTEOUS EUDOCIMUS 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the Cross, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Celebrating the forefeast now, * let all human nature leap up with joy; * for the 
Tree of the Cross, the sure healing * which giveth release from all infirmities and 
sufferings * and every affliction, ** shall be set before all the faithful.  
Come, O ye faithful, let us behold the strange wonder, * how the Tree of the 
Cross * quencheth the fever of every infirmity * and extinguisheth the burning heat of 
the passions * of those who celebrate its forefeast with faith ** and honor its festival.  
O ye who are living, * celebrate the forefeast with those who have died; * for the 
Tree of life which slew Hades, * is the protector of mankind, * the resurrection of the 
dead, and cometh now to impart true grace unto all ** and healings to mankind.  
And 3 Stichera of the righteous one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O blessed and divinely wise Eudocimus, * thy pure soul, * shining with Orthodox 
understanding * and shedding the light of the radiance of the virtues, * illumineth the 
fullness of the faithful, * dispelling the darkness of the demons. * Wherefore, O right 
wondrous one, * we all honor thee with reverence ** as one who hath a share in 
never-waning grace.  
Possessed of a merciful soul, * a pure mind, a vigilant heart, * unwavering faith * 
and truly unfeigned love, * thou didst pass over from earth to the heavens * and made 
thine abode with the choirs of the righteous. * Wherefore, we all honor thee with 
sacred hymns * and piously call thee blessed, ** O blessed Eudocimus.  
Strengthened by divine doctrines, * thou didst drive carnal passions away from thy 
soul * and didst become a pure habitation of the Holy Trinity. * Wherefore, thou hast 
departed into divine delight * since God now preserveth * thy body incorrupt, O 
blessed one * by divine judgments * known to Him alone ** Who manifestly 
glorifieth thee, O Eudocimus.  
Glory ..., in Tone I: 
How can we not marvel at thy prudence? How can we fail to praise thine angelic 
life, thy chastity of thought, thy meekness, humility and inner stillness, thy constant 
almsgiving, O venerable Eudocimus? For thou wast adorned with all the virtues, O 
blessed one. Wherefore, ineffable joy and the kingdom of heaven await thee.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., in Tone I: 
The holy words of David truly reach their fulfillment today! For, lo! we publicly 
bow down before the footstool of Thy most pure feet and, placing our hope in the 
shelter of Thy pinions, we cry aloud to Thee, O Most Compassionate One: Let the 
light of Thy countenance be signed upon us! Exalt the horn of Thine Orthodox 
people in the exaltation of Thy precious Cross, O Christ, Thou greatly merciful One!  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II:  
Thou art my mighty protection, O tripartite Cross of Christ! Sanctify me with thy 
power, that I may bow down and glorify Thee with faith and love!  
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
He Who hath summoned thee from earth * to the mansions of heaven * also 
preserveth thy body incorrupt after death, O holy Eudocimus; * for thou didst live in 
chastity and a pure life, * without defiling thy flesh, O blessed one. * Wherefore, 
entreat Christ God with boldness, ** that we may be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the Cross, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people * and bless Thine inheritance, * grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Cross, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people * and bless Thine inheritance, * grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
He Who hath summoned thee from earth * to the mansions of heaven * also 
preserveth thy body incorrupt after death, O holy Eudocimus; * for thou didst live in 
chastity and a pure life, * without defiling thy flesh, O blessed one. * Wherefore, 
entreat Christ God with boldness, ** that we may be saved.  
Both now ..., the Troparion of the Cross. 
One canon from the Oktoechos; the canon of the Cross, with 4 Troparia; and the 
canon of the righteous one, with 4 Troparia. 
ODE I 
Canon of the Cross, in Tone 1: 
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
The divine Cross, which goeth before us, sheddeth the radiance of grace and 
illumineth all who bow down before it and piously hymn the crucified Christ.  
Bowing down before the Cross doth elevate those who with love and faith glorify 
as God the Lord Who suffered in the flesh and hath restored us by His divine 
Passion.  
The veneration of the Cross poureth forth the sweet fragrance of gifts: it ever 
perfumeth all who glorify Christ and dispelleth all odor from men’s souls.  
Theotokion: We who have recognized the Lord, Who was incarnate of thee and 
accepted the Cross and death, chant to Him as our Redeemer, O Bride of God, and 
call thee blessed.  
Canon of the righteous one 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
As thy life is exalted and thou hast become wholly radiant through divine ascents, 
ask thou enlightenment for me who praise the honorable struggles whereby, having 
lived rightly, thou didst receive the things for which thou didst hope, O Eudocimus.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Loving the myrrh-scented doctrines, and devoting thyself to the reading of the 
sacred Scriptures, O all-blessed one, thou didst put away foul-smelling and shameful 
pleasures and, adorned with divine gifts, wast rendered fragrant.  
Thou gavest no slumber to the eyes of thy soul, O blessed one, keeping vigilant 
watch and uniting thyself to God by standing in prayer for whole nights, unmoved by 
the needs of nature. Wherefore, thou hast attained unto the never-waning Day.  
Theotokion: We ever bless thee, O Theotokos, as the animate bridal-chamber of 
God, the censer of the noetic and light-bearing Ember, crying: Rejoice, O mediatress 
of the Savior’s resurrection!  
ODE III  
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 
The Cross which is now venerated, and which was prefigured in images, 
accomplishing wondrous things, worketh yet more marvelous wonders, sanctifying 
and enlightening those who glorify the Creator.  
The Cross of Christ, the divine trophy of battles, is venerated, and it giveth mighty 
victories to the Orthodox, vanquishing hordes of the enemy.  
The staff of the Lord, the Cross which is displayed in temples and homes, 
preserveth their foundations immovable and overcometh all the assaults and wiles of 
the adversaries.  
The Cross of the Lord, which is piously venerated, filleth those who bow down 
before it with divine grace and noetic incense, and taketh away clouds of temptations 
and sorrows.  
Theotokion: With the Tree of the Cross He Who was born of thee drew mankind 
forth from the abyss of deception, O Theotokos, and lifted up those who piously 
glorify thee to the understanding of Him.  
Canon of the righteous one 
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
Heeding the words flowing with life, thou didst drink of the waters of salvation 
which are opposed to bitter sin; and, chanting, thou didst say to God, O Eudocimus: 
There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thou didst acquire mercy like unto that of Christ, distributing thy wealth among 
those in need, and hast obtained heavenly riches in return, crying out, O Eudocimus: 
There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord!  
Cleaving unto the Creator with divine love, thou didst receive a heavenly 
inheritance and, deified by communion with Him, thou dost partake of the Tree of 
life; and chanting, O glorious one, thou didst say: There is none as holy as Thee, O 
Lord!  
Theotokion: More honorable than the angels, thou didst bear the Creator of the 
angels in thy womb and hast given birth unto Him ineffably. To Him do we all chant: 
Thou art our God, and there is none as holy as Thee, O Lord!  
Sessional Hymn of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
Inclined to good works, thou wast tried by temptations like gold in a crucible, O 
glorious Eudocimus. Wherefore, even after thy death thou dost richly pour forth 
miracles like water, and rid us of our infirmities, ever praying for us, that we may 
receive forgiveness of our sins.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the Cross, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
The sky is shown to be brighter than the sun, and by the light of the Cross it 
illumineth all things with its radiance. Wherefore, O Savior of all and Lover of 
mankind, illumine our mind and senses for its sake; for we have it as a weapon of 
peace, an invincible trophy.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
Depicted, the divine and precious Cross doth firmly expel the prince of darkness 
from the air and spreadeth beams of grace upon those who make its sign, and 
illumineth those who hymn Christ God.  
Depicted in our hearts, the divine and most precious Cross stilleth the sea of the 
passions, calmeth the threefold billows of tribulations, and bringeth all who make the 
sign thereof with love, to the tranquility of righteousness.  
Emitting grace like a burning ember, the precious Cross consumeth all the works 
of the enemy and dispelleth his power; and it relieveth many in the Faith who praise 
and lovingly hymn Christ Who was crucified thereon. 
  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Venerated with faith, the most precious and divine Cross poureth forth noetic 
streams of spiritual gifts and waters of healing; and it giveth drink without ceasing to 
those who bow down before it and honor it.  
Theotokion: Enlightened by the sufferings of thy Son and acknowledging Him as 
the Benefactor of all, with love we glorify thee as our Queen and Lady, O most holy 
and pure one.  
Canon of the righteous one 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Preserving the teachings of the fathers unadulterated, with Orthodox 
understanding, from thine infancy thou didst have an undefiled life and a merciful 
demeanor, O right wondrous one.  
Neither the tumult of the world, nor the possession of authority, nor passing glory 
spoiled thy desire for God, O Eudocimus; but in thy divine activities thou wast truly 
well pleased to desire Him.  
Ever transported by the divine teachings, O Eudocimus, thou didst lay low the 
enemy and didst receive the ability to work healings through the righteous judgment 
of Him Who directeth all things.  
The shrine of thy relics, pouring forth the sweetness of thy rich healings, O 
Eudocimus, dispelleth the passions of those who honor thee with faith, and utterly 
consumeth all the hordes of the demons.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned one, thou didst give birth to God, Who truly became a 
man and is hymned by the armies of heaven. Cease thou never to pray for thy 
servants, O Ever-virgin.  
ODE V 
Canon of the Cross 
Irmos: Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light * upon us who rise early at 
dawn, * unto the judgments of Thy commandments, * O Master, Lover of 
mankind, * Christ our God.  
Bowing down now with faith before the most holy Cross, our mighty and 
immovable weapon which lieth before us, we receive invincible power over our 
enemies.  
Holding and venerating now the precious Cross of Him Who made the unquarried 
rock pour forth water, we receive a well-spring of gifts. 
  

--- PAGE 7 ---
The Cross of Christ, appearing to us to shine with golden luster, through grace 
bestoweth gifts upon the souls of those who bow down before it and ever hymn the 
Lord God.  
Theotokion: Holding fast to the staff of power, the Cross of thy Son, Christ our 
God, we hymn thee, the Queen of all, calling thee blessed.  
Canon of the righteous one 
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
Illumined by the pure radiance of the Holy Trinity, and protected by the law of 
God, thou didst pass through the night of this life without stumbling, furnished with 
wings by thy divine visions, O blessed one; and thou hast made thine abode in the 
divine life.  
Now is a great wonder, fraught with awe, apparent within thee: how after thy 
burial thy body, lying in the grave, was truly preserved for many years un-decayed, 
through judgments which He Who hath glorified thee alone knoweth.  
Blessed is the boldness which thou hast before God, and blessed the desire for 
Him which thou didst have within thy heart, living blessedly in accordance with thy 
name! Thou didst shine forth most gloriously with divine effulgence, and illumining 
the assemblies of the faithful.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother, ever entreat Him Who was incarnate of thee on 
behalf of us who piously call thee blessed, that we be delivered from tribulations, 
from soul-corrupting passions and grief, and from the flames of everlasting torment. 
ODE VI  
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
Venerated now, the most precious Cross proclaimeth the joy of the resurrection of 
Christ, and announceth the death of the author of evil.  
Thou didst plant the precious Cross upon the earth, and it hath become a noetic 
stairway to the heavens for the faithful, and an ascent on high for those who venerate 
and honor it.  
The precious Cross which was planted in the midst of the earth now putteth forth 
branches, the gifts inherent in itself, providing shade for those who venerate it.  
Venerated now, the Cross, which was prefigured by the staff which clove the Red 
Sea, cleaveth the sea of misfortunes and passions, and saveth those who bow down 
before it.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: Having ascended the Cross, thy Son and God hath drawn up to the 
heavens us who truly honor thee, His Mother, with love.  
Canon of the righteous one 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Thy sweat and joys have caused torrents of sweetness to gush forth, and the 
effulgence of healing, for the praise of Christ our God.  
Springing forth like a vine laden with much fruit, thou didst flourish in the courts 
of God, bearing the grapes of the virtues in abundance for the Husbandman of our 
souls.  
Gaining dominion over the passions, O Eudocimus, thou didst desire the kingdom 
of God and received the joy of the righteous for thy higher volition.  
Theotokion: Chosen as a beautiful and spacious habitation for God, O Virgin, 
thou didst become His bridal-chamber, lamp-stand and table.  
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone II: 
Desiring higher things, and uniting thyself * with those on high, * thou didst make 
thy soul a fiery chariot * by the divine ascents of the virtues, * O most blessed 
Eudocimus; * and living on the earth like one of the incorporeal ones, ** thou wast 
well pleasing to the Creator of all.  
Ikos: By thy right faith, O blessed Eudocimus, thou didst show forth a twofold 
life, pleasing God in both. Wherefore, thou didst acquire the kingdom of God as 
thine inheritance and, living now with the saints, dost stand before the Master of all. 
But thou didst preserve thy body free from defilement and left it intact for those who 
honor thee with love; for, having lived a pure life, O glorious one, thou wast well 
pleasing to the Creator of all.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither touched 
nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a single mouth * 
Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * ‘O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou.’ 
The Cross which was soaked with the precious blood of Christ poureth forth 
rivers of the radiance of noetic gifts giving drink to all who bow down and hymn it 
with faith.  
The Cross of Christ, which cast down death and the enemy and broke the noetic 
chains, hath now opened the portals of life and incorrupt food for those who with 
pure faith and love bow down before it.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Those who bow down before the Cross with love are protected by its power; they 
drive away enemies, spiritual and visible, and are preserved unharmed, chanting 
hymns to Christ.  
Theotokion: The Cross of thy Son hath been given to us as might and power over 
the enemy through thine acceptable and maternal boldness, O Bride of God, whereby 
we crush the assaults of the foe.  
Canon of the righteous one 
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
Enlivened by the might of the Bestower of life, thou didst restrain the desires of 
the flesh, O most noetically rich father, and didst furnish thy mind with wings to fly 
to the heavens, chanting mightily: Blessed and supremely glorious is God!  
Thou didst make thyself righteous, acquiring a noble character with wholeness of 
mind; and, exercising thyself in the study of the divine Scriptures, made the all-seeing 
God the object of all thy desire, O blessed one.  
O blessed Eudocimus, thou wast deemed worthy of the kingdom on high, the 
heavenly city, the paradise of God, the delight of the righteous, incorruptible 
sustenance, riches which cannot be taken away, and never-waning light.  
Theotokion: Him Whom thou didst bear do thou ever entreat, O Lady, that He 
deliver me from slavery to the passions and from damnation, from cruel despair 
which vexeth me, and from the oppression of those who afflict me, O pure and 
divinely joyous one.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Beholding the Cross which, having been set up felled death, the hordes of the 
noetic enemy hide themselves under the earth; and those who venerate it are 
renewed.  
The most radiant Cross, which was prefigured of old, hath Christ shown forth in 
the heights of heaven. And piously venerating it now, the faithful are exalted and 
made luminous with splendor.  
The Cross, which the prophets truly proclaimed of old, is revealed as the footstool 
of Christ; and bowing down before it now with true faith, we delight in its rich gifts.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: Thy Son and Lord, O Virgin, Who hath poured forth dispassion on 
mortals by His suffering, through thee doth ever renew us who hymn thee with love, 
in that He is our Benefactor.  
Canon of the righteous one 
Irmos: Of old in the furnace of the holy children, * Thou didst prefigure Thy 
Mother, O Lord, * in the image of those who entered therein, * and rescued 
therefrom remained unconsumed. * Her who hath been revealed today do we 
hymn * unto the ends of the earth, * supremely exalting her throughout all 
ages.  
Pondering the dread fire which will issue forth before the throne of Christ, with 
compunction of heart thou didst shed tear-drops of fervor which quenched the 
furnace of the passions for thee, O divinely wise Eudocimus.  
Thou didst fix the eye of thy soul wholly on God, O wise one, and didst cleave 
unto Him, crying out in psalmody: O my Christ, deliver me from the mire of deadly 
passions throughout the ages!  
Thou didst wait in patience, and wast lowly of heart and merciful to those in need, 
bearing a goodly demeanor and a virtuous character, O most honored one; and 
having lived therein, thou dost pour forth the grace of miracles.  
Possessed of a divine understanding, thou wast shown to be a fulfiller of the 
words of the Master, loving the right-hand paths, but manifestly avoiding those of the 
left, in that thou art prudent and wise. Wherefore, we honor thee, O divinely wise 
one, throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: The Creator of Adam taketh form through thy pure blood, and He 
Who feedeth every creature is nourished with thy milk, O Virgin Theotokos. 
Wherefore, we glorify thee as the Mother of God.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of all 
descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom He was 
incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as the pure 
Mother of God.  
The precious Cross poureth forth true drops of immortality and incorruption 
upon those who venerate it. It giveth life, cleanseth, reneweth, and maketh those who 
hymn Jesus Who was nailed to it worthy of higher glory and grace.  
Emitting the works of God like most radiant beams, the most precious Cross 
guideth to the unapproachable and immaterial Light those who venerate it with love 
and pure faith, illumining those who hymn the Creator of all.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
O supremely good Word Who hast sanctified the tree of Thy most holy Cross with 
Thy precious blood, by its activity do Thou illumine us and hallow those who bow 
down before it and hymn Thee, the Master of all.  
Theotokion: Grace which hath shone forth upon all more brightly than the sun, O 
Virgin, driveth away the clouds of misfortunes and the passions, and with the light of 
the knowledge of God it illumines those who lovingly glorify thee and unceasingly 
hymn thy Son as the Master of all.  
Canon of the righteous one 
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Desiring to see the glory of our God, thou didst adorn thyself with the virtues of 
divine knowledge; and, dwelling with the angels, thou hast entered into the splendid 
bridal chamber as a lamp-bearer, and dost manifestly delight in the vision of God.  
Like the dawn, like the sun hath the day of thy commemoration shone forth, 
illumining the hearts of those in darkness; for thou hast truly been shown to be a 
child of the light and the day, O divinely wise Eudocimus. Wherefore, we honor thee.  
Adorned with wisdom, illumined with understanding, arrayed in lowliness of heart, 
resplendent in the high stature of thy life, thou didst pass over to the noetic courts. 
Therefore be thou ever mindful of those who honor thee, O Eudocimus.  
We celebrate today the honored festival of thy departure from the earth, which 
bringeth us spiritual benefit; for, as one who pleased God and acted upon His 
commandments, thou wast shown to be unashamed, O right wondrous Eudocimus.  
Theotokion: Thy womb became the receptacle of the Light which enlighteneth the 
world, O divinely joyous one. Wherefore, wretch though I am, I beseech thee: by the 
supplications of the divinely wise Eudocimus, grant me beams of light, O Bride of 
God.  
Exapostilarion from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., that of the righteous one: 
Shining forth like the sun, thou dost emit rays of miracles, illuming the hearts of 
all, a thrice-blessed Eudocimus, and thou dost save those who with faith keep thy 
glorious memory. 
Both now ..., that of the Cross: 
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
The forefeast of the Cross is celebrated and the world is made new; the ranks of 
the angels hymn the One Who was crucified for our sake, and they keep festival and 
rejoice with us, crying out like David: Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the 
earth, O Master!  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone I: 
How can we not marvel at thy prudence; how can we fail to praise thine angelic 
life, O venerable Eudocimus, which thou didst live with chastity of thought, 
meekness, humility, inner serenity and constant almsgiving? For thou wast adorned 
with all the virtues, O blessed one. Wherefore, unutterable joy awaiteth thee: the 
kingdom of heaven.  
Both now ..., of the Cross, in Tone VI: 
The voices of the prophets foretold the holy Tree whereby Adam was deemed 
worthy of freedom from the ancient curse; and creation today lifteth up its voice as 
the Cross is elevated, asking great mercy from God. O Master, Who alone art infinite 
in thy compassion, be thou our cleansing, and save our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY 
Troparion of the Cross, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people * and bless Thine inheritance, * grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
He Who hath summoned thee from earth * to the mansions of heaven * also 
preserveth thy body incorrupt after death, O holy Eudocimus; * for thou didst live in 
chastity and a pure life, * without defiling thy flesh, O blessed one. * Wherefore, 
entreat Christ God with boldness, ** that we may be saved.  
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone II: 
Desiring higher things, and uniting thyself * with those on high, * thou didst make 
thy soul a fiery chariot * by the divine ascents of the virtues, * O most blessed 
Eudocimus; * and living on the earth like one of the incorporeal ones, ** thou wast 
well pleasing to the Creator of all.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord, for all that He hath rendered unto us?  
 
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, §213 (5: 22-6: 2) 
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACC. TO MATTHEW, §43 (11: 27-30) 
The Lord said; all things are delivered unto Me of my Father; and no man knoweth 
the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to 
whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am 
meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, 
and my burden is light.  
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
