--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 8th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
AFTERFEAST OF THE TRANSFIGURATION 
COMMEMORATION OF HOLY EMILIAN THE CONFESSOR, BISHOP OF CYZICUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 for the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Come, O ye divinely wise, * and let us be transformed with a goodly 
transformation today, * piously and joyously being transfigured with Christ. * And, 
borne up to the summit of the virtues, * let us rejoice with yet greater exaltation; * for 
the Savior of our souls, * in being transfigured, * hath in His tender compassion ** 
enlightened the ugliness of mankind.  
O ye who love the sight of things * which transcend comprehension, * O ye who 
love obedience! * Let us noetically behold Christ, * Who hath shone forth with divine 
radiance, * and let us cry out with the voice of His Father, * proclaiming Him the 
beloved Son * Who strengthened human nature on Tabor ** and poured forth 
enlightenment for our souls.  
Today, O Lord, * Thou hast shone forth Thy divinity * upon Thine apostles, and 
Moses and Elijah, * in that Thou art the God * of both the law and of grace, * 
delivering us now from the bonds of death. * And with them we glorify Thy loving 
dispensation, * O almighty Jesus, ** Thou Savior of our souls.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
Thou didst openly venerate the image of Christ, * O most wise one, * when the 
cruelty of Leo burst into flame * and troubled the people, * reviving the ungodly 
heresy of Copronymus. * Then didst thou openly denounce him, * boldly taking thy 
stand, * when the hierarchs came together. * Wherefore, thou wast shown to be * a 
most valiant warrior of Christ, * O all-blessed one. * Him do thou entreat, ** that He 
save and enlighten our souls.  
Thou didst make thine abode * in the mansions of heaven, * when the ungodly 
and impious one * showed forth his adverse character, * condemning thy 
steadfastness to imprisonment. * Then, O divinely eloquent one, * who manifestly 
knew the one homeland of paradise, * didst thou in no wise fall away therefrom, * 
but, rejoicing with gladness, endured. * Wherefore, thou hast been rightly deemed 
worthy * to behold Christ, the Life incorruptible. * Him do thou entreat, ** that He 
save and enlighten our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
When the accursed Leo * imposed his vile alien law, * commanding that no one 
venerate * the precious image of Christ, * then didst thou, most wisely possessed of a 
tongue of fire, * set against it the law of God, * for the veneration accorded to the 
icons * passeth through to the Prototype, * as the great Basil once said. * And the 
foul beast * was affrighted by thy discourse, * as though by thunder, ** O most 
honorable, divinely eloquent and sacred father.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
He Who of old spake with Moses on Mount Sinai in images, saying: “I am He 
Who is”, is today transfigured before His disciples on Mount Tabor, and having 
shown forth the pristine beauty of His countenance, hath taken upon Himself human 
nature. And having set before them Moses and Elijah as witnesses to this grace, He 
made them partakers of gladness who, for the sake of the Cross, proclaim His 
glorious and saving resurrection.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Tabor, the mountain of God, * rejoiceth in Thy name, * O Savior, * as the Father 
proclaimeth Thee to be ** His beloved Son.  
Verse: Thine are the heavens, * and Thine is the earth.  
A wonder was it to behold * the material sun * hide its rays * at the transfiguration 
** of the Sun of glory.  
Verse: Tabor and Hermon * shall rejoice in Thy name.  
When Thou wast transfigured, * the disciples, from among those on earth, * 
Moses, from among the dead, * and Elijah, as one from above, ** stood before thee 
as servants.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
David, the ancestor of God, foreseeing in the Spirit the coming of Thine only-
begotten Son in the flesh unto mankind, summoneth creation from afar to gladness, 
and crieth out prophetically: “Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in Thy name!” For, 
having ascended that mountain with Thy disciples, O Savior, Thou wast transfigured, 
and didst cause the darkened nature of Adam to shine again, imparting to it the glory 
and splendor of Thy divinity. Wherefore, we cry unto Thee: O Lord, Creator of all 
things, glory be to Thee!  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone VII:  
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. (Thrice) 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor, O Jesus, and a radiant cloud, stretching 
forth like a shadow, covered the apostles with glory. Wherefore, they fell face down 
upon the ground, unable to bear the sight of the splendor of the unapproachable 
glory of Thy countenance, O beginningless Savior. O Christ our God, Who then 
shone forth Thy light upon them, illumine Thou our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in the same melody 
Transfigured in the unapproachable glory of Thy divine light, O Christ, Thou didst 
illumine Thy godly disciples, John, Peter and James, moving them to awe by Thy 
divine grace. And they heard the voice of the Father bearing witness unto Thee as His 
beloved Son, and beheld the glory of Thy countenance, O Savior. O Word, Thou 
Who desirest that all mankind should be saved, enlighten our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE I  
Canon of the Transfiguration, the composition of John, with 8 Troparia, including its 
Irmos, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Moses of old, prophetically beholding the glory of the Lord upon the sea in the 
cloud and the pillar of fire, cried out: Unto our God and Redeemer let us sing!  
His body shielded as by a stone, Moses the beholder of God, seeing Him Who is 
invisible in His divinity, cried aloud: Unto our God and Redeemer let us sing!  
Of old Thou wast seen by Moses in darkness on the mount of the law; but now 
Thou art seen in the unapproachable light of the Godhead on Tabor.  
Canon of the holy hierarch, with 4 Troparia, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it shattered 
the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the deep.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
O divinely wise and blessed father, who dwellest with the heavenly ranks, looking 
down upon us, grant salvation unto those who with joy observe thy wondrous 
solemnity.  
Joined wholly to the Master, and illumined by the fiery splendors therefrom, O 
divinely wise one, thou hast been received by God, rendering thy whole festival 
brilliant with thy pious doctrines, as one revealed to be sacred.  
By suffering and virtue didst thou dispose thy mind toward the Master, O holy 
hierarch, as a righteous steward of soul and body, O father, imparting unto all those 
things which are needful. 
Standing manifestly before the Church, thou hast been revealed to be an excellent 
initiate of mysteries which pass understanding and a mighty champion of the truth, O 
most glorious one, breaking the jaws of lions and stopping their mouths.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate one, the one God in two natures, Who, in a 
manner transcending nature, is also a man, possessing the characteristics of each to 
perfection, do we piously acknowledge as having been born from thy womb.  
ODE III  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
The overshadowing glory in the tabernacle of old, when Thou didst converse with 
Moses, Thy favored one, was a figure of Thy transfiguration which shone forth 
ineffably on Tabor, O Master.  
Thou didst summon the foremost of the apostles to Thee on Mount Tabor, O 
only-begotten Word; and Moses and Elijah stood before Thee, as servants of God, O 
Thou Who alone lovest mankind.  
Through God the Word, Thou didst become wholly of earth, uniting humanity to 
Thy whole divinity in Thy hypostasis, which Moses and Elijah beheld on Mount 
Tabor in two natures.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
We, the faithful, offer thee to Christ as a divinely wise intercessor who contended 
splendidly for His sake, venerated His image, observed the law of honorable 
preaching, and preserved the Faith from on high.  
Thou wast shown to be the confirmation of martyrs, O right wondrous and 
divinely wise one, and didst set at naught the arrogance of the infamous, being 
manifest as the unshakable and immovable rampart of the Church and a divine 
mediator, steadfastly denouncing the mindless ones.  
The most wicked one, having drunk the poison of heresy to satiety, was 
denounced by thine instructive discourse; for darkness is dispelled by light and the 
weaving of the evil one’s counsel is laid bare by the radiance of divine wisdom.  
Theotokion: With radiant voice do we now, from the depths of our soul, truly 
proclaim thee to be the Mother of God who hast given birth to the incorporeal God, 
Who was incarnate of Thee, dwelt among us, and did neither accept alteration nor 
was confused by commingling, O all-immaculate one.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: 
The Church for which thou didst suffer, O Emilian, * chanting, doth glorify thee * 
who didst reveal thyself to be a mighty champion of the Trinity. * Wherefore, we 
honor thy memory. ** Deliver thy servants from the invasion of the heathen.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Illumined by the divine Spirit, with boldness thou didst preach the Traditions of 
Orthodoxy, O all-blessed one, putting to shame the iniquitous emperor, and wast cast 
into prison, O venerable father; do thou entreat Christ God, that He grant us great 
mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
When Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor, Thou didst reveal the effulgence 
of Thy divine glory to Thy disciples, as far as each one could endure, O Word of 
God. And with them we, who hymn Thee, have also been enlightened, O only 
immutable and immortal Lord; for with faith we cry out to Thee: Glory to Thy 
kingdom, O Christ!  
ODE IV 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Rays of divinity issued forth from Thy flesh * upon the prophets and 
the apostles. * Wherefore, chanting, the leaders cried aloud: * glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
O Master, Who preserved intact the bush which had been touched by fire, Thou 
didst show Thy divinely radiant flesh unto Moses, who chanteth: Glory to Thy power, 

--- PAGE 6 ---
O Lord!  
The material sun was eclipsed by the radiance of the Godhead, seeing Thee 
transfigured on Mount Tabor, O my Jesus. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
When Thou didst reveal Thyself to Moses, Elijah and the apostles, O Master, 
Thou wast seen to be an immaterial fire which consumeth not the matter of the body, 
being One in two essences, in two perfect natures.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain overshadowed 
by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy One of Israel * 
would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and restoration. 
Thou didst help to cast down the arrogance of the deceiver, having acquired 
virtue, O all-blessed Emilian; and now, O most noetically rich confessor, thou dost 
cry aloud to Him Who is omnipotent and mighty and battle: Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
Sent into exile, thou didst accept bitter imprisonment, O divinely wise Emilian; but 
protected by the word of grace, O wondrous initiate of the sacred mysteries, thou 
wast seen to endure, crying out to God: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
From infancy thou wast shown to be dedicated to the law, enlightened by early 
teachings of fasting, O all-blessed Emilian. And in later life thou wast shown to be a 
hierarch, O most excellent God-bearer and hieromartyr.  
Theotokion: Working mysteries on earth, He Who comprehendeth all the 
creations of the life-originating divine knowledge which passeth understanding made 
His abode within thy womb, which was adorned with the splendors of virginity, O 
most pure one.  
ODE V 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
The tongue of the orator is unable to proclaim Thy greatness; for Thou, Who hast 
control over life and dominion over death, didst stand forth on Mount Tabor before 
Moses and Elijah, who bore witness to Thy divinity.  
O Christ Who with invisible hands fashioned mankind according to Thine image, 
Thou hast shown forth Thy primal beauty in Thy creation; for Thou wast both God 
and man, not in image, but as Thou Thyself art in essence.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
United without commingling, on Mount Tabor Thou didst show us the burning 
ember of divinity, which burneth up sins and enlighteneth souls; and Thou didst 
strike Moses, Elijah and the foremost apostles with awe.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
Perceiving the disposition of thy great soul with divine foreknowledge, Christ 
clearly adorned it with great honors, arraying thee in the vestments of the priesthood 
and the sufferings of martyrdom, O most honored initiate of the sacred mysteries.  
Having drawn to thyself the grace of the Spirit, thou didst water the flock of 
Christ with rivers of doctrine, O all-blessed and sacred one; wherefore, taught by thee 
to venerate His image, and those of all the saints, we put to shame those opposed to 
God.  
Having mortified the wisdom of thy flesh amid the pangs of fasting, O most 
noetically rich confessor, thou didst enliven thy mind with the radiance of the Spirit. 
Wherefore, having pleased God, thou didst shine forth in both, O right wondrous 
hierarch and hieromartyr.  
Theotokion: O pure Virgin, thou holy of holies, thou didst give birth unto Christ 
the Redeemer, the Holy of holies, Who sanctifieth all. Wherefore, we proclaim thee 
the Queen and Lady of all, as Mother of the Author of creation.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
How great and awesome was the vision beheld this day! From the sky the material 
sun shone forth, while from the earth the noetic Sun of righteousness, which is 
beyond compare, shone forth on Mount Tabor.  
Beholding Thy divinity on Tabor, Moses cried: “The shadow of the law, grown 
weak, hath passed away, and Christ the Truth is manifestly come!”  
The pillar of fire and the cloud most manifestly prefigured the transfigured Christ 
and the grace of the Spirit which overshadowed Him on Tabor.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Desiring to avoid the pasture of heresy, thou didst zealously submit thyself to 
tribulations and with boldness denounced the character of him who adhered to 
ungodliness, O all-blessed one; and thou wast the first to speak for the divinely wise 
council.  
Fervently loving Christ alone and desiring to receive His divine radiance, O God-
pleasing hierarch of the Lord, thou didst exhibit a martyr’s steadfastness, having first 
shone forth in fasting, thou didst manifestly receive a twofold crown, O father.  
O blessed and venerable one, thou didst possess a mind close to God on high, 
shining with divine radiance; thou didst sail across the sea of life easily and hasten to 
the heavenly harbors, propelled by the winds of the Holy Spirit, O divinely inspired 
one.  
Theotokion: He Who is supremely divine, in that He is full of loving-kindness, 
being well-pleased to save human nature which had become grievously corrupt 
through the jealousy of the serpent, made His abode in thy womb and assumed 
immutable flesh, having found thee alone to be pure, O most pure Virgin Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain O Christ God, * and Thy disciples beheld 
Thy glory as far as they could endure; * that when they would see Thee crucified, * 
they would comprehend that Thy suffering was voluntary, * and proclaim to the 
world that Thou art of a truth ** the Effulgence of the Father.  
Ikos: Arise, ye slothful thoughts of my soul, which are ever dragged down unto the 
earth! Be ye borne up and rise aloft to the summit of divine ascent! Let us make haste 
to Peter and the sons of Zebedee, and with them let us go to Mount Tabor, that we 
may see the glory of our God with them, and may hear the voice which they heard 
from on high; and they preached the Effulgence of the Father.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Now have invisible things become visible to the apostles: the Divinity which 
shone forth in the flesh on Mount Tabor shineth upon those who cry out: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
The apostles were moved to awe by fear on Mount Tabor, marveling at the 
majesty of the kingdom of God, and crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages!  
Now have things never before heard become audible; for the Son, Who was born 
of the Virgin without father, is borne witness gloriously by the voice of the Father, in 
that He is God and man, the same throughout the ages.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Being from the beginning the beloved Son by nature, Thou wast not such by the 
adoption of the Most High, and Thou hast approached us without changing. Blessed 
art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; * 
for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so hath He 
wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou praised and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Thou art truly the goodly adornment of holy hierarchs, O father; for, having 
become king over the passions, thou wast shown to be an unbreakable pillar, a 
rampart for the Church, magnifying God Who is praised and exceedingly glorious.  
Thou hast been shown to us as a new David, O most glorious one, having brought 
down the aliens with the sling of the teaching and darts of doctrine, calling God 
praised and exceedingly glorious.  
Thou didst stand radiantly at the tribunal of the tyrant, for Christ’s sake, O father, 
and didst pour forth discourse as from a divine wellspring; for thou didst preach the 
veneration of icons, manifestly knowing that it passeth through to the Prototype.  
Theotokion: In giving birth to the Creator of all, the praised and supremely 
glorious God of our fathers, Who resteth on the throne of the cherubim, thou dost 
strangely remain Virgin, O most blessed Virgin Mother who alone art all-hymned.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Thy disciples, O Master, having heard Thee borne witness to by the Father, and 
unable to bear the sight of the splendor of Thy countenance, though it was a most 
firm human visage, fell face down upon the ground, crying out in fear: Ye priests 
bless; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou art the most comely King of kings, the mighty Lord of all who rulest in 
every place, the Blessed One Who dwellest in light unapproachable. And marveling at 
Thee, the disciples, Moses and Elijah cried out: Ye children, bless; ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
The apostles, from among those on earth, and Elijah the Tishbite and Moses, from 
among the dead, stood before Thee, O Christ, as before the Master of heaven, the 
Lord of earth, the One Who hath dominion over the nethermost depths; and they 
chanted together: Ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
When they followed Thee to the exalting of the divine life from the earth, Thy 
chosen apostles left behind on earth the grief which giveth rise to despondency, O 
Lover of mankind. Wherefore, having received Thy divine manifestation according as 
they were worthy, they chanted: Ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so the 
fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin’s womb * into which it had 
descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation bless the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
When thou didst call upon God, thou didst reduce to ashes with noetic fire the 
whole furnace of the tinder of heresy; and like Elijah slaughtered the abominable 
priests with the sword of the Spirit. And now thou dost chant in gladness: Let all 
creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou wast shown to be full of divine grace and power, O thrice blessed one and, 
adorned with the comeliness of chastity, thou didst command an immutable piety. 
And standing therewith now before the Master, thou criest: Let creation bless the 
Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou lookest down from on high upon those who hymn thee, O sacred and 
divinely wise father, showing us the straight path by thy supplications, and shattering 
the arrogance of heresies, that, venerating the icon of Christ, the Theotokos and all 
the saints, we may chant and worship with boldness.  
Theotokion: There is no blemish in thy beauty, O Virgin; for thou alone, O all-
pure one, hast from of old been revealed to be most pure, illumining the world with 
rays of virginity and the light of purity. Wherefore, chanting, we sing: Let all creation 
bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
That Thou mayest clearly show forth Thine ineffable second coming, that Thou 
mayest reveal Thyself as the Most High God, standing in the midst of gods, on Tabor 
Thou didst ineffably illumine the apostles, Moses and Elijah. Wherefore, all glorify 
Thee, O Christ.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Come and submit yourselves to Me, O ye peoples! And ascending the holy and 
supra-celestial mountain, let us stand immaterially in the city of the living God, and 
noetically behold the immaterial Godhead of the Father and the Spirit which shineth 
forth in the only-begotten Son.  
Thou hast drawn me to Thyself with love, O Savior, and hast transformed me by 
Thy divine desire; but burn up my sins with immaterial fire, and deem me worthy to 
partake of Thy food, that, rejoicing in both, I may magnify Thy mighty works, O 
Good One.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy pure 
birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * quench the 
raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may unceasingly 
magnify Thee. 
Thou didst find the reward for thy pangs, O God-bearing Emilian, being deemed 
worthy now to dwell in the mansions of heaven with the divine armies of the martyrs, 
in that thou art a godly hierarch, O most wondrous hieromartyr.  
Thou wast shown to be adorned with discourse, wisdom and precepts, O excellent 
Emilian. Wherefore, Christ hath crowned thine honored head, O most noetically rich 
confessor. Him do thou now ever entreat on our behalf, we pray.  
Throwing wide the portals of heaven, the Master received thy soul, O venerable 
Emilian, granting it rest in places of coolness, as one of the righteous. And now thou 
dost walk about the throne of the King of all.  
Theotokion: O thy miracles which pass understanding, O Birthgiver of God, O 
only all-pure Lady! For thou dost move to awe the armies of the angels and divers 
assemblies of mortals. Wherefore, we unceasingly magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
Exapostilarion of the feast: 
O Word, Thou immutable Light of the light of the unbegotten Father: today on 
Mount Tabor we have seen in Thy light the manifest light of the Father and the light 
of the Spirit Who guideth all creation with light.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Blessed is the joy * which passeth understanding * of which the godly * foremost 
of Thy disciples ** were deemed worthy on Mount Tabor, O Lord.  
Verse: Thine are the heavens, * and Thine is the earth.  
Shining like the sun * on the mountain today, * before the Cross, * Christ showeth 
His disciples ** a new sign of His divinity.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Verse: Tabor and Hermon * shall rejoice in Thy name.  
Come, O ye mortals, * and let us diligently ascend * Mount Tabor, * to behold 
Christ ** transfigured in glory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
The foremost of the apostles, beholding Thine unbearable splendor and Thine 
unapproachable divinity, O beginningless Christ, were stricken with godly awe; and, 
covered with a radiant cloud, they heard the voice of the Father proclaiming the 
mystery of Thy becoming a man; for Thou alone, even after Thine incarnation, art the 
only-begotten Son and Savior of the world.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia from ODE III of both canons, including the Irmos.  
The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble and the weak have girded themselves 
with strength: therefore is my heart established in the Lord. 
Having put on all of Adam and transformed the nature which of old had become 
dark, Thou didst illumine it with the transfiguration of Thine appearance, rendering it 
divine, O Christ.  
Christ, Who of old guided Israel in the wilderness by the pillar of fire and the 
cloud, hath ineffably shone forth in light today upon Mount Tabor.  
The overshadowing glory in the tabernacle of old, when Thou didst converse with 
Moses, Thy favored one, was a figure of Thy transfiguration which shone forth 
ineffably on Tabor, O Master.  
Thou didst summon the foremost of the apostles to Thee on Mount Tabor, O 
only-begotten Word; and Moses and Elijah stood before Thee, as servants of God, O 
Thou Who alone lovest mankind.  
Through God the Word, Thou didst become wholly of earth, uniting humanity to 
Thy whole divinity in Thy hypostasis, which Moses and Elijah beheld on Mount 
Tabor in two natures.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. 
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: 
The Church for which thou didst suffer, O Emilian, * chanting, doth glorify thee * 
who didst reveal thyself to be a mighty champion of the Trinity. * Wherefore, we 
honor thy memory. ** Deliver thy servants from the invasion of the heathen.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain O Christ God, * and Thy disciples beheld 
Thy glory as far as they could endure; * that when they would see Thee crucified, * 
they would comprehend that Thy suffering was voluntary, * and proclaim to the 
world that Thou art of a truth ** the Effulgence of the Father.  
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Instead of “It is truly meet...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who was transfigured on Tabor!  
Irmos: Thy birthgiving was revealed to be incorrupt, * God came forth from 
thy womb, * and He appeared upon earth in mortal flesh * and dwelt among 
mankind; * Wherefore we all magnify thee, O Theotokos. 
 
Communion Verse of the feast: O Lord, in the light of Thy face shall we walk, 
and in Thy name shall we rejoice all the day long.  
