--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 1st DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST 
THE PROCESSION OF THE PRECIOUS WOOD OF THE HONORABLE & LIFE-
CREATING CROSS 
COMMEMORATION OF THE 7 HOLY MACCABEE CHILDREN, THEIR MOTHER, 
SOLOMONIA, & THEIR TEACHER, ELEAZAR 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the Cross, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
Today the godly multitudes of the faithful rejoice, * for the heavenly Cross * hath 
appeared to the ends of the world, * illumining the firmament with unapproachable 
light, * it maketh the air brilliant * and adorneth the face of the earth. * And the 
Church of Christ hymneth it in divine songs, * worshiping it with veneration, * and 
the divine and supremely wondrous Cross * preserveth it from on high. * By its 
power are we strengthened; * wherefore, let us approach the Master, saying: ** Grant 
peace to the world and enlighten our souls!  
Let creation leap up and rejoice, * for the Cross hath shone forth today from 
heaven, * illumining those on earth, * and revealing those who have been scattered to 
be unified. * Today the angelic choirs * join chorus with mortals, * for the rampart of 
resistance * hath been destroyed by the Cross, * which hath manifestly united all into 
one. * Wherefore, shining forth more brightly than the sun, * it illumineth all creation 
with grace, * saving and making radiant ** those who honor it with faith.  
Behold! the divine Cross * clearly shineth forth upon the ends of the earth * more 
brightly than the radiance of the sun, * as the precious scepter * of Christ the King. * 
It hath raised the human race up from Hades, * sending Hades into great captivity, * 
and, casting down the enemy, * it hath utterly destroyed the pride of the demons. * 
And now having revealed the resurrection of the Savior * it saveth those who cry: * 
Grant peace to the world ** and enlighten our souls!  
And 3 Stichera of the righteous ones, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Tyranny could not shake the summit of the law * raised aloft on seven pillars; * for 
the right noble youths and brethren, * the preservers of the Traditions of Moses, * 
manfully endured * the bestial wrath of the tyrant, * giving themselves over ** to 
those who cut the body asunder.  
Animated by the great expectations * which they have now received, * the pious 
and valiant children, * with their divinely wise mother Solomonia, * endured the 
severing of the members of their flesh, * truly elevating their mind * far above visible 
things, ** finding rest in the bosom of Abraham their forefather. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Having armed themselves firmly * with valor of soul, * as ones who vanquished 
wrath * the most sacred Eleazar and the most wise youths, * together with their 
divinely wise mother Solomonia, * mightily attacked the enemy * with their 
preservation of the law of their fathers, ** for the sake of piety.  
Glory ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII: 
The holy Maccabees said to the tyrant: “O Antiochus, we have but one God, 
through Whom we came into being, and to Whom we will return! Another world 
awaiteth us, more exalted and constant than that which is visible, a mighty and 
imperishable Jerusalem will be our homeland, and our triumph will be to dwell with 
the angels!” Through their supplications, O Lord, have mercy and save our souls!  
Both now ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII: 
To Thy precious Cross, O Christ God, which Moses prefigured in himself of old 
when he cast down and vanquished Amalek, and of which David the psalmist 
commanded, saying: “Worship the footstool of His feet”, do we sinners now offer 
homage today with unworthy lips; and chanting, we entreat Thee Who wast well -
pleased to be nailed thereto: O Lord, grant unto us a place with the thief in Thy 
kingdom!  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos. 
 Glory ..., by Cosmas the Monk, in Tone VIII: 
The souls of the righteous are in the hands of the Lord: Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, 
the forefathers before the law was given, the ancestors of the Maccabees whom we 
now praise. For, as descendants of Abraham, mighty in soul, zealous for the Faith of 
their forefather Abraham, they struggled lawfully even unto death for piety; for, 
having been raised in piety, by suffering lawfully they denounced the ungodliness of 
the prideful Antiochus, and by valuing this transitory life as naught for the sake of 
that which is everlasting, they offered all to God: their souls, courage, understanding, 
their tender bodies, and their rewards for having been raised in purity. O the pious 
root from whom ye sprang forth, O Maccabees! O thy holy mother, who gave birth 
to sons equal in number to the days of the week! Yet pray ye for us, together with 
your mother Solomonia and the wise priest Eleazar, O Maccabees, when ye stand 
before Christ God, for Whose sake ye labored to receive from Him the fruits of thy 
labors, and earnestly entreat Him for all mankind; for whatsoever He desireth He 
doth do, and fulfilleth the desires of those who fear Him.  
Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
O God, the words of Moses Thy prophet have been fulfilled, who said: “Ye shall 
see your life hanging before your eyes!” Today the Cross is exalted, and the world is 
freed from deception. Today the resurrection of Christ is renewed, and the ends of 
the earth rejoice, offering to Thee a hymn on cymbals, like David, and saying: “Thou 
hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth, O God: the Cross and resurrection! 
For their sake Thou hast saved us, O Good One Who lovest mankind! O Almighty 
Lord, glory be to Thee!”  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Troparion of the righteous ones, in Tone I: 
By the pangs of the saints, which they suffered for Thee, O Lord, * be Thou 
entreated, * and heal Thou all our infirmities, ** we pray Thee, O Lover of mankind.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the Cross, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people * and bless Thine inheritance, * grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  
 
Be It Known: Before the bells are rung, the priest entereth the sacristy and 
transfereth the precious Cross to the table of oblation. After the dismissal of 
Vespers, the priest and deacon array themselves in their vestments. The deacon 
censeth the precious Cross, and saith: Bless, master! Priest: Blessed is our God 
...Then:  
Trisagion through Our Father  Troparion of the Cross; Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Kontakion of the Cross. The priest taketh the Cross on its tray and placeth it 
upon his head, and beareth it into the sanctuary, preceded by two candle-
bearers bearing lighted candles. And he setteth the Cross on the altar-table, in 
the place usually occupied by the Gospel-book, said Gospel-book being 
removed to the High Place. And a lamp is set to burn before the precious Cross 
throughout the night.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Cross, in Tone I:  
Save O Lord Thy people * and bless Thine inheritance, * grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  
Glory ..., that of the righteous ones:  
By the pangs of the saints, which they suffered for Thee, O Lord, * be Thou 
entreated, * and heal Thou all our infirmities, ** we pray Thee, O Lover of mankind.  
Both now ..., that of the Cross. 
The usual Kathismata; Sessional Hymns from the Oktoechos. 
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 4 Troparia, including the Irmos; the 
canon of the Cross, with 6 Troparia; and that of the Maccabees with 4 
Troparia. But if this feast falleth on a Saturday, and if the temple is dedicated to 
Christ or the Theotokos, we chant the canon of the temple, with 4 Troparia, 
including the Irmos; and the canons of the Cross and Maccabees as above. 
ODE I 
Canon of the Cross, the acrostic whereof is: “I bow down before the Cross, the 
salvation of the faithful”, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
I bow down before the Cross, the salvation of the faithful, and kissing it fervently, 
and, embracing it, I cry aloud: O all-blessed Tree of Christ, illumine my soul and 
mind, I pray!  
Today the sign of the Cross hath revealed itself to be victorious over the passions 
and the demons. Wherefore, O ye faithful, radiantly illumined in soul, let us all kiss it 
now.  
The precious Cross emitteth brilliant rays and illumineth those who bow down 
before it with faith today, sanctifying our souls and bodies.  
Laying visibly before us, the life-giving Cross sendeth forth brilliant rays of grace. 
Offering praise unto the Lord, let us approach and receive enlightenment, gladness, 
salvation and forgiveness.  
Theotokion: O most holy Virgin who hast given birth in the flesh unto Christ 
Who of His own will suffered for our sake on the Cross: by thine entreaties save 
those who bless thee with honor.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Canon of the righteous ones, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Appearing among the cruel ones with a single resolve, the choir of the seven 
spiritual athletes did not refuse to die, that they might confirm the law of their fathers.  
Disdaining glory on this earth, with their desire for the divine kingdom the godly 
Maccabees endured every pang; wherefore, they are honored today as is meet.  
The preservers of the law of Moses, the truly valiant Maccabees, revealed 
themselves to be brethren one to another when they trampled underfoot the 
ungodliness of Antiochus.  
Theotokion: The ranks of angels and men praise thee unceasingly, O unwedded 
Mother; for in thine arms thou didst bear the Creator of all as a babe.  
Katavasia: Inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross upon the waters, * 
Moses marked a straight line before him with his staff * and divided the Red 
Sea, * opening a path for Israel who went over dry-shod. * Then he marked a 
second line across the waters * and united them in one, * overwhelming the 
chariots of Pharaoh. * Therefore let us sing to Christ our God, * for He hath 
been glorified. 
ODE III  
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Of old, a sword was given to guard the blessed tree of life after the disobedience 
of Adam the first-formed man; but the Cross hath opened a path thereto.  
With eyes, mouth and soul, with our faces and hearts, let us all bow down before 
the most holy Cross of Christ, the Bestower of life, whereby the whole world is 
sanctified.  
Becoming temples of God today, as the prophets said, bowing down before the 
wood of the most holy Cross, all of us who are the heirs thereto kiss it with fear.  
We chant hymns to thee, O Christ, and with faith entreat thy power: Rescue us 
from the snares of the enemy, and direct all of us who hymn thee to the haven of 
salvation.  
Theotokion: As a virgin thou hast given birth to the Son Who before thee was 
begotten of God the Father without mother before time began, and hath been 
crucified in the flesh, that He might save those who had sinned before.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the righteous ones 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Walking according to the precepts of the law of your fathers, O blessed spiritual 
athletes of Christ, with your blood ye have acquired the life which ageth not, O all-
praised ones.  
Neither fire nor the sword were ever able to alter the valor of your resolve for the 
Faith, O blessed ones, and therein ye set at naught the arrogance of the tormenters.  
Ye endured tortures for Christ God, O all-praised martyrs, and have received 
trophies of victory from on high, praying continually that He save our souls.  
Theotokion: As a virgin thou hast given birth, O thou who knewest not wedlock, 
and a virgin didst thou remain, O unwedded Mother. O Theotokos Mary, entreat 
Christ our God, that we be saved!  
Katavasia: The rod of Aaron is an image of this mystery, * for when it budded 
it showed who should be priest. * So in the Church, that once was barren, * the 
wood of the Cross hath now budded forth, * filling her with strength and 
steadfastness. 
Kontakion of the righteous ones, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
O ye seven pillars of the wisdom of God, * seven-branched lamp of the divine 
Light, * O all-wise Maccabees * who before the martyrs, * were martyrs most great: * 
with them entreat ye the God of all, * that we who honor you may be saved!  
Ikos: Praise thy God with fervor, O Sion, for He hath strengthened the chains of 
thy gates and blessed thy children; for, like an invincible army, a legion truly valiant 
and mighty of mind, they stood with divine wisdom against the wiles of the ungodly, 
receive together the wreaths of victory of the heavenly Sion, and stand before the 
throne of God, praying unceasingly for all. Ask thou that those who hymn you may 
be saved.  
Sessional Hymn of the righteous ones, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having been raised in piety, O wise children, as martyrs ye manfully put to shame 
the threats of the tormenters; as champions of the law, ye were obedient to your 
fathers, O saints, and with your divinely wise mother ye suffered patiently. Wherefore, 
having truly purchased the life of heaven by your death, ye rejoice eternally, O 
Maccabees mighty of soul. Entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto 
those who honor your holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the Cross, in Tone VI: 
Thy Cross, O Lord, is sacred, for therein have healings been wrought for those 
sick in sins; wherefore, we fall down before Thee, and cry: Have mercy upon us!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE IV 
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Let the whole earth drop forth joy, and let the trees of the forest be glad, deified 
today by the most precious Cross which illumineth the ends of the world.  
O most glorious Cross, who wast intended to be an instrument of execution, but 
didst become an invincible weapon of victory bearing life into the world: illumine our 
hearts!  
O most honored Cross, thou art the divine conquest, thou art the accomplishment 
of our salvation, thou art the victory of the faithful and the divine sacrifice: Sanctify 
those who hymn thee!  
With all the earth is heaven gladdened. The passion-bearers, martyrs and apostles, 
and the souls of the righteous now joyfully rejoice, and the life-imparting Tree, which 
lay visibly in our midst, saveth all and sanctifieth the faithful with grace.  
Theotokion: Truly hast thou appeared! Truly didst thou give birth to the Most 
High as thy Son, Who stretched forth His hands upon the Cross and summoned the 
world to Him, O Virgin Mother Mary.  
Canon of the righteous ones 
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Having, like Moses of old, inscribed the law on the tablets of your mind, O blessed 
ones, ye would not violate it even unto death, but struggled steadfastly.  
Offering unto God the sacrifices of the law, and being zealous for the life of 
Moses, the spiritual athletes of Christ prevailed over the laws of the tyrant.  
As stones withstand the onslaught of the waves, O ye Maccabee, so did ye endure 
many tortures with manly resolve, even unto death.  
Triadicon: O beginningless Trinity, adored Unity, co-enthroned, O hymned Trin-
ity: by the entreaties of the martyrs deliver from misfortunes and perils us who hymn 
Thee.  
Theotokion: Accept the cry, “Rejoice!” from us, O holy Theotokos! Rejoice, O 
thou who hast given birth to Joy for the world! Rejoice, O blessed and pure 
Theotokos, who alone art the help of men!  
Katavasia: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE V 
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
With joy let us uplift the most blessed Cross which is set forth in the churches and 
cities, and let us bow down before it, that we may receive forgiveness of our debts.  
The wicked serpent is now slain, the prince of darkness, unable to bear the 
radiance emitted by the life-bearing Cross, the precious scepter of the divine King.  
Like a most brilliant star, like a magnificent pearl and the most radiant sun doth 
the Cross of the Lord, which we venerate, illumine all the ends of the earth. Lift up 
your voices in jubilation, O ye nations!  
Leap up, ye tribes, and chant unto God Who hath given us the indestructible 
confirmation of the Cross, which He now setteth before us! Rejoice, all ye faithful, 
receiving good things for its sake!  
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be the origin of salvation, O pure one, all the 
faithful bless thee; for thou hast given birth in the flesh to Him Who existed from the 
beginning, and by His own will was nailed to the Cross.  
Canon of the righteous ones 
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
In that ye never violated the law of your fathers, O holy martyrs, Christ Himself 
hath placed upon you crowns of righteousness.  
Standing with Eleazar as peers in resolve, O blessed children, with him ye offered 
yourselves unto Christ as a spiritual holocaust.  
O Lord Who freest all from deception by Thy saints, save us by their 
supplications, in that Thou art full of loving-kindness.  
Theotokion: Having been shown to be more honorable than the cherubim, O all-
hymned Virgin, pray to thy Son, that He save the souls of those who hymn thee.  
Katavasia: O thrice-blessed Tree, on which Christ the king and Lord was 
stretched! * Through thee the beguiler fell, * who tempted mankind with the 
tree. * He was caught in the trap set by God, * who was crucified upon thee in 
the flesh, * granting peace unto our souls. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Seeing the Cross set forth today as a divine vessel, as a radiant lamp in churches, 
temples and cities, we hymn Him Who hath caused it to shine.  
Death is slain, corruption is put to death, and the hordes of the demons flee, 
beholding the victorious and awesome Cross of Christ set forth today, unable to 
endure its touch.  
Hymning Thee, God the King and Lord, in that Thou hast given us the Cross as 
an impregnable bulwark, we now kiss it with joy and thus escape evils.  
Theotokion: Our first mother in Eden was poisoned by eating of the serpent’s 
venom; but the Virgin, having given birth to the Author of life, hath poured forth 
incorruption and resurrection upon the world.  
Canon of the righteous ones 
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Having arrayed yourselves in the vesture of martyrdom, O saints, ye embroidered 
it with the labors of your suffering.  
Desiring to be with Christ, O all-glorious martyrs, ye have run the course of 
suffering with unwavering resolve.  
Preserving the law which Moses handed down, O holy ones, ye suffered lawfully, 
putting the tyrant Antiochus to shame.  
Theotokion: O thou who alone hast given birth to the Word in the flesh at His 
word, deliver our souls from the snares of the enemy, we pray.  
Katavasia: Jonah stretched out his hands in the form of a cross * within the 
belly of the sea monster, * plainly prefiguring the redeeming Passion. * Cast 
out from thence after three days, * he foreshadowed the marvelous 
Resurrection of Christ our God, * who was crucified in the flesh and 
enlightened the world * by His Rising on the third day. 
Kontakion of the Cross, in Tone IV: 
O Thou Who wast willingly lifted up upon the Cross, * bestow Thy compassions 
upon the new community named after Thee, O Christ God; * gladden by Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over all adversaries. ** May they have as 
an ally the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace.  
Ikos: He who was caught up to the third heaven of paradise and heard 
unspeakable and divine words which the human tongue cannot utter, what was it hath 
he wrote to the Galatians, which, as lovers of the Scriptures, ye have both read and 
come to understand? - God forbid, saith he, that I should glory, save only in the 
Cross of the Lord, - whereon having suffered He slew the passions. Let us all then 
firmly hold this boast, the Cross of the Lord; for this Wood is our salvation, the 
invincible trophy, the weapon of peace!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE VII 
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
O ye faithful, let us bow down before the saving Tree, the most holy Cross, which 
all the armies of the angels serve, beholding it displayed, pouring forth sanctification 
and life upon us.  
The most holy Cross of Christ, the Bestower of life, hath been revealed to be 
victorious, from on high driving away a multitude of the demons and the audacity of 
the barbarians, and showing forth our Orthodox hierarchs as conquerors of all 
heresies.  
We hymn, glorify, magnify and bow down before Thy might, O Christ, for Thou 
hast given Thy divine Cross to us, Thy servants, as an inexhaustible sweetness and a 
guardian for our souls and bodies.  
Theotokion: The furnace did not consume the three youths, prefiguring thy 
birthgiving; for the divine Fire, dwelling within thee, did not consume thee, teaching 
all to chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Canon of the righteous ones 
Irmos: O Thou who in the beginning founded the earth * and by Thy word 
made the heavens firm, * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * O Lord God 
of our Fathers. 
In suffering the pain of martyrdom, ye were undaunted by the threats of the tyrant, 
crying out to Christ: Blessed is the God of our fathers! (Twice)  
Enduring pain with patience, ye vanquished the cruel wiles of the enemy, crying 
out to Christ: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: O God of our fathers, Who madest Thine abode within the Virgin’s 
womb, and for her sake restored Adam, blessed art Thou!  
Katavasia: The senseless decree of the wicked tyrant, * breathing forth threats 
and blasphemy hateful to God, * confused the people. * Yet neither the fury of 
the wild beast nor the roaring of the fire * could frighten the three Children: * 
but standing together in the flame, * fanned by the wind that brought 
refreshment as the dew, they sang: * ‘Blessed and supremely praised art Thou, 
* O our God and the God of our fathers.’ 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos Be thou astonished and afraid, O heaven, * and let the foundations of 
the earth be shaken; * for lo! He Who of old burnt the sacrifice of the righteous 
man with water * doth clothe Himself in water! * Him do ye children bless, ye 
priests hymn, * ye people supremely exalt throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Prefiguring Thy Cross, Jacob once laid his arms cross-wise over his grandsons, 
blessing them and teaching grace among the nations. Ye children bless; ye priests 
hymn; ye people supremely exalt God throughout the ages!  
O Thine ineffable condescension and Thine indescribable good things, O Christ! 
Thou didst become incarnate, and, being crucified and accepting death, didst decide 
to release mankind from the curse, pouring forth incorruption upon the thrice-
blessed Tree, the supremely glorious Cross, throughout the ages.  
Let us praise today the all-holy Cross of the Lord, the divine victory, the origin of 
life, the destroyer of falsehood, the annihilator of the demons, the repeller of 
barbarians, the protector and champion of kings.  
Theotokion: Beholding Christ pierced with nails, His incorrupt side run through 
with a spear, beaten about the head with a reed, and given gall to eat, the Virgin cried 
aloud: “Whither hath Thy beauty departed, O most comely Word, more glorious than 
all the children of mankind?”  
Canon of the righteous ones 
Irmos: The Beginningless King of glory, * before Whom tremble all the hosts 
of heaven, * ye priests hymn, and ye peoples * supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
As true lovers and excellent keepers of the law, O all-praised martyrs, ye hymn 
Christ throughout the ages.  
Let us truly honor, as is meet, the seven Maccabees, the seven-branched fruit of a 
holy root, as martyrs of the Lord.  
Let us honor as is meet the zealots of the law, the faithful spiritual athletes one in 
soul, the seven Maccabees and their mother.  
Triadicon: O indivisible Trinity and Unity, I glorify Thee alone in divinity, and 
hymn Thee, one Power in three Hypostases.  
Theotokion: God, Who became incarnate of the Virgin for our sake in the latter 
times, O ye priests hymn and supremely exalt throughout the ages.  
Katavasia: O children equal in number to the Trinity: * bless ye God, the 
Father and Creator; * hymn ye the Word Who came down * and transformed 
the fire into dew; * and supremely exalt ye Him Who giveth life unto all, * the 
most holy Spirit, * throughout the ages! 
ODE IX 
Canon of the Cross  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Through disobedience we became corrupt, being shown to be violators of the 
commandment of God; wherefore, death came upon mankind. For this cause 
immortality hath blossomed forth today; the victorious Cross of Christ, which we 
venerate.  
Lo! the most holy Tree hath appeared; the mighty hope of the faithful, the 
deliverance from the curse; and it setteth joy before us, denouncing the prince of 
darkness. O ye faithful, let us bow down before it with gladness.  
The desired Tree, the invincible weapon, the origin of blessing, the confirmation 
and bulwark of Christians, the steadfast aid, the deliverance from the curse, hath 
appeared to us; and it hath illumined and sanctified us who bow down before it.  
Theotokion: O temple and portal of sanctity, O throne of God, cloud and most 
radiant lamp, O all-immaculate one, thou ark of grace; protect and preserve those 
who offer veneration to the precious image of thine only-begotten Son.  
Canon of the righteous ones 
Irmos: We magnify thee O Mother of God, * and We glorify thee, O Virgin 
Theotokos, * for thou hast given birth to Christ the Savior of our souls. 
O all-praised martyrs, ye have truly been shown to be a treasury of divine gifts and 
riches which cannot be taken away.  
O valiant advocates before the Creator of all, ask for our souls a tranquil life. 
Preserve us who with divine zeal and ardor of soul celebrate your memory, un-
devoured by the evil one.  
Triadicon: Let us worship the Father and the Spirit with the Son, crying out with 
the angels: Glory to God in the highest!  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O holy gate which openeth unto God Who alone is most 
wise, O thou whom the most holy Spirit overshadowed!  
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought 
forth Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted 
upon the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
Exapostilarion from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., that of the righteous ones: 
We hymn the wondrous Maccabees: Eleazar, the children and Solomonia; for they 
cast down the arrogance of the serpent, the author of evil, and have been crowned as 
servants of the law.  
Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the Cross: 
The Cross is the guardian of the whole world! The Cross is the beauty of the 
Church! The Cross is the dominion of kings! The Cross is the confirmation of the 
faithful! The Cross is the glory of the angels and the wounding of the demons!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
On the Praises, 6 Stichera: 3 of the Cross, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
The precious Cross maketh the paths of heaven * ready for all to cross * who bow 
down before it with steadfast faith; * and He Who was nailed thereto * joineth those 
who hymn it with love ** to the choirs of the immaterial hosts.  
Bowing down with faith * before the precious Cross, * we hymn the Master Who 
was crucified thereon, * purifying our lips and souls at His behest; * and, praising 
Him, ** we are illumined with its noetic radiance.  
Sweetening the bitter waters of old, * Moses delivered Israel, * using an image of 
the Cross; * and we, O ye faithful, * mystically and divinely tracing its image in our 
hearts, ** are ever saved by its might.  
And 3 Stichera of the righteous ones: 
In Tone I: The much-suffering mother, calling her children to struggle, said: 
“Follow after the gray hairs of Abraham, that ye may share in the sacrifice of Isaac!” 
And, accepting this instruction, they went before her who taught them, watching as 
each of them, one by one, underwent the torments of cruelty. Through their 
supplications, O God, have mercy upon us!  
In Tone IV: The seven chosen pillars were hewn from a single noetic rock, and 
were shown to be unshakable pillars of the law. Wherefore, be Thou well-pleased, O 
Savior, to preserve our souls in peace.  
In Tone V: The children of Solomonia, the preservers of the law, suffering at the 
tribunal of Antiochus, cried out to him: “O Antiochus, we are enduring all for the law 
of our fathers; and neither fire, nor the sword, nor wild beasts, nor wounds shall 
separate us therefrom. We will die together, with our aged mother and our father and 
teacher, living and rejoicing together for endless ages!”  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Come, O ye faithful, let us behold the force assembled against the Maccabees, and 
the valor of the holy children! For the tyrannical king who held sway over all nations 
was thwarted by an elderly man, seven children and one woman! Through their 
supplications, O God, have mercy upon us!  
Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
O Lord Who enabled the meek David to conquer the foreigner, ally Thyself also 
with our pious Orthodox hierarchs and enable them to bring down all proponents of 
heresy and schism with the weapon of the Cross. O Compassionate One, show forth 
upon us Thine ancient mercies, that they may truly know that Thou art God, and that 
we who set our hope on Thee may triumph, entreating Thy most pure Mother, as is 
our wont, that we be granted great mercy.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
And while the Great Doxology is chanted quietly, the priest, having put on full 
sacerdotal vestments, entereth the holy sanctuary bearing the censer, the deacon 
preceding him with a lamp; and the priest censeth the holy table and the 
precious Cross, and, lifting the precious Cross with its tray to his head, he 
departeth the sanctuary through the northern door, preceded by servers bearing 
two lamps and the censer, and cometh before the royal doors, where he 
standeth, awaiting the conclusion of the Trisagion.  
When the Trisagion cometh to an end, the priest intoneth: “Wisdom! Stand 
aright!” And the singers chant the Troparion: “ Save O Lord, Thy people ...,” 
thrice.  
Then the priest leaveth his place before the royal doors, bearing the precious 
Cross on his head, and goeth to the analogion which has been placed, adorned, 
in the center of the church, and setteth the precious Cross thereon. And he 
maketh a prostration before the precious Cross thrice, chanting softly: “Before 
Thy Cross we bow down, O Master, and Thy holy resurrection do we glorify!” 
And the choirs also chant this hymn aloud, thrice. Then all venerate the 
precious Cross, bowing down before it one by one, while the following Stichera 
are chanted: 
In Tone II: Come, ye faithful, and let us venerate the life-giving Tree, * upon 
which Christ, the King of Glory, hath willingly stretched out His hands. * To the 
ancient blessedness hath He raised us up, * whom the enemy despoiled of old 
through pleasure, making us exiles far from God. * Come, ye faithful, and let us 
venerate the Tree whereby * we have been counted worthy to crush the heads of our 
invisible enemies. * Come, all ye kindred of the nations, * and let us honor in hymns 
the Cross of the Lord. * Rejoice, O Cross, perfect redemption of fallen Adam. * 
Glorying in thee, our faithful kings laid low by thy might the people of Ishmael. * We 
Christians kiss thee now with awe, * and glorifying God Who was nailed on thee, we 
cry aloud: * O Lord, Who was crucified on the Cross, have mercy upon us, ** for 
Thou art good and lovest mankind.  
In Tone V: Beholding Thee, the Author and Creator of all, hanging naked upon 
the Cross, all creation was moved with fear and lamented. The sun dimmed its light, 
and the earth quaked, the rocks split asunder, and the splendid veil of the temple was 
rent in twain. The dead arose from their graves, and the angelic hosts were filled with 
awe, saying: “O the wonder! The Judge is condemned and suffereth, desiring to save 
and restore the world!”  
In Tone VIII: Today the Master of the creation and the Lord of Glory * hath 
been nailed to the Cross and His side hath been pierced; * and He Who is the 
sweetness of the Church tasteth gall and vinegar. * A crown of thorns hath been 

--- PAGE 15 ---
placed upon Him Who covereth the heavens with clouds. * He hath been clothed in a 
cloak of mockery, * and He Who formed man with His hands hath been struck by a 
hand of clay. * He Who doth wrap the heaven in clouds hath been smitten upon His 
back. * He accepteth spitting and scourging, reproach and buffeting; * and all these 
things my Redeemer and God hath endured for me who am condemned, ** that in 
His compassion He may save the world from delusion.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Today He Who is in essence unapproachable, * hath become approachable for 
me and suffereth His Passion, delivering me from passions. * He Who doth grant 
light unto the blind hath been spat upon by the mouths of transgressors, * and He 
hath given His back over to scourging for the sake of those that are held captive. * 
When the pure Virgin, His Mother saw Him on the Cross, she cried aloud in pain: * 
‘Woe is me, my Child! What is this that Thou hast done? * Thou Who wast in beauty 
fairer than all mortal men, * dost now appear without life and form, having neither 
shape nor comeliness. * Woe is me, my Light! * I cannot bear to look upon Thee 
sleeping, and I am wounded in the depths of my soul, * a harsh sword hath pierced 
my heart. * I sing the praises of Thy Passion, I venerate Thy loving-kindness: ** O 
long-suffering One, glory be to Thee!  
Then, the litanies: Have mercy upon us, O God ..., and Let us complete our 
morning prayer ...Deacon: Wisdom! And the priest intoneth the dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the Cross, and 
4 from ODE VI of the canon of the righteous ones: 
Of old, a sword was given to guard the blessed tree of life after the disobedience 
of Adam the first-formed; but the Cross hath opened a path thereto.  
With eyes, mouth and soul, with our faces and hearts, let us all bow down before 
the most holy Cross of Christ, the Bestower of life, whereby the whole world is 
sanctified.  
Becoming temples of God today, as the prophets said, bowing down before the 
wood of the most holy Cross, all of us who are the heirs thereto kiss it with fear.  
We chant hymns to thee, O Christ, and with faith entreat thy power: Rescue us 
from the snares of the enemy, and direct all of us who hymn thee to the haven of 
salvation. 
Having arrayed yourselves in the vesture of martyrdom, O saints, ye embroidered 
it with the labors of your suffering.  
Desiring to be with Christ, O all-glorious martyrs, ye have run the course of 
suffering with unwavering resolve.  
Preserving the law which Moses handed down, O holy ones, ye suffered lawfully, 
putting the tyrant Antiochus to shame.  
Theotokion: O thou who alone hast given birth to the Word in the flesh at His 
word, deliver our souls from the snares of the enemy, we pray.  
After the entrance, Troparion of the Cross, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people * and bless Thine inheritance, * grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  
Troparion of the righteous ones, in Tone I: 
By the pangs of the saints, which they suffered for Thee, O Lord, * be Thou 
entreated, * and heal Thou all our infirmities, ** we pray Thee, O Lover of mankind.  
Glory ..., Kontakion of the righteous ones, in Tone II: 
O ye seven pillars of the wisdom of God, * seven-branched lamp of the divine 
Light, * O all-wise Maccabees * who before the martyrs, * were martyrs most great: * 
with them entreat ye the God of all, * that we who honor you may be saved!  
Both now ..., Kontakion of the Cross, in Tone IV: 
O Thou Who wast willingly lifted up upon the Cross, * bestow Thy compassions 
upon the new community named after Thee, O Christ God; * gladden by Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over all adversaries. ** May they have as 
an ally the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Prokeimenon of the Cross, in Tone VI: Save O Lord, Thy people, * and bless 
Thine inheritance.  
Verse: Unto Thee, O Lord, will I cry; O my God, be not silent unto me.  
Prokeimenon of the Maccabees, in Tone VI: In the saints that are in His earth 
hath the Lord been wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, § 125 (I COR. 1: 18-24) 
Brethren: The preaching of the cross is to them that perish, foolishness; but unto 
us which are saved, it is the power of God. For it is written: I will destroy the wisdom 
of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where is the 
wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? For after that in the 
wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the 
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. For the Jews require a sign, and 
the Greeks seek after wisdom: but we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a 
stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, 
both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. 
 EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, §330 (11 :33-40) 
Brethren: By faith all the saints subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, 
obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, 
escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in 
fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Women received their dead raised to 
life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain 
a better resurrection: And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, 
moreover of bonds and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, 
were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and 
goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; (Of whom the world was not worthy:) 
they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. And 
these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise: God 
having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made 
perfect. 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast purchased 
from the beginning.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the midst 
of the earth.  
Verse: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He delivered them 
out of all their tribulations.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
 
GOSPEL ACC. TO ST. JOHN, §60 (JN. 19: 6-11, 13-20, 25-28, 30-35) 
At that time, the high priests and elders took council against Jesus to put Him to 
death. And they delivered Him to Pilate saying: “Away with Him! away with Him! 
Crucify Him!” Pilate said unto them: “Take ye Him, and crucify Him: for I find no 
fault in Him. The Jews answered him: “We have a law, and by our law He ought to 
die, because He made Himself the Son of God.” When Pilate therefore heard that 
saying, he was the more afraid; and went again into the judgment hall, and said unto 
Jesus: “Whence art Thou?” But Jesus gave him no answer. Then said Pilate unto Him: 
“Speakest Thou not unto me? Knowest Thou not that I have power to crucify Thee, 
and have power to release Thee?” Jesus answered: “Thou couldst have no power at 
all against Me, except it were given thee from above.” When Pilate therefore heard 
that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that 
is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha. And it was the preparation of 
the Passover, and about the sixth hour: and he said unto the Jews: “Behold your 
King!” But they cried out: “Away with Him! Away with Him! Crucify Him!” Pilate 
said unto them: “Shall I crucify your King?” The chief priests answered: “We have no 
king but Caesar.” Then delivered he Him therefore unto them to be crucified. And 
they took Jesus, and led Him away. And He bearing His Cross went forth into a place 
called the place of the skull, which is called in Hebrew Golgotha: where they crucified 
Him, and two others with Him, on either side, and Jesus in the midst. And Pilate 
wrote a title, and put it on the Cross. And the writing was: “Jesus of Nazareth, the 
King of the Jews.” This title then read many of the Jews; for the place where Jesus 
was crucified was nigh to the city: and it was written in Hebrew, and Greek, and 
Latin. Now there stood by the Cross of Jesus His Mother, and His Mother’s sister, 
Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus therefore saw His 
Mother, and the disciple standing by, whom He loved, He said unto His Mother: 
“Woman, behold thy son!” Then said He to the disciple: “Behold thy Mother!” And 
from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home. After this, Jesus knowing 
that all things were now accomplished, bowed His head, and gave up the ghost. The 
Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not remain 
upon the cross on the Sabbath day, (for that Sabbath day was a high day,) besought 
Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away. Then came 
the soldiers, and broke the legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with 
him. But when they came to Jesus, and saw that He was dead already, they broke not 
His legs: but one of the soldiers with a spear pierced His side, and forthwith came 
there out blood and water. And he that saw it bore record, and his record is true.  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
 
GOSPEL ACC. TO MATTHEW, §38 (MT.10: 32-33, 37-38; 19: 27-30) 
The Lord said to His disciples: “Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him will 
I confess also before My Father Who is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny Me 
before men, him will I also deny before My Father Who is in heaven. He that loveth 
father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me: and he that loveth son or 
daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me.” Then answered Peter and said unto 
Him: “Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed Thee, what shall we have 
therefore?” And Jesus said unto them: “Verily I say unto you, that ye who have 
followed Me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of His 
glory, so also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And 
every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or 
wife, or children, or lands, for My name’s sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall 
inherit everlasting life. But many that are first shall be last; and the last shall be first.”  
 
Communion Verse of the Cross: The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, hath 
been signed upon us.  
Communion Verse of the saints: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is 
meet for the upright.  
 
Be It Known: On this day, in monasteries, cathedrals and parish churches, the Lesser 
Blessing of Water is performed, as set forth in the Euchologion. 
 
 
 
