--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
AFTERFEAST OF THE TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR LORD  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE MATTHIAS  
AT VESPERS  
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 3 for the feast, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Come, and with faith * let us celebrate together * the most radiant and divine 
transfiguration of Christ, * and, transformed by a goodly transformation, * let us 
spiritually mount to the lofty summit of the virtues * with the disciples of Christ, * 
that, taught with them * the revelation of awesome mysteries, ** we may glorify the 
Savior and Lord.  
Rejoice piously and be glad, * O honored Church of the faithful, * celebrating now 
this honored and most radiant feast; * for the Master of all, Who is now transfigured, 
* doth manifestly illumine * with the brilliance of ineffable splendor * the 
disfigurement of mankind, * radiantly emitting an effulgence ** which surpasseth the 
brightness of the sun.  
The God and Creator of all, * assuming the guise of a servant * in the ineffable 
richness of His tender compassion, * now saveth mankind from the ancient darkness, 
* His face shining, * disclosing the effulgence of the Godhead in His flesh; * 
wherefore, filled with awe and fear, * the disciples worshiped the Master of all, ** 
falling prostrate.  
And 5 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
O Apostle Matthias, * thou didst complete the divine choir * from whence Judas 
had fallen, * and with the divine brilliance of thy wise discourses * thou hast driven 
away the gloom of the madness of idolatry * by the grace of God. * Make thou 
supplication now, that He grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy. (Twice)  
O blessed Matthias, * thou didst traverse the noetic Eden * like a river flooded 
with divine waters; * and thou hast given * the earth mystic waters to drink * and hast 
shown it to be fertile; wherefore, pray thou, * that God grant unto our souls ** peace 
and great mercy. (Twice)  
O divinely inspired Matthias, * with the lightning-flashes of thy teachings * thou 
didst hallow all the world, * illumining all, guiding all to the knowledge of God, * 
making those who slept before * in the darkness of vanity * and the gloom of all 
ungodliness ** to be receptacles of the light.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Grace was poured forth in thy lips, O glorious Apostle Matthias, and thou wast a 
beacon of the Church of Christ, teaching the reason endowed sheep to believe in the 
consubstantial Trinity, in the one Godhead.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Sanctifying the whole world with Thy light, Thou wast transfigured on a lofty 
mountain, O Good One, showing Thy power to Thy disciples, that Thou mightest 
deliver the world from transgression. Wherefore, we cry out to Thee: O 
compassionate Lord, save Thou our souls!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES (ACTS 1: 15-26)  
And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples, and said, (the 
number of names together were about an hundred and twenty,) Men and brethren, 
this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit by the mouth of 
David spake before concerning Judas, which was guide to them that took Jesus. For 
he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this ministry. Now this man 
purchased a field with the reward of iniquity; and falling headlong, he burst asunder in 
the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. And it was known unto all the dwellers at 
Jerusalem; insomuch as that field is called in their proper tongue, Haceldama, that is 
to say the field of blood. For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be 
desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and his bishopric let another take. Wherefore 
of these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in 
and out among us, Beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he 
was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his 
resurrection. And they appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed 
Justus, and Matthias. And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which knowest the 
hearts of all men, shew whether of these two thou hast chosen, That he may take part 
of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might 
go to his own place. And they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and 
he was numbered with the eleven apostles.  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN (I JN 3: 21-4: 6)  
Beloved: if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. And 
whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do 
those things that are pleasing in his sight. And this is his commandment, That we 
should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave 
us commandment. And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he 
in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given 
us. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: 
because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit 
of God: Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: 
And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of 

--- PAGE 3 ---
God: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; 
and even now already is it in the world. Ye are of God, little children, and have over-
come them: because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. They are 
of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them. We are 
of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us.  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN (I JN 4: 11-16) 
Beloved: if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. No man hath seen 
God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected 
in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us 
of his Spirit. And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the 
Savior of the world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God 
dwelleth in him, and he in God. And we have known and believed the love that God 
hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in 
him.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Taking the form of the first man Adam, O Christ, in Thy tender compassion, 
Thou didst reveal Thyself as the second Adam, and wast transfigured on Mount 
Tabor, disclosing Thy divinity, O my Savior.  
Verse: Thine are the heavens, * and Thine is the earth.  
Beholding Thy transfiguration on the holy mountain, O Christ, the foremost 
representatives of grace and the law were amazed; and with them we worship Thee 
and the Father and the divine Spirit.  
Verse: Tabor and Hermon * shall rejoice in Thy name.  
Creation is clearly enlightened by Thy transfiguration, O Christ, which, as God, 
Thou didst show on Tabor to the divine apostles, and to Moses and Elijah, ineffably 
shining more brightly than the sun.  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Full of divine zeal, O right wondrous Apostle Matthias, with zeal thou wast 
zealous for God Almighty, Who hath shown thee to be full of divine miracles; for, 
possessing unusual zeal, thou didst acquire integrity through thine actions. Wherefore, 
dwelling with the heavenly choirs in the highest, pray thou to the Word, Christ our 
God, O beholder of God, that He grant us great mercy.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., in Tone II: 
O Christ God Who wast transfigured on Mount Tabor, showing the glory of Thy 
divinity to Thy disciples, illumine us all with the light of the knowledge of Thee, and 
guide us on the path of Thy commandments, as Thou alone art good and the Lover 
of mankind.  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Matthias, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., that of the apostle;  
O holy Apostle Matthias, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls 
Both now ..., that of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II:  
He who is glorious among the apostles pursued the nations and taught the ends of 
the earth to worship Thee, O Christ God, with the Father and the Spirit. For his sake 
establish Thy Church and send Thy blessing upon the faithful, O only Merciful One 
and Lover of mankind. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., that of the feast, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Revealing the human form of Thy second and awesome coming with Thy glory, O 
Savior, Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor. Elijah and Moses conversed with 
Thee, and Thy three disciples were summoned to behold Thy glory, O Master, and 
marveled at Thy radiance. O Thou Who then shone forth Thy light upon them, 
illumine our souls!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
As the Sun of righteousness, Christ emitted thee like a ray of light, to illumine the 
whole world, O glorious Apostle Matthias; and in thy supplications thou art luminous 
and dost enlighten with the never-waning light of God all who celebrate thy holy 
memory with faith. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Moses and Elijah stood before Thee when Thou didst ascend the mountain with 
the disciples and shone forth in the glory of the Father; for the law and the prophets 
serve God; and the Father, declaring Christ’s essential Sonship, called Him His Son. 
Him do we hymn with Thee and the Spirit.  
After the Polyeleos, this magnification: We magnify thee, O Matthias, apostle of 
Christ, and we honor thy pangs and labors, wherewith thou didst struggle in the 
proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the 
work of His hands.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Casting down the pride of idolatry and desiring the sufferings of the Savior, O 
most blessed Apostle Matthias, thou wast revealed to the world by heaven, pouring 
forth miracles upon all, and didst become a teacher for the nations. Wherefore, we 
honor thy memory as is meet, glorifying ,thee in hymns and faithfully magnifying 
thee, O most noetically rich and divinely eloquent apostle. Entreat Christ God, that 
He grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor, O Jesus, and a radiant cloud, stretching 
forth like a shadow, covered the apostles with glory. Wherefore, they fell face down 
upon the ground, unable to bear the sight of the splendor of the unapproachable 
glory of Thy countenance, O beginningless Savior. O Christ our God, Who then 
shone forth Thy light upon them, illumine Thou our souls!  
Hymn of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and 
their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Let every breath ...,  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN, § 67 (JN 21:15-25)  
At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the 
dead, and saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou me more than these? 
He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed 
my lambs. He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou 
me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, 
Feed my sheep. He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou 
me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? And 
he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus 
saith unto him, Feed my sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, 
thou girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, 
thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither 

--- PAGE 7 ---
thou wouldest not. This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. 
And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, Follow me. Then Peter, turning 
about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast 
at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee? Peter seeing him saith to 
Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till 
I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. Then went this saying abroad among 
the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall 
not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Grace hath been poured forth in thy lips, O glorious Apostle Matthias, and thou 
wast a luminary of the Church of Christ, teaching the reason-endowed sheep to 
believe in the consubstantial Trinity, in the one Godhead.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos, the composition of Cosmas 
of Maiuma, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: The people of Israel passed dry-shod across the watery deep of the Red 
Sea * and beholding the riders and captains of the enemy * swallowed by the 
waters, they cried out for joy: * ‘Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been 
glorified.’ 
Speaking words of life and giving instruction concerning that which is divine, 
Christ said to his friends: “Recognize the Father in Me, for I emit unapproachable 
light, unto the joy of those who chant: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been 
glorified!”  
“Ye will be invested with the power of tongues, O My friends and disciples, and 
will be marvelous in the richness thereof, for ye will be filled with glory. For I shall 
reveal Myself to be brighter than the sun, illumining those who chant in joy: Let us 
sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!”  
Shining forth today with divine radiance on Mount Tabor, as He promised, Christ 
hath laid bare His countenance to His disciples. And, full of light-bearing and divine 
splendor, they chanted in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!  
Canon of the apostle, with 8 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “With hymns do I 
hymn thee, O Matthias, friend of Christ”;  
The composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
O Matthias, bestow thou a beam of salvation from heaven upon me who now 
hymn thy radiant festival with hymns, I pray.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou hast been revealed to be a great sun of the great Light, O right wondrous 
one; for thou hast conversed directly with God Who is with us, O apostle.  
Submitting to the laws of the Master, O blessed one, with the net of thy tongue 
thou didst draw forth the ends of the earth from the abyss of ignorance.  
Theotokion: In His goodness, the supremely divine Word saveth all of me, for He 
desired to become incarnate of thy womb, O pure Mother of God.  
Katavasia: The people of Israel passed dry-shod across the watery deep of the 
Red Sea * and beholding the riders and captains of the enemy * swallowed by 
the waters, they cried out for joy: * ‘Let us chant unto our God, for He hath 
been glorified.’ 
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
Having put on all of Adam and transformed the nature which of old had become 
dark, Thou didst illumine it with the transfiguration of Thine appearance, rendering it 
divine, O Christ.  
Christ, Who of old guided Israel in the wilderness by the pillar of fire and the 
cloud, hath ineffably shone forth in light today upon Mount Tabor.  
Canon of the holy apostle 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Strengthened by the hand of the Author of life, O wise one, thou wast able to 
snatch away the spoils of the mighty one and enslave him by grace.  
Loving the Teacher and serving Him industriously, O right wondrous one, thou 
dost save us from deception.  
The all-accomplishing Spirit chose thee, O divinely eloquent one, to fill the twelfth 
place in the holy choir of the disciples.  
Theotokion: Possessing thine aid, O pure one, I fear not the assaults of wicked 
enemies; for having thee as an intercessor, I vanquish the hordes thereof.  
Katavasia: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have 
girded themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the 
Lord. 
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain O Christ God, * and Thy disciples beheld 
Thy glory as far as they could endure; * that when they would see Thee crucified, * 
they would comprehend that Thy suffering was voluntary, * and proclaim to the 
world that Thou art of a truth ** the Effulgence of the Father.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Ikos: Arise, ye slothful thoughts of my soul, which are ever dragged down unto the 
earth! Be ye borne up and rise aloft to the summit of divine ascent! Let us make haste 
to Peter and the sons of Zebedee, and with them let us go to Mount Tabor, that we 
may see the glory of our God with them, and may hear the voice which they heard 
from on high; and they preached the Effulgence of the Father.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
With the lightning-flashes of thy divine words thou didst consume the deception 
of the wicked one and enlighten the faithful to hymn the coming in the flesh of Him 
Who hath dominion over all things; and thou didst emulate His divine sufferings. 
Wherefore, assembling, we celebrate in gladness thy holy memory and cry out to thee 
in unison: O Apostle Matthias, entreat Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins 
unto those who with love honor thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded ...”: 
The lightning hidden under the flesh of Thy nature and divine majesty, O Christ 
our Benefactor, didst thou show forth upon the holy mountain, shining upon the 
disciples who were with Thee. And when they perceived Thine unbearable glory, they 
cried aloud: “Holy art Thou, for, though Thou art unapproachable, Thou art visible 
to the world in the flesh, O Thou only Lover of mankind!”  
ODE IV 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: I have heard of Thy glorious Dispensation, * O Christ our God: * how 
Thou wast born of the Virgin, * that Thou mightest deliver from error * those 
who cry aloud to Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord. 
Forming the law in writing on Sinai, O Christ God, Thou wast manifest, borne in 
the cloud, the fire, the darkness and the whirlwind. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
That Thou mayest confirm Thy glorious dispensation, O Christ God, in that Thou 
hast existed from before the beginning of time, Thou didst shine forth ineffably on 
Tabor, likewise setting Thine ascent in a cloud.  
Those who conversed with Thee as servants stood before Thee, O Master Christ; 
and Thou didst converse with them in the fire and darkness, and the moist whistling 
wind. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Moses, Who of old foresaw Thee in the fire and the bush, and Elijah, who was 
taken up in the chariot of fire, arriving on Tabor proclaimed Thy glory, for the sake 
of Thy Cross, O Christ.  
Canon of the holy apostle 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Proclaiming the one Essence of the Godhead, the one Monarchy and Dominion, 
O most blessed one, thou didst pursue the flock of the nations.  
The Lord brought thee to the sea of life, O most wise one, like a horse roiling the 
bitter waters of polytheism.  
With divine discourse thou didst renew stony hearts, O glorious one, sowing piety 
and the knowledge of the Truth.  
Theotokion: O vessel of virginity and habitation of the infinite Being, illumine my 
soul, which hath been darkened by many passions.  
Katavasia: I have heard of Thy glorious Dispensation, * O Christ our God: * 
how Thou wast born of the Virgin, * that Thou mightest deliver from error * 
those who cry aloud to Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord. 
ODE V 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Thou hast parted light from the primal chaos, * that Thy works might 
hymn Thee in light, O Christ, * as their Creator: * do Thou direct our paths in 
Thy light. 
The mountains bowed themselves before Thy face; for Thou wast well pleased to 
accept, in Thine earthly form, the light and heavenly rays which the sun came and laid 
at Thy feet.  
Moses and Elijah cried to the disciples who were being instructed on holy Mount 
Tabor: “Behold, Christ the Savior is the God Whom we proclaimed of old!”  
The immutable nature, having mingled itself with human nature, shone forth 
ineffably, abundantly disclosing to the apostles the light of the immaterial Godhead.  
When the disciples beheld Thee, the ever-existent Effulgence, shining in the glory 
of the Father, O Christ, they cried out to Thee: “Direct Thou our paths in Thy light!.”  
Canon of the holy apostle 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
The true Vine put thee forth as a most fertile branch producing the grapes which 
exude the wine of salvation; and drinking thereof, O blessed one, we who are held 
fast by ignorance have cast off the drunkenness of deception. 
Thou wast shown to fulfill the choir of the twelve disciples from which the 
betrayer had cast himself, finding bitter strangulation, having lifted his heel against 
Christ, O wondrous Matthias, proclaimer of the mysteries.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Thou wast cast into the world as divine salt, O blessed and most praised Apostle 
Matthias, cleansing away the corruption of falsehood with sweet doctrines, driving 
away sickness and healing wounds of body and soul.  
Theotokion: By thy most pure birthgiving, O Virgin Bride of God, Adam shed the 
ugly garments of ancient mortality and clothed himself in a holy robe of truth which 
was in nowise polluted by the passions.  
Katavasia: Thou hast parted light from the primal chaos, * that Thy works 
might hymn Thee in light, O Christ, * as their Creator: * do Thou direct our 
paths in Thy light. 
ODE VI 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In mine affliction I cried unto the Lord, * the God of my salvation, * 
and He hearkened unto me. 
Shining forth the light which is far brighter than the sun, the Savior illumined us 
on Tabor.  
Having ascended Mount Tabor, O Christ, Thou wast transfigured; and having cast 
falsehood utterly into darkness, Thou hast illumined us.  
Recognizing Thee as God on Tabor, O Christ, the glorious apostles, marveling, 
bowed down their knees.  
Canon of the holy apostle 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Thou didst become a god by adoption, deified by divine union, receiving pristine 
rays of light from God, and thou hast illumined the faith and cleansed the earth of the 
darkness of idolatry. (Twice)  
Lo! every prophecy of the sacred prophets is contained in thee, the disciple; for 
thou wast an eye-witness, emulator and apostle of Him Whom thou didst proclaim of 
old, O Matthias, servant of God.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, we, the faithful, call thee the noetic sanctuary, the 
untouchable mercy-seat, the golden lamp-stand, the spiritual table bearing the Bread 
of life.  
Katavasia: In mine affliction I cried unto the Lord, * the God of my salvation, * 
and He hearkened unto me. 
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Thy luminous sound which hath gone forth like the sun into all the earth * doth 
enlighten the Church of the nations with grace, ** O wondrous Apostle Matthias.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Ikos: Grant me a stream of discourse, O Lord Who created the nature of water; 
strengthen my heart, O Compassionate One Who established the earth by Thy word; 
and enlighten my thoughts, O Thou Who clothest Thyself in light as with a garment, 
that I may say and chant fitting things worthily to honor Thine Apostle Matthias, O 
greatly Merciful One.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Illumined by the light of unapproachable glory on Mount Tabor, the apostles cried 
out to Christ: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”  
Enraptured by the effulgence of the divine voice, the dew-bearing cloud and the 
radiance, O Christ, the apostles chanted: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”  
When he beheld Thee in unapproachable light on Mount Tabor, O Christ, Peter 
cried aloud: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”  
Present with thee, the Author of life, when Thou didst cause the light of Thy 
countenance to shine forth, the sons of Zebedee cried aloud: “O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!” 
Canon of the holy apostle 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
With the flood of thy divine wisdom thou didst dry up the torrent of falsehood, O 
glorious one, and with a torrent of sustenance thou hast given drink to those who cry 
with faith: Blessed art Thou, O God!  
By the power of God Almighty thou didst set at naught the wiles of the enemy 
before the face of thine advance, O apostle, and the mountains and hills of 
ungodliness were torn down.  
Theotokion: Behold the Virgin of whom the great Isaiah said in the Spirit, that she 
would conceive in her womb and give birth unto the God to Whom we chant: O 
Lord God, blessed art Thou!  
Katavasia: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the 
flame of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, 
blessed art Thou. 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In Babylon the godly Children, * burning with a fiery zeal for God * 
bravely trampled upon the threat of the tyrant and the fire; * and thrown into 
the midst of the flames * they were refreshed with dew and sang: * Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Christ Who upholdeth all things by His hand, hath with His most pure feet 
ascended Mount Tabor, whereon His face shone with radiance brighter than the 
beams of the sun, and showed forth those highest among the law and grace, who 
chanted: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
He Who ineffably manifested Himself on Mount Tabor with unapproachable 
glory, the intangible and never-waning Light, the Effulgence of the Father, illumining 
creation hath deified mortals who sing: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
Moses and Elijah, standing on Mount Tabor as befitteth priests, manifestly 
beholding the Hypostasis of the Divinity, Christ Who shone forth in the Father’s 
glory, chanted: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
The face of Moses once was filled with glory in its appearance because of the 
manifestation of God; and Christ is arrayed in light and glory as in a robe, for, being 
light itself, He illumineth those who chant: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the 
Lord!  
The disciples, beholding Christ surrounded by the luminous cloud on Tabor, fell 
to the ground, their minds enlightened, and hymned Him with the Father and the 
Spirit, chanting: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
Canon of the holy apostle 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
As the mouth of God thou didst snatch from the throat of the slayer of mankind 
those whom he had cruelly slaughtered and made food for his malice, O wise one, 
and with the laver of regeneration thou didst bring them to the Lord, chanting 
unceasingly: Ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
As the weapon of the word of God, O glorious one, thou didst utterly grind down 
the sword of falsehood and the weapon of evil, and by the power of God thou didst 
cast down the sacrifices, pillars and temples of the idolaters, but hast made into 
temples of the Trinity those who cry: Ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Thou didst show thyself to be the heaven of the Word, declaring the ineffably 
divine glory of the Only-begotten, O all-wise Matthias, thou lightning-flash of grace, 
seeker of the lost, lamp-stand of the divine Light, initiate of ineffable mysteries, 
whom we hymn together with gladness.  
Theotokion: In a manner transcending nature didst thou conceive; in a manner 
past all telling thou hast given birth to the Creator of human nature, and Who, though 
inseparable from the Father, became a man, O pure Lady. Him doth all creation 
hymn, chanting: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Katavasia: In Babylon the godly Children, * burning with a fiery zeal for God * 
bravely trampled upon the threat of the tyrant and the fire; * and thrown into 
the midst of the flames * they were refreshed with dew and sang: * Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Thy birthgiving was revealed to be incorrupt, * God came forth from 
thy womb, * and He appeared upon earth in mortal flesh * and dwelt among 
mankind; * Wherefore we all magnify thee, O Theotokos. 
Suddenly illumined with a new outpouring of light, the disciples, stricken with awe, 
looked one at another; and, astonished, bowed down to the earth and worshipped 
Thee, the Master of all.  
A divinely sounding voice issued forth from the midst of the cloud, announcing 
the wonder; for the Father of lights cried to the apostles: “This is My beloved Son! 
Heed ye Him!”  
Having seen new and most glorious things and heard the voice of the Father on 
Tabor, the servants of the Word cried out: “This is our Savior, the image of the 
Prototype!”  
O immutable Image of Him Who Is, O Immovable One, unalterable Seal, Son, 
Word, Wisdom, Arm, Right Hand of the Most High, Power: Thee do we hymn with 
the Father and the Spirit.  
Canon of the holy apostle 
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
The Savior called thee His friend who obeyed His commandments, O blessed 
apostle, the heir to His kingdom, who will be enthroned with Him on that awesome 
day which is to come, O most wise Matthias, thou fulfillment of the twelve disciples. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Having traversed the sea of life with the sail of the Cross, O blessed one, thou 
didst reach the harbor of peace and thine ultimate desire; and, rejoicing now, thou 
standest with the choir of the apostles, entreating Him Who is the Lover of mankind 
on our behalf.  
Thy tongue hath been shown to be a truly radiant lamp, a shining beacon of the 
Spirit, which consumeth foreign doctrines, burneth up alien fire, O wise one, and 
shineth forth light upon those who sleep in the darkness of Ignorance.  
Theotokion: Thou, alone among women, hast brought an end to the curse of the 
first-formed man, O Bride of God, having given birth in the flesh to the Infinite One 
Who became finite; and thou hast restored the bounds of nature, O undefiled one, 
and by thy most glorious mediation hast united those things which of old were set 
apart.  
Katavasia: Thy birthgiving was revealed to be incorrupt, * God came forth 
from thy womb, * and He appeared upon earth in mortal flesh * and dwelt 
among mankind; * Wherefore we all magnify thee, O Theotokos. 
Exapostilarion of the holy apostle:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
Directing the course of thy beautiful feet on high, O Apostle Matthias, thou didst 
mount the path to heaven rejoicing; and, standing before the Trinity, thou beholdest 
the Son in the Father and the divine Spirit. Wherefore, with faith we celebrate thy 
most sacred and divine memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the feast: 
O Word, Thou immutable Light of the light of the unbegotten Father: today on 
Mount Tabor we have seen in Thy light the manifest light of the Father and the light 
of the Spirit Who guideth all creation with light. 
On the Praises, 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
On Mount Tabor * the glory of the Trinity * was manifestly revealed * when Thou 
wast transfigured, ** O my supremely good Savior.  
At the transfiguration * a cloud of light * was manifestly stretched forth, * filling 
with amazement ** the foremost of the divine disciples.  
Elijah and Moses * stood before Thee, O Word, * at Thy transfiguration, * and the 
Father bore witness, ** speaking from heaven.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
With the rod of grace * thou didst draw forth all * from the abyss of vainglory, O 
right wondrous Matthias, * obedient to the behest of the Teacher * Who illumined 
thine understanding in all things * and showed thee to be * an apostle and an honored 
divine herald * of His unapproachable divinity, ** O all-blessed one.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
The effulgence of the Spirit descended upon thee * in a fiery vision, O blessed 
one, * and made thee a divine vessel * which quickly driveth away the gloom of 
ungodliness; * and thou dost illumine the world * with the radiance of thine all-wise 
words, * O initiate of the mysteries, * adornment of the apostles, ** blessed witness 
of Christ.  
Illumining those who sit in darkness * with the lightning-flashes of thy preaching, 
* O glorious one, * thou didst show them forth * to be children, through faith, of 
God the Master, * Whose sufferings and death thou didst emulate, * and of Whose 
glory thou art an heir, * in that thou art wise and divinely eloquent, ** and a disciple 
of the Truth.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Forsaking earthly things, thou didst follow after Christ, marked by the inspiration 
of the Holy Spirit; and thou wast sent by Him unto the nations who were perishing, 
to convert men to the light of divine knowledge, O Apostle Matthias, and, having 
finished the struggles of thy divine sufferings and divers torments, thou didst commit 
thy soul to Christ. Him do thou entreat, O all-blessed one, that He grant us great 
mercy.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone II: 
On Mount Tabor Moses and Elijah beheld God, Who had become incarnate of 
the Virgin Maiden, for the deliverance of mankind.  
Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE IV of the canon of the feast, and 4 
from ODE VI of the canon of the holy apostle.  
I have heard of Thy glorious Dispensation, O Christ our God: how Thou wast 
born of the Virgin, that so Thou mightest deliver from error those who cry aloud to 
Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord. 
Forming the law in writing on Sinai, O Christ God, Thou wast manifest, borne in 
the cloud, the fire, the darkness and the whirlwind. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
O Master, Who preserved intact the bush which had been touched by fire, Thou 
didst show Thy divinely radiant flesh unto Moses, who chanteth: Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord!  
The material sun was eclipsed by the radiance of the Godhead, seeing Thee 
transfigured on Mount Tabor, O my Jesus. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Thou didst become a god by adoption, deified by divine union, receiving pristine 
rays of light from God, and thou hast illumined the faith and cleansed the earth of the 
darkness of idolatry. (Twice)  
Lo! every prophecy of the sacred prophets is contained in thee, the disciple; for 
thou wast an eye-witness, emulator and apostle of Him Whom thou didst proclaim of 
old, O Matthias, servant of God.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, we, the faithful, call thee the noetic sanctuary, the 
untouchable mercy-seat, the golden lamp-stand, the spiritual table bearing the Bread 
of life.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. 
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Matthias, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls 
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
Thy luminous sound which hath gone forth like the sun into all the earth * doth 
enlighten the Church of the nations with grace, ** O wondrous Apostle Matthias.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain O Christ God, * and Thy disciples beheld 
Thy glory as far as they could endure; * that when they would see Thee crucified, * 
they would comprehend that Thy suffering was voluntary, * and proclaim to the 
world that Thou art of a truth ** the Effulgence of the Father.  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Prokeimenon of the feast: How magnified are Thy works, O Lord! * In wisdom 
hast Thou made them all. 
Prokeimenon of the apostle, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all 
the earth, * and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 
THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, § 2 (ACTS 1: 12-17, 21-26)  
In those days, the apostles returned unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, 
which is from Jerusalem a sabbath day’s journey, and when they were come in, they 
went up into an upper room, where abode Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, 
Philip, and Thomas, Bartholemew, and Matthew, James, the son of Alpheus, and 
Simon the Zealot, and Jude, son of James. These all continued with one accord in 
prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary, the mother of Jesus, and with 
His brethren. And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples, and said 
(the number of names together was about an hundred and twenty), Men and 
brethren, this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit, by the 
mouth of David, spoke before concerning Judas, who was guide to those who took 
Jesus. For he was numbered with us, and had obtained part in this ministry. 
Wherefore, of these men who have companied with us all the time that the Lord 
Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the baptism of John unto that same 
day that He was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of 
His resurrection. And they appointed two, Joseph, called Barsabbas, who was 
surnamed Justus, and Matthias. And they prayed, and said: “Thou, Lord, Who 
knowest the hearts of all men, show which of these two Thou hast chosen, that he 
may take part in this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, 
that he might go to his own place.” And they gave forth lots; and the lot fell upon 
Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens confess Thy wonders, a Lord, and Thy truth in 
the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 40 (LK. 9: 1-6)  
At that time, Jesus called His twelve disciples together, and gave them power and 
authority over all devils, and to cure diseases. And He sent them to preach the 
kingdom of God, and to heal the sick. And He said unto them: “Take nothing for 
your journey, neither staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two 

--- PAGE 19 ---
coats apiece. And whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence depart. 
And whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city, shake off the very 
dust from your feet for a testimony against them. And they departed, and went 
through the towns, preaching the Gospel and healing everywhere.  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who was transfigured on Tabor!  
Thy birthgiving was shown to be incorrupt: God issued forth from thy womb, 
and appeared as a mortal being on earth, and dwelt with men. Wherefore, we 
all magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
Communion Verse of the feast: O Lord, in the light of Thy face shall we walk, 
and in Thy name shall we rejoice all the day long.  
Communion Verse of the saint: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
 
 
