--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
COMMEMORATION OF THE TRANSLATION OF THE RELICS OF THE HOLY 
PROTOMARTYR AND ARCHDEACON STEPHEN. 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy protomartyr, 3 in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O Stephen, first among the martyrs to suffer, * foundation of those who minister 
as deacons, * elect of the apostles: * with unwaning light do thou illumine * those 
who celebrate * thy radiant festival with splendor, * bestowing grace and mercy upon 
thy servants, O martyr, * guiding them to everlasting life ** by thy supplications.  
O Stephen, martyr of Christ, * receiving upon thy head a crown of graces * in 
accordance with thy name, * having adorned thy neck with a necklace of virtues as 
with one of gold, * thou didst become a most wise habitation of wisdom, * which 
thou didst cherish, * laying it up as something thou didst love; * wherefore, thou hast 
been honored ** with glory and grace.  
O most honored Stephen, * first of the martyrs to suffer, * crowned with glory and 
grace, O apostle, * when thou wast stoned * thou didst offer to our King and God * a 
precious crown, noetic and of greater value * than gold and precious stones. * Sweet 
are thy deeds and name. ** Remember thou all of us.  
And 3 Stichera, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone II: 
First among deacons and first among martyrs wast thou shown to be, O all-holy 
Stephen; for thy path was to holy things, and thou didst lead many martyrs to the 
Lord. Wherefore, heaven was opened to thee, and God appeared to thee. Him do 
thou entreat, that our souls be saved.  
In sanctity wast thou clothed, O blessed Stephen, protomartyr and proto-deacon, 
converser with the angels. Intercede with the sinless Savior and Lord, and pray for us.  
Let us honor the proto-deacon Stephen, the protomartyr and valiant favorite of 
Christ; for, standing in the midst of the iniquitous, he beheld the Son at the right 
hand of the Father.  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VI: 
First among martyrs and deacons wast thou shown to be, O apostle Stephen, 
adornment of spiritual athletes, confirmation of the faithful, glory of the righteous. As 
thou standest before the throne of Christ, the King of all, ask thou that those who 
celebrate thine honored memory be deemed worthy to be cleansed of their sins and 
to inherit the kingdom of heaven.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth birth to 
Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son How is it 
that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  
On the Aposticha, Stichera from the Oktoechos and Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
The composition of Cyprian: Rejoice in the Lord, O crown-bearer Stephen, thou 
emulator of the Master; for thou wast the first martyr of Christ our King and didst 
abolish the deception of the iniquitous Jews; and thou prayest unto the Lord on our 
behalf.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician * and healer of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 
Troparion of the holy protomartyr, in Tone IV: 
For the sufferings which thou didst endure for Christ God, * thy head hath been 
crowned with a royal diadem, * O Stephen, first among those who have suffered; * 
for, having denounced the insanity of the Jews, * thou didst behold thy Savior at the 
right hand of the Father. * Him do thou therefore entreat ** on behalf of our souls.  
 
After the dismissal of vespers, the priest vesteth in phelonion and the deacon in 
sticharion, and, accompanied by candles and censer, they bear the precious 
Cross into the sanctuary, whilst the Troparion “Save O Lord, Thy people ...” 
and the Kontakion are chanted; and it is placed upon the altar table.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, with 8 Troparia, without their Martyria; and the 
canon of the protomartyr, with six Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I crown the 
protomartyr with hymns,” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Standing before the Master, illumined with the radiant brilliance of the Spirit and 
with thy supra-natural sufferings, O Stephen, thou crown-bearer and most rich crown 
of the martyrs, enlighten those who hymn thine endurance.  
As first among the spiritual athletes to run the race and head of the assembly of the 
martyrs, O glorious and wondrous Stephen, thou wast deemed worthy to behold Him 
Who setteth the contest extending to thee a divinely woven wreath of victory on His 
life-bearing right hand.  
As Thou alone art a Treasury of goodness, O Savior, Thou didst show forth from 
the bosom of the earth a priceless treasure, riches which cannot be squandered, a 
possession which cannot be taken away: the relics of Thy protomartyr Stephen.  
Manifestly illumined with angelic splendor, O protomartyr Stephen, foremost 
among the deacons, the place where thou wast hidden was revealed by angelic hymns, 
and, full of spiritual fragrance, thou hast been truly honored as is meet.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate one, thou hast given birth unto the divine Word 
of the Father, Who before was incorporeal, yet became incarnate for our sake. O 
abode of virginity, vessel of purity, and temple of sanctity, O Bride of God, Sovereign 
Lady of the world!  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Thou wast shown to be a sacred speaker of divine mysteries and a theologian, 
disputing with the assemblies of the Jews and mightily denouncing their godlessness 
and their disposition which opposeth God, O most excellent martyr Stephen.  
Come ye all, and together let us honor with divine hymns the protomartyr of 
Christ, the first to minister as deacon, the converser with angels, who hath splendidly 
shown to the martyrs the threshold of the course.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
The first of the martyrs, the first of those who were chosen to serve as deacons, 
appeareth as a treasure hidden in the earth; and he hath filled the world with divine 
fragrance and the Church with rich gifts.  
Resurrect my mind which hath been slain, through the activity of life which was 
preached by thee, O wise one, to hymn thine honored solemnity, and deem me 
worthy to follow in thy footsteps, O blessed Stephen.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be the portal of the noetic Orient, the Most 
High, Who appeared on earth, O Virgin; for through thee, O most pure one, the 
Word hath entered in unto us, to save all from ignorance.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
O apostle of Christ, first among deacons, wise protomartyr, chief among the 
martyrs: having sanctified the ends of the earth by thy sufferings, thou hast 
enlightened the souls of all by thy miracles. From all misfortunes deliver those who 
honor thee, O most laudable Stephen. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone I: 
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
O glorious protomartyr who art full of faith, divine power and grace, today thou 
hast poured forth for us streams of fragrant myrrh, a fountain welling forth a river of 
divine blessings, and thou hast opened unto us a sweet torrent.  
The feast day of the protomartyr hath been made manifest unto the imperial city 
as sacred, splendid and harmonious, truly full of light and spiritual gladness, 
preserving the dominion of the honored Church and dispelling the audacity of the 
barbarians.  
Thou hast received a good inheritance as is fitting, O blessed Stephen, and where 
Christ the King of all is, there hast thou made thine abode; for thou hast been shown 
to be His minister, working signs and wonders with power and granting healing unto 
the sick.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Stephen, the great preacher of the Truth, the true champion of suffering, hath 
been planted as an upright and steadfast pillar of the Church, and stretcheth from the 
earth even unto the heavens, enlightening all the ends of the earth with the radiance 
of piety.  
Theotokion: O Savior and Redeemer of all, Thou art the new Adam, superseding 
the first Adam, born of the Virgin, who supersedeth Eve, our first mother, replacing 
death with true and immortal life. Wherefore, knowing her who gaveth birth unto 
Thee to be the Theotokos, all we, the faithful, call her blessed as is meet.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
The vain council of the iniquitous Jews didst thou denounce with true boldness; 
and, covered by the stones which they cast at thee, O divinely eloquent Stephen, as a 
victor thou wast taken up into the heavens by the Spirit.  
As one as comely as the dawn hast thou been revealed to the world, O glorious 
Stephen, driving away the darkness, dispelling the illusions of the demons, and 
healing the sufferings of the infirm and the sores of their spiritual ailments, O divinely 
inspired one.  
Rejoicing noetically with the angels, O blessed one, thou dost truly sanctify the 
ends of the earth by thine arrival and grace, fragrant with the sweet scent of spiritual 
myrrh, delivering us from misfortunes and temptations.  
Theotokion: Possessed of maternal boldness toward thy Son, O all-pure one, 
abandon not thy kindred care for us, we pray; for thee alone do we Christians set 
before the Master to intercede mercifully for our cleansing.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Being like unto the angels in thy desires, thou didst acquire an angelic bearing, O 
blessed one; and rejoicing and dancing with them, save those who hymn thee.  
The power of thy divinely inspired words manifestly fell like a loud clap of thunder 
upon the ears of the iniquitous and darkened their visage, O blessed one, who art 
pleasing unto God.  
Thou wast deemed worthy to see the glory of the Father and the co-essential 
radiance thereof, O Stephen, and He awarded thee with splendid crowns for thy 
sufferings.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: The only-begotten Son, Who was invisible from before the ages, in 
the latter days became thy firstborn: the God of my salvation, Who, through thee, 
became visible in the flesh, O Mother of God.  
Kontakion of the holy protomartyr, in Tone VI: 
Thou wast the first to be sown on the earth * by the heavenly Husbandman, O 
most laudable Stephen, * and thou wast the first on earth to shed thy blood for 
Christ, O blessed one; * first hast thou been to be crowned with the wreath of victory 
in the heavens, * O first among spiritual athletes, ** crown-bearer, and first among 
martyrs.  
Ikos: Beholding the blooms of paradise, which fill the whole world with their 
comely fragrance, I marvel at their strange appearance; for amid the image of winter 
many blossom forth, which is a thing strange for flowers. And the martyr of Christ 
who was first to blossom forth hath become a gateway for those who suffer under 
the law and who flower amid the deep winter of torment, for he hath shown the 
straight path to all who wish to suffer thus. Thou art the initiator of the contest, who 
wast revealed in thy pangs, O crowned one, to be the first among the martyrs to 
suffer thus.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The flow of thy blood hath opened the portals of heaven and hath shown thee 
standing before the Judge of the contest, Who extendeth to thee a crown; wherefore 
thou dost cry aloud: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Seizing the divinely manifest one like wild beasts, the murderers slew him with 
their hands which were defiled by murder, whilst he prayed earnestly for those who 
were slaying him, chanting: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
With the law didst thou upbraid the iniquitous, being a lawful emulator of the 
Savior, and didst show them to be opposed to God; and, stoned to death by them, 
thou didst chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Having conceived the Timeless One within time without knowing 
wedlock, O pure one, thou hast given birth unto the Word, Who before was 
incorporeal, but received flesh from thee, O Virgin. To Him do we chant in unison, 
crying aloud: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Resplendent with supra-natural radiance, O most excellent Stephen, the angelic 
visage of thy countenance showed forth the grace which issued forth from thee and 
which was richly hidden within thy soul. Wherefore, thou didst cry aloud: Ye children 
bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
O crown-bearer Stephen, with the sprinkling of thy blood cleanse thou the pangs 
of my soul and my sinful wounds; for unto thy merciful aid and Christ-like character 
do I have recourse, crying aloud: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
A crown of graces, of which thou art the namesake, hath been placed upon thy 
precious head by the impartial Judge, Whom thou didst piously proclaim to be the 
Creator, God and King of all, crying out unceasingly: Ye children bless; ye priests 
hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Into the hands of the Creator didst thou surrender thy spirit, and, rejoicing, the 
hosts of heaven received as a thee as a true friend, who, before on earth, wast equal to 
the angels and hast now joined their choirs, unceasingly chanting: Ye children bless; 
ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Thou wast a vessel of unwaning Light, O all-pure one, for thou 
gavest birth unto the Light of those who are in darkness and shadow and Who 
illumineth all with the grace of the knowledge of God. To Him do we, the faithful, 
unceasingly chant: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
The initiator of the sufferings of the martyrs, who hath brightly shown the straight 
path of torment which leadeth to the heavens, the protomartyr Stephen summoneth 
all in spirit to divine gladness, to partake of light and to share in sanctity.  
Captivated by the love of Christ, and emulating His meekness and words, Stephen 
said: “Lay not this sin to the charge of my murderers, O Lord; but receive my spirit, 
O Good One, and deem me worthy to inherit the divine kingdom and the ineffable 
food which are with Thee!”  
Comely and angelic of men, full of wisdom and faith, shining with rays of divine 
splendor, with thy mouth of godly speech thou didst theologize like a river, making 
proclamations in a godly manner, O divinely blessed one; wherefore thou hast 
received a heavenly inheritance.  
Thou wast crowned with a wreath of graces, surrounded by the choirs of the 
martyrs; and, standing before Christ, the Judge of the contest, pray thou on behalf of 
us who celebrate with splendor thy truly radiant festival, O blessed one, and deliver us 
from misfortunes.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Lady, Mother of God, as the merciful intercessor 
for all Christians, deliver thy suffering servants from misfortunes and temptations, 
and heal those who are afflicted with the wounds of cruel transgressions and are held 
fast by grievous pangs.  
Exapostilarion of the holy protomartyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us ...”: 
The casting of stones hath woven for thee a transcendent wreath of incorruption, 
and the drops of thy blood have dyed for thee a robe of royal purple, O excellent 
Stephen, first among martyrs.  
Theotokion: O holy and most pure Lady, who alone hast not known wedlock, our 
salvation and hope: beseech thou our Redeemer, Who was born of thee, that He save 
the world from falsehood, misfortunes and tribulations.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Assembling mystically, * O ye that love the feasts of the Church, * let us celebrate 
today * the prayerful and honored memory of the protomartyr, * thereon receiving 
healing * through his precious gifts; * and let us cry aloud: O rightly hymned martyr, * 
pray thou that they that celebrate thy memory ** be delivered from misfortunes. 
(Twice)  
The stones which were cast at thee * were like steps and stairs on the ascent to 
heaven; * and, ascending thereon, * thou didst behold the Lord * standing at the right 
hand of the Father, * extending to thee the crown, whereof thou art the namesake, * 
in his life-bearing right hand. * And thou standest nigh unto Him, as one right 
victorious ** and foremost among those who have suffered.  
Having illumined thy thought with spiritual grace, * thou wast shown to be like an 
angel in demeanor, O Stephen, * when thy body shone with inner radiance * and thy 
spiritual splendor was manifest * unto those who looked upon thee, * for which cause 
thou didst receive sight of the Light * when the heavens * were most gloriously 
opened unto thee, ** O first and boast of the martyrs.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Stephen, the good beginning of the martyrs, full of grace and power, working signs 
and great wonders amongst the people, was slain, stoned by the iniquitous; yet he 
shone forth like an angel, and beheld the glory of Thee, Who wast crucified for our 
sake, standing at the right hand of power, and he was taken up into the heavens by 
the Spirit of grace. Wherefore, abiding with the choirs of the angels, he prayeth that 
our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; 
Glory ..., in Tone II, the composition of Cyprian: 
O protomartyr, apostle and first deacon, portal of the martyrs and glory of the 
righteous, boast of the apostles: standing before the Sanhedrin, thou beheldest the 
heavens opened, and the Son of God standing at the right hand of the invisible 
Father. Wherefore, shining forth in countenance like an angel, with joy thou didst cry 
out concerning those who were stoning thee to death: “Lay not this sin to their 
charge!” And now ask thou cleansing of sins and great mercy for those who with love 
praise thee.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this StavroTheotokion, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Desiring that all receive salvation, O my sinless Christ, Thou wast pleased to pay a 
great price, Thy precious blood, for our deliverance. Wherefore, beholding Thee 
nailed, Thy Mother, lamenting, rent her hair, saying: “O Child, mine all-immaculate 
Lamb, Who desirest to deliver the world by Thy precious blood, how hast Thou set 
to whence I cannot see, O never-setting Sun, Who grantest unto all enlightenment, 
peace and great mercy?”  

--- PAGE 10 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: four from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III 
of the canon to the holy protomartyr.  
Thou wast shown to be a sacred speaker of divine mysteries and a theologian, 
disputing with the assemblies of the Jews and mightily denouncing their godlessness 
and their disposition which opposeth God, O most excellent martyr Stephen.  
Come ye all, and together let us honor with divine hymns the protomartyr of 
Christ, the first to minister as deacon, the converser with angels, who hath splendidly 
shown to the martyrs the threshold of the course.  
Resurrect my mind which hath been slain, through the activity of life which was 
preached by thee, O wise one, to hymn thine honored solemnity, and deem me 
worthy to follow in thy footsteps, O blessed Stephen.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be the portal of the noetic Orient, the Most 
High, Who appeared on earth, O Virgin; for through thee, O most pure one, the 
Word hath entered in unto us, to save all from ignorance.  
Troparion of the holy protomartyr, in Tone IV: 
For the sufferings which thou didst endure for Christ God, * thy head hath been 
crowned with a royal diadem, * O Stephen, first among those who have suffered; * 
for, having denounced the insanity of the Jews, * thou didst behold thy Savior at the 
right hand of the Father. * Him do thou therefore entreat ** on behalf of our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy protomartyr, in Tone VI: 
Thou wast the first to be sown on the earth * by the heavenly Husbandman, O 
most laudable Stephen, * and thou wast the first on earth to shed thy blood for 
Christ, O blessed one; * first hast thou been to be crowned with the wreath of victory 
in the heavens, * O first among spiritual athletes, ** crown-bearer, and first among 
martyrs.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 
THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES (6:8-7:60) 
And Stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among 
the people. Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the 
synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Cilicia and of Asia, disputing with Stephen. And they were not able to resist the 
wisdom and the spirit by which he spake. Then they suborned men, which said. 
We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and against God. 
And they stirred up the people, and the elders. and the scribes, and came upon 
him, and caught him, and brought him to the council, and set up false 
witnesses, which said, This man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words 
against this holy place, and the law: for we have heard him say, that this Jesus of 
Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change the customs which Moses 
delivered us. And all that sat in the council, looking steadfastly on him, saw his 
face as it had been the face of an angel. Then said the high priest, Are these 
things so? And he said, Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken; The God of glory 
appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he 
dwelt in Haran, and said unto him, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy 
kindred, and come into the land which I shall show thee. Then came he out of 
the land of the Chaldeans, and dwelt in Haran: and from thence, when his 
father was dead, he removed him into this land, wherein ye now dwell. And he 
gave him none inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on: But 
Solomon built him a house. Howbeit the Most High dwelleth not in temples 
made with hands; as saith the prophet, Heaven is my throne, and earth is my 
footstool: what house will ye build me? saith the Lord: or what is the place of 
my rest? Hath not my hand made all these things? Ye stiff necked and 
uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your 
fathers did, so do ye. Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? 
and they have slain them which showed before of the coming of the Just One; 
of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers: who have received 
the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it. When they heard 
these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their 
teeth. But he, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven, 
and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, and 
said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man, standing on the 
right hand of God. Then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their 
ears, and ran upon him with one accord, and cast him out of the city, and 
stoned him: and the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man’s feet, 
whose name was Saul. And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, 
Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud 
voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell 
asleep. 
Alleluia, in Tone: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (21: 33-42).  
The Lord spake a parable saying: There was a certain householder, which planted a 
vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a winepress in it, and built a tower, 
and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country: and when the time of the 
fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the 
fruits of it. And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, 
and stoned another. Again, he sent other servants more than the first: and they did 
unto them likewise. But last of all he sent unto them his son, saying: They will 
reverence my son. But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among 
themselves: This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. 
And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him. When the lord 
therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen? They say 
unto him: He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard 
unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons. Jesus saith 
unto them: Did ye never read in the Scriptures, the stone which the builders rejected, 
the same is become the head of the corner, this is the Lord’s doing, and it is 
marvelous in our eyes.  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
