--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 3rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHERS  
ISAACIUS, DALMATUS & FAUSTUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable fathers, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs, O Lord ...”: 
Making themselves like unto the incorporeal ones, O Lord, with prayer and 
abstinence Thy saints dispelled the passions of the flesh and, shining with wondrous 
works, they illumine the hearts of all. By their supplication grant Thy people great 
mercy.  
Taking up zeal for the virtues, Dalmatus and Isaacius manifestly set at naught the 
heresy of Arius and Nestorius, and as champions of the Orthodox have received the 
acclaim of all. Through their prayers, O Christ, grant Thy people great mercy.  
Having shown yourselves to be stars of the firmament of abstinence, O venerable 
fathers, ye have illumined the monastics, driving away the darkness of the demons. 
Wherefore, even after your repose ye are called blessed, praying that all who celebrate 
your godly memory may be saved.  
But if Alleluia be chanted instead of “God is the Lord ...” at Matins, then we chant 
first the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same tone and melody:  
From the hands of the serpent who hath brought death to mankind, and who 
wageth war utterly to slay me with deception, do thou wrest me for the Master. Crush 
his jaws, I pray, and set at naught his wiles, that delivered from his talons, I may 
magnify thy power.  
I am like the barren tree, devoid of the fruit of salvation, O all-immaculate one. 
Wherefore, I tremble at the thought of the visitation, lest I be cast into the 
unquenchable fire, wretch that I am. Therefore I fall down before thee, crying aloud: 
Deliver me, and by thy mediation show me forth to thy Son as fruitful, O pure one.  
My thoughts are defiled, my lips false, and all my deeds impure. What, then, shall I 
do? How shall I meet the Judge? O Virgin and Lady, entreat the Lord, thy Son and 
Creator, that He accept my spirit in repentance, in that He alone is compassionate.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
Woe is him who hath angered his God! and woe is me for I ever abide in 
despondency, slothfulness and ignorance! O Virgin and Lady; help me who am 
darkened, and entreat thy Son and Creator to grant me forgiveness of mine offenses.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished heifer, beholding her Bullock * willingly 
nailed upon the Tree, * cried out aloud, lamenting piteously: * “Woe is me, O my 
most beloved Child! * How hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, 
* desiring to leave me childless and bereft of Thee, ** O my most beloved Child?”  
Troparion of the venerable fathers, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and the canon of the saints, with four Troparia, 
the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the radiant stars of the monks”, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified! 
Standing radiantly before the divine Light, ever filled with the splendor of the 
three-fold Sun and deified in the true communion thereof, O blessed one, illumine 
those who celebrate your most sacred memory with faith and sing unto the Lord in a 
godly manner.  
Directing your gaze to those things which alone are lasting, ye did in every way 
repulse the assaults of fleeting things, cleaving unto the Lord with all your mind and 
rejecting the pleasures of the flesh, O most honored fathers. Wherefore, ye have 
passed on to the unwaning radiance.  
Winged with sacred doctrines, O wise father Dalmatus, and adorned with the 
divine teachings of the godly Isaacius, thou didst manifestly ascend to the heights of 
the virtues and become a pillar and ground for monks. Wherefore, we call thee 
blessed.  
Theotokion: O most glorious one who hast given birth unto God: deliver me from 
the dishonor of the passions, and bestow upon me the thought of compunction, O 
Virgin. O pure one, shine forth the effulgence of repentance within my mind, that I 
may magnify thee who hast uplifted us all.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
O venerable father Isaacius, we have all known thee to be a true star which sped 
from the East, destroying the bitter darkness of heresies and illumining the faithful 
with thy words.  
Noetically shining forth in the pure splendors of thy struggles, O father Faustus, 
thou didst become light, illumining all who beheld thee and faithfully followed thy 
life, O blessed one.  
Having lulled all the passions of your bodies to sleep with unceasing prayers and 
hymns, O venerable ones, ye received from God inviolate riches and unfailing grace, 
O most blessed ones.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: O Virgin, we have known thee to be a noetic and splendid lamp-stand 
who received within thyself the unbearable Fire; and we know thee also to be a divine 
palace, and the lofty throne whereon the Transcendent One hath rested.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable fathers, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Shining radiantly with the light of the Trinity, O fathers, ye have radiantly driven 
away the thick darkness of the pleasures, illumining the hearts of the faithful with 
divine works. Wherefore, we reverence your light-bearing and honored memory today 
and cry out in unison: O most noetically rich Godbearers, entreat Christ God, that He 
grant forgiveness unto those who honor your holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
As most fruitful branches of the true Vine, O venerable ones, ye have poured forth 
upon all the pure wine of compunction.  
O venerable Dalmatus, we have all known thee to be one who was in accord with 
the Council, who makest firm the pious and cuttest down the prideful.  
O blessed one, the godly Council commanded thee beforehand, as one who shone 
forth more than all others, and who was adorned with divine virtues, to undertake the 
care of all.  
Theotokion: With the slumber of slothfulness the sleep of sin overcome me hath, 
O pure one. But by thy diligent prayer raise me up now to repentance.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Thou wast one who journeyed from the East to the Imperial City, and with divine 
seed, increased its harvest, uprooting all the wicked harm wrought by Arius, O sacred 
father Isaacius.  
Thou wast a disciple unto Isaacius, as Elisha was unto Elijah, O sacred Dalmatus, 
parting the waters of the evil harm of the demons with the mantle of the gifts of the 
Spirit, and pointing the way for the faithful.  
Having submitted to the laws of God, and turned utterly away from the laws of 
sin, thou wast revealed to be a pillar going before the divine Council, a role and 
model for monks, and an unshakable foundation for the faithful, O God-bearing 
Faustus.  
Theotokion: The generations of generations all glorify thee as the true Theotokos, 
who art manifestly more holy than the angels, O most holy Virgin. Wherefore, I cry 
out: Sanctify my soul which hath been defiled by the passions.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Thou wast revealed to be a converser with the angels; for, traveling thy way and 
weakening thy body by abstinence, thou didst emulate their life while yet upon the 
earth, O Dalmatus, guide and most eminent rule of monastics.  
Aflame with zeal for the love of the Lord as was Elijah, O blessed Isaacius, and 
with boldness thou didst denounce, as he did Ahab, the champion of darkness who 
was infected with the wicked heresy of the foolish Arius.  
Ye have been revealed to be guides for those astray and havens for those who are 
saved by faith, O God-bearing and wonder-working fathers Faustus and Dalmatus 
and godly Isaacius, ye servants of Jesus and most radiant beacons for monastics.  
Theotokion: O most holy Virgin, with thy saving haste and visitation, visit thou my 
soul which hath fallen ill through sins and all the temptations of the enemy; and in 
that thou art good, heal it, O all-hymned Theotokos, my hope.  
Kontakion of the venerable fathers, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “In supplications ...”: 
With hymns let us praise Isaacius, Dalmatus and Faustus, * who shone forth like 
beacons through fasting * and turned away heresies with faith; * for they are saints of 
God ** who ever entreat Him on behalf of us.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Ikos: Who among mortals is able to recount the splendid virtues of the venerable 
fathers, their struggles and labors, divine zeal and pure boldness of life, and the godly 
works which they accomplished upon the earth, like angels? Yet, honoring them, we 
hymn the Trinity with faith; for, standing radiantly with the angelic choirs before 
Him, they ever pray on our behalf.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Ye have been shown to be embers aflame with the divine fire of the Comforter, 
burning up the fuel of malice and enlightening the faithful throughout the ages, O 
God-bearers.  
Having mortified thy body with fasting, thou didst subject it to thy spirit, O 
Dalmatus, and with the torrents of thy spiritual tears thou didst drown the malice of 
the enemy throughout the ages, O God-bearer.  
Having found a blessed end, ye dwell in the kingdom of heaven and have joined 
the choirs of the venerable. O fathers, with them cry aloud: O Lord God, blessed art 
Thou!  
Theotokion: Thou didst block the stream of death, having given birth unto the 
immortal God, O thou who alone art the pure Theotokos. To Him do we now chant 
with faith: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Parting the sea of the passions with the rod of the Cross, ye destroyed all the 
might of the noetic pharaoh, O venerable fathers, and have saved a sacred multitude 
of monks, leading them to the land of dispassion, as they chant unceasingly: Ye 
children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
The exaltation of the heretical didst thou manifestly cast down, foreseeing their 
destruction from afar. Thou didst help the poor, and wast a guide for the blind, a staff 
for the aged and the consolation of widows, O Dalmatus, crying aloud: Ye children 
bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
For forty-three days didst thou fast, and straightway didst thou fall asleep for as 
many days, in a manner surpassing nature, keeping the eye of thy heart in vigilance, 
illumined by the radiance of God, O wise one. And to Him dost thou cry, O 
Dalmatus: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: The Lord, having made His abode within thine undefiled womb, 
showed thee forth as pure and radiant. Wherefore, O Virgin, cleanse me who am 
defiled by bitter habits and the harmful assaults of the adversary, and grant that I may 
chant: Ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
Strengthened by the power of Christ, the monastic instructors of heavenly wisdom 
were enabled to vanquish the feeble audacity of the foe. And now, adorned, they have 
entered the noetic courts, rejoicing.  
O thrice-rich fathers, ye have been shown to be thrice-radiant lamps emitting 
unwaning radiance, and unfading flowers of paradise which perfume the thoughts of 
the faithful. Wherefore, with faith we celebrate your most festive memory.  
Adorned with dispassion as with a magnificent crown and arrayed in the 
accomplishments of divine love, O most wise ones, ye have entered, rejoicing, into 
the banquet hall of Christ, reclining and receiving the reward of your pangs.  
Your divine memory, O blessed Dalmatus, Faustus and Isaacius, hath shone forth 
with noetic splendor, illumining the assemblies of the faithful, O universal beacons 
and instructors of monastics. Wherefore, enlighten also our spiritual senses.  
Theotokion: Enlighten my heart which hath been blinded by malice, O portal of 
the Light, and permit me not to fall now into the sleep of death, for I am ever 
darkened by impure thoughts. But let me glorify thee in thanksgiving, O all-hymned 
Theotokos.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable fathers, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Kontakion of the venerable fathers, in Tone II: 
With hymns let us praise Isaacius, Dalmatus and Faustus, * who shone forth like 
beacons through fasting * and turned away heresies with faith; * for they are saints of 
God ** who ever entreat Him on behalf of us.  
 
