--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 6th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST.  
THE HOLY TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR LORD, GOD & SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the feast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
He Who of old spake with Moses * on Mount Sinai in images, saying: * “I am God 
Who am!” * today, transfigured on Mount Tabor, * showeth forth the Prototype, 
shining with rays of splendor. ** Wherefore, O Christ, I magnify Thy power! (Twice)  
Taking with Thee Thy favorite disciples, O Christ, * Peter, James and John, * 
Thou didst willingly lead them up to the mountain, * showing them an awesome 
wonder: * the everlasting and unbearable magnificence ** of Thy divine arrival from 
afar.  
The apostles of old, trembling * at Thine unapproachable advent, O Christ, * 
falling prostrate on the ground, * marveled at the power of Thy divinity, * which 
shone forth more brightly than the sun, O Good One, ** with Thine ineffable might.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
The cloud of the law, in which Moses and Elijah stood, received the radiant 
darkness of the transfiguration; and, deemed worthy of the most radiant glory, they 
said unto God: “Thou art our God, the King of the ages!”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Today, on Mount Tabor, * Christ, transforming * the darkened nature of Adam * 
and enlightening it, ** hath made it divine.  
Verse: Thine are the heavens, * and Thine is the earth.  
Illumined with the radiance of the virtues, * let us cry aloud, * beholding the divine 
transfiguration * of the Lord ** on Mount Tabor.  
Verse: Tabor and Hermon * shall rejoice in Thy name.  
The sun, illumining the earth, * straightway setteth; * but Christ, having shone 
forth * with glory on the mountain, ** hath enlightened the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody: 
On Mount Tabor * Moses and Elijah beheld God, * Who had become incarnate * 
of the Virgin Maiden, ** for the deliverance of men.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone VII:  
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
We do not chant “Blessed is the man ...,” except if the feast fall on Sunday, 
when we chant the entire first Kathisma, or on Monday, when we chant only 
the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the Transfiguration: 
The composition of Cosmas the Monk, in Tone IV:  
Before Thy crucifixion, O Lord, the mountain emulated the heavens and the cloud 
spread itself out like a tabernacle when Thou wast transfigured and borne witness to 
by the Father. There were Peter, James and John, for they were to be with Thee also 
at the time of Thy betrayal, that, beholding Thy wonders, they might not be afraid of 
Thy sufferings, which do Thou grant that we may venerate in peace, for the sake of 
Thy great mercy. (Twice)  
Taking the disciples up upon the lofty mountain before Thy crucifixion, O Lord, 
Thou wast transfigured before them, illumining them with the effulgence of power, 
desiring both in Thy love for mankind and in Thine authority to show them the 
splendor of the resurrection, which do thou grant unto us in peace, in that Thou art 
merciful and the Lover of mankind. (Twice)  
The mountain which before was dark and gloomy is now honorable and holy, for 
thereon did Thy feet stand, O Lord; for in the latter days Thou didst make manifest 
the hidden, pre-eternal mystery, Thine awesome transfiguration, to Peter, John and 
James. But they, unable to endure the radiance of Thy countenance and the 
brightness of Thy raiment, fell prostrate on the ground and covered themselves. And, 
seized with terror, they marveled, beholding Moses and Elijah conversing with Thee 
as they stood with Thee; and the voice of the Father bore witness, saying: “This is My 
beloved Son in Whom I am well pleased: Him do ye obey! He Will grant the world 
great mercy!” (Twice)  
Transfigured on the high mountain, the Savior, having with Him His pre-eminent 
disciples, shone forth most wondrously, showing them forth as illumined by the 
loftiness of the virtues and as ones deemed worthy of divine glory. Moses and Elijah, 
who spake with Christ, showed that He hath authority over the living and the dead, 
and that He is the God Who of old spake through the law and the prophets. Of Him 
was the voice of the Father heard saying from the cloud of light: “Him do ye obey, 
Who through the Cross made Hades captive and granteth life everlasting to the 
dead!” (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VI: 
Foreshadowing Thy resurrection, O Christ our God, Thou didst take three of Thy 
disciples - Peter, James and John - and didst ascend Tabor. And as Thou wast 
transfigured, O Savior, Mount Tabor was clothed with light. Thy disciples cast 
themselves upon the ground, O Word, unable to endure the sight of Thine invisible 
countenance. Angels ministered to thee in fear and trembling; the heavens were afraid 
and the earth quaked, beholding the glory of the Lord upon the earth.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM EXODUS  
The Lord said to Moses: “Come up to Me into the mountain, and be there; and I 
will give thee the tablets of stone, the law and the commandments, which I have 
written to give them laws.” And Moses rose up, and Joshua his attendant, and they 
went up into the mount of God. And to the elders they said: “Rest there until we 
return unto you; and behold, Aaron and Hur are with you. If any man have a cause to 
be tried, let him go unto them.” And Moses and Joshua went up to the mountain, and 
the cloud covered the mountain. And the glory of God came down upon Mount 
Sinai, and the cloud covered it for six days; and the Lord called Moses on the seventh 
day out of the midst of the cloud. And the appearance of the glory of the Lord was as 
burning fire on the top of the mountain, before the children of Israel. And Moses 
went into the midst of the cloud, and went up to the mountain, and was there in the 
mountain forty days and forty nights.  
A READING FROM EXODUS  
In those days, the Lord spake to Moses face to face, as one would speak to his 
friend; and he retired into the camp: but his servant, Joshua son of Nun, a young 
man, departed not forth from the tabernacle. And Moses said to the Lord: “Lo! Thou 
sayest to me: Lead on this people; but Thou hast not shown me whom Thou wilt 
send with me, but hast said to me: I know thee above all, and thou hast favor with 
Me. If then I have found favor in Thy sight, reveal Thyself to me, that I may see 
Thee; that I may find favor in Thy sight, and that I may know that this great nation is 
Thy people.” And the Lord said to him: “I Myself will go before thee, and give thee 
rest.” And Moses said to Him: “If Thou go not up with us Thyself, bring me not up 
hence. And how shall it be surely known, that both I and this people have found 
favor with Thee, except only if Thou go with us. So both I and Thy people shall be 
glorified beyond all the nations, as many as are upon the earth.” And the Lord said to 
Moses: “I will also do for thee this thing, which thou hast spoken; for thou hast 
found grace before Me, and I know thee above all.” And Moses said: “Manifest 
Thyself unto me!” But the Lord said: “I will pass by before thee with My glory, and I 
will call by My name, the Lord, before thee; and I will have mercy on whom I will 
have mercy, and will have pity on whom I will have pity.” And He said: “Thou shalt 
not be able to see My face; for no man shall see My face, and live.” And the Lord 
said: “Behold, there is a place by Me: thou shalt stand upon the rock; and when My 
glory shall pass by, then I will put thee into a hole in the rock; and I will cover thee 
over with My hand, until I shall have passed by. And I will remove My hand, and then 
shalt thou see My backparts; but My face shall not appear to thee.” And having risen 
early, Moses went up to Mount Sinai, as the Lord told him. And the Lord descended 

--- PAGE 4 ---
in a cloud, and stood near him there, and called by the name of the Lord. And the 
Lord passed by before his face, and proclaimed: the Lord God, compassionate and 
merciful, long-suffering, greatly merciful and true. And Moses hastened, and bowed 
down to the earth, and worshipped the Lord.  
A READING FROM THE THIRD BOOK OF KINGS  
In those days, Elijah came to Beersheba, to the land of Judah, and left his servant 
there. And he himself went a day’s journey into the wilderness, and came and sat 
under a juniper tree; and he asked concerning his life, that he might die, and said: “Let 
it be enough, now, O Lord. Take, I pray Thee, my life from me; for I am no better 
than my fathers.” And he lay down, and slept there under the tree. And behold, 
someone touched him, and said to him: “Arise, and eat!” And Elijah looked, and, 
behold, at his head there was a cake of meal and a cruse of water; and he arose, and 
ate and drank, and returned and lay down. And the angel of the Lord returned again, 
and said to him: “Arise, and eat, for the journey is far from thee.” And he arose, and 
ate and drank, and went in the strength of that food for forty days and forty nights to 
Mount Horeb. And he entered there into a cave, and rested there; and, behold, the 
word of the Lord came to him, and said: “Thou shalt go forth, and shalt stand before 
the Lord in the mountain. Behold, the Lord will pass by. And, behold, there was a 
great and strong wind rending the mountains, and crushing rocks before the Lord; 
but the Lord was not in the wind. And after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord 
was not in the earthquake. And after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in 
the fire. And after the fire, the voice of a gentle breeze and the Lord was there. And it 
came to pass that when Elijah heard, he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went 
forth and stood in the cave. And the Lord said unto him: “Go, and return, and thou 
shalt come into the way of the wilderness of Damascus: and thou shalt go and anoint 
Elisha, the son of Shaphat, to be prophet in thy place.”  
At the Litiya, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Sanctifying the whole world with Thy light, Thou wast transfigured on a lofty 
mountain, O Good One, showing Thy power to Thy disciples, that Thou mightest 
deliver the world from transgression. Wherefore, we cry out to Thee: O 
compassionate Lord, save Thou our souls!  
O Christ God Who wast transfigured on Mount Tabor, showing the glory of Thy 
divinity to Thy disciples, illumine us all with the light of the knowledge of Thee, and 
guide us on the path of Thy commandments, as Thou alone art good and the Lover 
of mankind.  
Dwelling bodily on earth, Christ, the Light from before the sun, Who before His 
crucifixion fulfilled all things of His awesome dispensation in a divine manner, today 
hath mystically shown forth on Mount Tabor the Image of the Trinity; for taking His 

--- PAGE 5 ---
three excellent disciples, Peter, James and John, He led them up to it together, and 
having hidden His guise of flesh for a little while, He was transfigured before them, 
revealing the majesty of His original beauty, though not completely. And while 
making it known to them, He also took pity upon them, lest they in anywise cease to 
live because of what they saw, even though they were able to grasp with their bodily 
eyes, and behold it. And Thou didst summon Moses and Elijah, the foremost of the 
prophets, who bore witness rationally concerning Thy divinity, that it is the true 
effulgence of the essence of the Father, O Thou Who hast dominion over the living 
and the dead. Wherefore, the cloud enfolded them like a tabernacle, and the voice of 
the Father testified, speaking forth from the cloud like thunder, saying: “This is My 
beloved Son, Whom I begat incorruptibly from within Me before the morning star, 
and Whom I have sent to save those who are baptized in the name of the Father, the 
Son and the Holy Spirit, and who confess with faith that the one dominion of the 
Godhead is indivisible! Hear ye Him!” And do Thou Thyself, O Christ God Who art 
the Lover of mankind, illumine us with the light of Thine unapproachable glory, and 
show us forth as worthy heirs of Thy kingdom Which is without end, in that Thou art 
supremely good.  
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
Come ye, let us go to the mountain of the Lord, to the habitation of our God; and 
let us gaze upon the glory of His Transfiguration, the glory of the Only-begotten of 
the Father; and let us receive light through the Light; and, exalted by the Spirit, let us 
hymn the consubstantial Trinity throughout the ages.  
Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Moses the God-beholder and Elijah of the fiery chariot, who traversed the 
heavens without being consumed, beholding Thee, O Christ, in the cloud at Thy 
transfiguration, bore witness to Thee as the Creator and Fulfiller of the law and the 
prophets. With them grant Thine enlightenment also unto us, O Master, that we may 
hymn Thee throughout the ages.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone I: 
He Who of old spake with Moses on Mount Sinai in images, saying: “I am He 
Who is”, is today transfigured before His disciples on Mount Tabor, and having 
shown forth the pristine beauty of His countenance, hath taken upon Himself human 
nature. And having set before them Moses and Elijah as witnesses to this grace, He 
made them partakers of gladness who, for the sake of the Cross, proclaim His 
glorious and saving resurrection.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Verse: Thine are the heavens, * and Thine is the earth.  
David, the ancestor of God, foreseeing in the Spirit the coming of Thine only-
begotten Son in the flesh unto mankind, summoneth creation from afar to gladness, 
and crieth out prophetically: “Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in Thy name!” For, 
having ascended that mountain with Thy disciples, O Savior, Thou wast transfigured, 
and didst cause the darkened nature of Adam to shine again, imparting to it the glory 
and splendor of Thy divinity. Wherefore, we cry unto Thee: O Lord, Creator of all 
things, glory be to Thee!  
Verse: Tabor and Hermon * shall rejoice in Thy name.  
The foremost of the apostles, beholding Thine unbearable splendor and Thine 
unapproachable divinity, O beginningless Christ, were stricken with godly awe; and, 
covered with a radiant cloud, they heard the voice of the Father proclaiming the 
mystery of Thy becoming a man; for Thou alone, even after Thine incarnation, art the 
only-begotten Son and Savior of the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
To Peter, James and John, Thy foremost disciples, O Lord, Thou hast shown the 
glory of Thy divine countenance today on Mount Tabor; for they beheld Thy 
garments illumined as with light, and Thy face shining more brightly than the sun. 
And unable to endure the unbearable sight of Thine effulgence, they fell face down 
upon the ground, in nowise able to look further. And they heard a voice from above 
bearing witness, saying: “This is my beloved Son, Who hath come into the world to 
save mankind!”  
After the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. (Thrice) 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. (Thrice) 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Revealing the human form of Thy second and awesome coming with Thy glory, O 
Savior, Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor. Elijah and Moses conversed with 
Thee, and Thy three disciples were summoned to behold Thy glory, O Master, and 
marveled at Thy radiance. O Thou Who then shone forth Thy light upon them, 
illumine our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor, O Jesus, and a radiant cloud, stretching 
forth like a shadow, covered the apostles with glory. Wherefore, they fell face down 
upon the ground, unable to bear the sight of the splendor of the unapproachable 
glory of Thy countenance, O beginningless Savior. O Christ our God, Who then 
shone forth Thy light upon them, illumine Thou our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify Thee, O Christ Bestower of 
light, and we honor the most glorious transfiguration of Thy most pure flesh.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, in the city of our God, in His 
holy mountain. 
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Moses and Elijah stood before Thee when Thou didst ascend the mountain with 
the disciples and shone forth in the glory of the Father; for the law and the prophets 
serve God; and the Father, declaring Christ’s essential Sonship, called Him His Son. 
Him do we hymn with Thee and the Spirit.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
The lightning hidden under the flesh of Thy nature and divine majesty, O Christ 
our Benefactor, didst thou show forth upon the holy mountain, shining upon the 
disciples who were with Thee. And when they perceived Thine unbearable glory, they 
cried aloud: “Holy art Thou, for, though Thou art unapproachable, Thou art visible 
to the world in the flesh, O Thou only Lover of mankind!”  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Tabor and Hermon * shall rejoice in Thy name.  
Verse: Thine are the heavens, and Thine is the earth;  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, § 45 (LK. 9: 28-36)  
At that time, Jesus took Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to 
pray. And as He prayed, the fashion of His countenance was altered, and His raiment 
was white and glistering. And, behold, there talked with Him two men, which were 
Moses and Elijah: Who appeared in glory, and spake of His decease which He should 
accomplish at Jerusalem. But Peter and they that were with Him were heavy with 
sleep: and when they were awake, they saw His glory, and the two men that stood 
with Him. And it came to pass, as they departed from Him, Peter said unto Jesus, 
Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for Thee, 
and one for Moses, and one for Elijah: not knowing what he said. While he thus 
spake, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them: and they feared as they entered 
into the cloud. And there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, this is my beloved 
Son: hear Him. And when the voice was past, Jesus was found alone. And they kept it 
close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen.  
After Psalm 50:  
Glory ..., All things have been filled with joy today! Christ hath been transfigured 
before His disciples.  
Both now ..., All things have been filled with joy today! Christ hath been 
transfigured before His disciples.  
Have mercy on me, O God ..., 
Then this Sticheron, in Tone V: 
Disclosing a little of the radiance of Thy divinity to those who ascended the 
mountain with Thee, O Savior, Thou didst make them lovers of Thy supra-natural 
glory; wherefore, they cried out in awe: “It is good for us to be here!” And with them 
we also hymn Thee forever: Christ the transfigured Savior.  
Two canons, each with 6 Troparia:  

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE I  
The composition of Cosmas of Maiuma, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: The people of Israel passed dry-shod across the watery deep of the Red 
Sea * and beholding the riders and captains of the enemy * swallowed by the 
waters, they cried out for joy: * ‘Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been 
glorified.’ 
Speaking words of life and giving instruction concerning that which is divine, 
Christ said to his friends: “Recognize the Father in Me, for I emit unapproachable 
light, unto the joy of those who chant: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been 
glorified!”  
“Ye will be invested with the power of tongues, O My friends and disciples, and 
will be marvelous in the richness thereof, for ye will be filled with glory. For I shall 
reveal Myself to be brighter than the sun, illumining those who chant in joy: Let us 
sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!”  
Shining forth today with divine radiance on Mount Tabor, as He promised, Christ 
hath laid bare His countenance to His disciples. And, full of light-bearing and divine 
splendor, they chanted in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!  
The composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Moses of old, prophetically beholding the glory of the Lord upon the sea in the 
cloud and the pillar of fire, cried out: Unto our God and Redeemer let us sing!  
His body shielded as by a stone, Moses the beholder of God, seeing Him Who is 
invisible in His divinity, cried aloud: Unto our God and Redeemer let us sing!  
Of old Thou wast seen by Moses in darkness on the mount of the law; but now 
Thou art seen in the unapproachable light of the Godhead on Tabor.  
Katavasia: Inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross upon the waters, * 
Moses marked a straight line before him with his staff * and divided the Red 
Sea, * opening a path for Israel who went over dry-shod. * Then he marked a 
second line across the waters * and united them in one, * overwhelming the 
chariots of Pharaoh. * Therefore let us sing to Christ our God, * for He hath 
been glorified. 
ODE III 
 Canon I  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Having put on all of Adam and transformed the nature which of old had become 
dark, Thou didst illumine it with the transfiguration of Thine appearance, rendering it 
divine, O Christ.  
Christ, Who of old guided Israel in the wilderness by the pillar of fire and the 
cloud, hath ineffably shone forth in light today upon Mount Tabor.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
The overshadowing glory in the tabernacle of old, when Thou didst converse with 
Moses, Thy favored one, was a figure of Thy transfiguration which shone forth 
ineffably on Tabor, O Master.  
Thou didst summon the foremost of the apostles to Thee on Mount Tabor, O 
only-begotten Word; and Moses and Elijah stood before Thee, as servants of God, O 
Thou Who alone lovest mankind.  
Through God the Word, Thou didst become wholly of earth, uniting humanity to 
Thy whole divinity in Thy hypostasis, which Moses and Elijah beheld on Mount 
Tabor in two natures.  
Katavasia: The rod of Aaron is an image of this mystery, * for when it budded 
it showed who should be priest. * So in the Church, that once was barren, * the 
wood of the Cross hath now budded forth, * filling her with strength and 
steadfastness. 
Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor, O God, in the midst of the most wise 
Elijah and Moses, with James, Simon and John. And Peter, who was there, said to 
Thee: “It is good for us to make here three booths: one for Moses, one for Elijah, 
and one for Thee, Christ our Master!” O Thou Who at that time shone forth Thy 
light upon them, illumine our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE IV  
Canon I  
Irmos: I have heard of Thy glorious Dispensation, * O Christ our God: * how 
Thou wast born of the Virgin, * that Thou mightest deliver from error * those 
who cry aloud to Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord. 
Forming the law in writing on Sinai, O Christ God, Thou wast manifest, borne in 
the cloud, the fire, the darkness and the whirlwind. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
That Thou mayest confirm Thy glorious dispensation, O Christ God, in that Thou 
hast existed from before the beginning of time, Thou didst shine forth ineffably on 
Tabor, likewise setting Thine ascent in a cloud.  
Those who conversed with Thee as servants stood before Thee, O Master Christ; 
and Thou didst converse with them in the fire and darkness, and the moist whistling 
wind. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Moses, Who of old foresaw Thee in the fire and the bush, and Elijah, who was 
taken up in the chariot of fire, arriving on Tabor proclaimed Thy glory, for the sake 
of Thy Cross, O Christ.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Rays of divinity issued forth from Thy flesh * upon the prophets and 
the apostles. * Wherefore, chanting, the leaders cried aloud: * glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
O Master, Who preserved intact the bush which had been touched by fire, Thou 
didst show Thy divinely radiant flesh unto Moses, who chanteth: Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord!  
The material sun was eclipsed by the radiance of the Godhead, seeing Thee 
transfigured on Mount Tabor, O my Jesus. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
When Thou didst reveal Thyself to Moses, Elijah and the apostles, O Master, 
Thou wast seen to be an immaterial fire which consumeth not the matter of the body, 
being One in two essences, in two perfect natures.  
Katavasia: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: Thou hast parted light from the primal chaos, * that Thy works might 
hymn Thee in light, O Christ, * as their Creator: * do Thou direct our paths in 
Thy light. 
The mountains bowed themselves before Thy face; for Thou wast well pleased to 
accept, in Thine earthly form, the light and heavenly rays which the sun came and laid 
at Thy feet.  
Moses and Elijah cried to the disciples who were being instructed on holy Mount 
Tabor: “Behold, Christ the Savior is the God Whom we proclaimed of old!”  
The immutable nature, having mingled itself with human nature, shone forth 
ineffably, abundantly disclosing to the apostles the light of the immaterial Godhead.  
When the disciples beheld Thee, the ever-existent Effulgence, shining in the glory 
of the Father, O Christ, they cried out to Thee: “Direct Thou our paths in Thy light!”  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Canon II 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
The tongue of the orator is unable to proclaim Thy greatness; for Thou, Who hast 
control over life and dominion over death, didst stand forth on Mount Tabor before 
Moses and Elijah, who bore witness to Thy divinity.  
O Christ Who with invisible hands fashioned mankind according to Thine image, 
Thou hast shown forth Thy primal beauty in Thy creation; for Thou wast both God 
and man, not in image, but as Thou Thyself art in essence.  
United without commingling, on Mount Tabor Thou didst show us the burning 
ember of divinity, which burneth up sins and enlighteneth souls; and Thou didst 
strike Moses, Elijah and the foremost apostles with awe.  
Katavasia: O thrice-blessed Tree, on which Christ the king and Lord was 
stretched! * Through thee the beguiler fell, * who tempted mankind with the 
tree. * He was caught in the trap set by God, * who was crucified upon thee in 
the flesh, * granting peace unto our souls. 
 ODE VI 
 Canon I  
Irmos: In mine affliction I cried unto the Lord, * the God of my salvation, * 
and He hearkened unto me. 
Shining forth the light which is far brighter than the sun, the Savior illumined us 
on Tabor.  
Having ascended Mount Tabor, O Christ, Thou wast transfigured; and having cast 
falsehood utterly into darkness, Thou hast illumined us.  
Recognizing Thee as God on Tabor, O Christ, the glorious apostles, marveling, 
bowed down their knees.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
How great and awesome was the vision beheld this day! From the sky the material 
sun shone forth, while from the earth the noetic Sun of righteousness, which is 
beyond compare, shone forth on Mount Tabor.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Beholding Thy divinity on Tabor, Moses cried: “The shadow of the law, grown 
weak, hath passed away, and Christ the Truth is manifestly come!”  
The pillar of fire and the cloud most manifestly prefigured the transfigured Christ 
and the grace of the Spirit which overshadowed Him on Tabor.  
Katavasia: Jonah stretched out his hands in the form of a cross * within the 
belly of the sea monster, * plainly prefiguring the redeeming Passion. * Cast 
out from thence after three days, * he foreshadowed the marvelous 
Resurrection of Christ our God, * who was crucified in the flesh and 
enlightened the world * by His Rising on the third day. 
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone VII:  
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain O Christ God, * and Thy disciples beheld 
Thy glory as far as they could endure; * that when they would see Thee crucified, * 
they would comprehend that Thy suffering was voluntary, * and proclaim to the 
world that Thou art of a truth ** the Effulgence of the Father.  
Ikos: Arise, ye slothful thoughts of my soul, which are ever dragged down unto the 
earth! Be ye borne up and rise aloft to the summit of divine ascent! Let us make haste 
to Peter and the sons of Zebedee, and with them let us go to Mount Tabor, that we 
may see the glory of our God with them, and may hear the voice which they heard 
from on high; and they preached the Effulgence of the Father.  
ODE VII  
Canon I  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Illumined by the light of unapproachable glory on Mount Tabor, the apostles cried 
out to Christ: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”  
Enraptured by the effulgence of the divine voice, the dew-bearing cloud and the 
radiance, O Christ, the apostles chanted: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”  
When he beheld Thee in unapproachable light on Mount Tabor, O Christ, Peter 
cried aloud: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”  
Present with thee, the Author of life, when Thou didst cause the light of Thy 
countenance to shine forth, the sons of Zebedee cried aloud: “O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!”  
Canon II  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Now have invisible things become visible to the apostles: the Divinity which 
shone forth in the flesh on Mount Tabor shineth upon those who cry out: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
The apostles were moved to awe by fear on Mount Tabor, marveling at the 
majesty of the kingdom of God, and crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages!  
Now have things never before heard become audible; for the Son, Who was born 
of the Virgin without father, is borne witness gloriously by the voice of the Father, in 
that He is God and man, the same throughout the ages.  
Being from the beginning the beloved Son by nature, Thou wast not such by the 
adoption of the Most High, and Thou hast approached us without changing. Blessed 
art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Katavasia: The senseless decree of the wicked tyrant, * breathing forth threats 
and blasphemy hateful to God, * confused the people. * Yet neither the fury of 
the wild beast nor the roaring of the fire * could frighten the three Children: * 
but standing together in the flame, * fanned by the wind that brought 
refreshment as the dew, they sang: * ‘Blessed and supremely praised art Thou, 
* O our God and the God of our fathers.’ 
ODE VIII  
Canon I  
Irmos: In Babylon the godly Children, * burning with a fiery zeal for God * 
bravely trampled upon the threat of the tyrant and the fire; * and thrown into 
the midst of the flames * they were refreshed with dew and sang: * Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Christ Who upholdeth all things by His hand, hath with His most pure feet 
ascended Mount Tabor, whereon His face shone with radiance brighter than the 
beams of the sun, and showed forth those highest among the law and grace, who 
chanted: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
He Who ineffably manifested Himself on Mount Tabor with unapproachable 
glory, the intangible and never-waning Light, the Effulgence of the Father, illumining 
creation hath deified mortals who sing: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
Moses and Elijah, standing on Mount Tabor as befitteth priests, manifestly 
beholding the Hypostasis of the Divinity, Christ Who shone forth in the Father’s 
glory, chanted: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
The face of Moses once was filled with glory in its appearance because of the 
manifestation of God; and Christ is arrayed in light and glory as in a robe, for, being 
light itself, He illumineth those who chant: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the 
Lord!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
The disciples, beholding Christ surrounded by the luminous cloud on Tabor, fell 
to the ground, their minds enlightened, and hymned Him with the Father and the 
Spirit, chanting: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
Canon II  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Thy disciples, O Master, having heard Thee borne witness to by the Father, and 
unable to bear the sight of the splendor of Thy countenance, though it was a most 
firm human visage, fell face down upon the ground, crying out in fear: Ye priests 
bless; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou art the most comely King of kings, the mighty Lord of all who rulest in 
every place, the Blessed One Who dwellest in light unapproachable. And marveling at 
Thee, the disciples, Moses and Elijah cried out: Ye children, bless; ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
The apostles, from among those on earth, and Elijah the Tishbite and Moses, from 
among the dead, stood before Thee, O Christ, as before the Master of heaven, the 
Lord of earth, the One Who hath dominion over the nethermost depths; and they 
chanted together: Ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
When they followed Thee to the exalting of the divine life from the earth, Thy 
chosen apostles left behind on earth the grief which giveth rise to despondency, O 
Lover of mankind. Wherefore, having received Thy divine manifestation according as 
they were worthy, they chanted: Ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Katavasia: O children equal in number to the Trinity: * bless ye God, the 
Father and Creator; * hymn ye the Word Who came down * and transformed 
the fire into dew; * and supremely exalt ye Him Who giveth life unto all, * the 
most holy Spirit, * throughout the ages! 
We do not chant the Magnificat before ODE IX, even if it be Sunday, but chant 
instead the following festal refrain:  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who was transfigured on Tabor!  
And then the Irmos of ODE IX of the first canon. After this, the second choir 
chanteth the same refrain and Irmos. This identical refrain is used for Canon II.  
ODE IX  
Canon I  
Irmos: Thy birthgiving was revealed to be incorrupt, * God came forth from 
thy womb, * and He appeared upon earth in mortal flesh * and dwelt among 
mankind; * Wherefore we all magnify thee, O Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who was transfigured on Tabor!  
Suddenly illumined with a new outpouring of light, the disciples, stricken with awe, 
looked one at another; and, astonished, bowed down to the earth and worshipped 
Thee, the Master of all.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who was transfigured on Tabor!  
A divinely sounding voice issued forth from the midst of the cloud, announcing 
the wonder; for the Father of lights cried to the apostles: “This is My beloved Son! 
Heed ye Him!”  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who was transfigured on Tabor!  
Having seen new and most glorious things and heard the voice of the Father on 
Tabor, the servants of the Word cried out: “This is our Savior, the image of the 
Prototype!”  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who was transfigured on Tabor!  
O immutable Image of Him Who Is, O Immovable One, unalterable Seal, Son, 
Word, Wisdom, Arm, Right Hand of the Most High, Power: Thee do we hymn with 
the Father and the Spirit.  
Canon II.  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who was transfigured on Tabor!  
That Thou mayest clearly show forth Thine ineffable second coming, that Thou 
mayest reveal Thyself as the Most High God, standing in the midst of gods, on Tabor 
Thou didst ineffably illumine the apostles, Moses and Elijah. Wherefore, all glorify 
Thee, O Christ.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who was transfigured on Tabor!  
Come and submit yourselves to Me, O ye peoples! And ascending the holy and 
supra-celestial mountain, let us stand immaterially in the city of the living God, and 
noetically behold the immaterial Godhead of the Father and the Spirit which shineth 
forth in the only-begotten Son.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who was transfigured on Tabor!  
Thou hast drawn me to Thyself with love, O Savior, and hast transformed me by 
Thy divine desire; but burn up my sins with immaterial fire, and deem me worthy to 
partake of Thy food, that, rejoicing in both, I may magnify Thy mighty works, O 
Good One.  
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought 
forth Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted 
upon the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Exapostilarion of the feast: 
O Word, Thou immutable Light of the light of the unbegotten Father: today on 
Mount Tabor we have seen in Thy light the manifest light of the Father and the light 
of the Spirit Who guideth all creation with light. (Thrice) 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
Before Thine honored Cross and suffering, taking with thee those of Thy sacred 
disciples whom Thou didst ordain beforehand, Thou didst ascend Mount Tabor, O 
Master, desiring to show them Thy glory. And seeing Thee transfigured and shining 
more brightly than the sun, they fell prostrate and, amazed by Thy power, cried aloud: 
“Thou art the timeless Light, O Christ, and the Effulgence of the Father, even though 
Thou hast been pleased to manifest Thyself in the flesh, O Immutable One!” (Twice)  
O Word, Thou Word of God from before time began, Who dost clothe Thyself 
with light as with a garment: Thou hast deigned to be transfigured before Thy 
disciples in brilliance surpassing the sun’s; and Moses and Elijah have stood before 
Thee, proclaiming unto the living and the dead that Thou art the Lord, and glorifying 
Thine ineffable dispensation and mercy, and the exceeding great tender compassion 
whereby Thou hast saved the world, which perisheth through sin.  
When Thy disciples stood before Thee, O Lord, the voice of the Father manifestly 
called Thee His beloved Son: Thee Who wast born of the cloud which is the Virgin, 
and didst become incarnate, and art transfigured upon Mount Tabor, surrounded by a 
cloud of light, in that Thou art of one essence and co-enthroned with the Father. 
Wherefore Peter, marveling, said: “It is good to be here!”, not knowing what he said, 
O greatly merciful Benefactor.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VIII: 
Having taken Peter, James and John alone up upon the lofty mountain, Christ was 
transfigured before them. His face shone like the sun, and His garments were as white 
as light. And Moses and Elijah appeared, speaking with Him, and a cloud of light 
overshadowed them. And, lo! a voice spake from the cloud, saying: “This is my 
beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased! Hear ye Him!”  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour. 
Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY  
ANTIPHON I  
A: Shout with jubilation unto the Lord all the earth; chant ye unto His name, give 
glory in praise of Him.  
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us!  
B: The voice of Thy thunder is in their rolling, and Thy lightnings have lighted the 
world; the earth was shaken and it trembled.  
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us!  
A: Confession and majesty hast Thou put on, Who coverest Thyself with light as with 
a garment.  
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us!  
 
ANTIPHON II  
A: The mountains of Sion on the sides of the north, the city of the great King.  
Refrain: O Son of God Who wast transfigured upon the mountain, save us who 
chant unto Thee: Alleluia!  
B: And He brought them unto the mountain of His sanctuary, this mountain which 
His right hand had gained.  
Refrain: O Son of God Who wast transfigured upon the mountain, save us who 
chant unto Thee: Alleluia!  
A: Mount Sion He loved. He built His sanctuary as that of a unicorn.  
Refrain: O Son of God Who wast transfigured upon the mountain, save us who 
chant unto Thee: Alleluia!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., O only-begotten Son and Word of God ... 
ANTIPHON III  
Verse: They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion. Nevermore shall he 
be shaken.  
Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Verse: Mountains are round about her, and the Lord is round about His people 
from henceforth and for evermore.  
The Troparion is repeated.  
Verse: O Lord, who shall abide in Thy tabernacle? and who shall dwell in Thy 
holy mountain?  
The Troparion is repeated.  
Verse: Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord? Or who shall stand in 
His holy place?  
The Troparion is repeated.  
Entry Hymn (Introit): 
O Lord, send out Thy light and Thy truth; they have guided me along the way, 
and have brought me unto Thy holy mountain.  
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Kontakion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain O Christ God, * and Thy disciples beheld 
Thy glory as far as they could endure; * that when they would see Thee crucified, * 
they would comprehend that Thy suffering was voluntary, * and proclaim to the 
world that Thou art of a truth ** the Effulgence of the Father.  
Trisagion; and Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: How magnified are Thy works, O 
Lord! * In wisdom hast Thou made them all.  
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been magnified 
exceedingly.  
THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF PETER, § 65 (II PET. 1: 10-19) 
Brethren: give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if ye do these 
things, ye shall never fall: For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Wherefore I will 
not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know 
them, and be established in the present truth. Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in 
this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance; Knowing that shortly I 
must put off this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath shewed me. 
Moreover I will endeavor that ye may be able after my decease to have these things 
always in remembrance. For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we 

--- PAGE 20 ---
made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were 
eyewitnesses of His majesty. For He received from God the Father honor and glory, 
when there came such a voice to Him from the excellent glory: This is my beloved 
Son, in Whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, 
when we were with Him in the holy mount. We have also a more sure word of 
prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a 
dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts.  
Alleluia, in tone VIII: Thine are the heavens, and Thine is the earth.  
Verse: Blessed is the people that know jubilation.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 70 (MT. 17: 1-9) 
At that time, Jesus took Peter, James, and John his brother, and brought them up 
into a high mountain apart, And was transfigured before them: and His face did shine 
as the sun, and His raiment was white as the light. And, behold, there appeared unto 
them Moses and Elijah talking with Him. Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, 
Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one 
for Thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah. While he yet spake, behold, a bright 
cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is 
My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased; hear ye Him. And when the disciples 
heard it, they fell on their face, and were sore afraid. And Jesus came and touched 
them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid. And when they had lifted up their eyes, they 
saw no man, save Jesus only. And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus 
charged them, saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again 
from the dead.  
Instead of “It is truly meet...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who was transfigured on Tabor!  
Thy birthgiving was shown to be incorrupt: God issued forth from thy womb, 
and appeared as a mortal being on earth, and dwelt with men. Wherefore, we 
all magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
This is done through to the leave-taking of the feast. 
Communion Verse: O Lord, in the light of Thy face shall we walk, and in Thy 
name shall we rejoice all the day long.  
 
