--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 13th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIERARCH TIKHON, BISHOP OF VORONEZH, 
WONDERWORKER OF ZADONSK AND ALL RUSSIA  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: 
Come, ye faithful, and joyously assembling, let us bless Tikhon, the holy hierarch 
of Christ, the most excellent pastor, the teacher of golden eloquence, the comforter 
of the sorrowful, the unmercenary physician of the infirm, the new wonderworker 
given to Russia, who doth pray for our souls. (Twice)  
Like the radiant sun hath thy memory shone upon us, O holy hierarch Tikhon, 
illumining those who approach thee with faith; for with the splendors of thy virtues 
dost thou reveal to us the light of righteousness, and with the rays of thy words dost 
thou enlighten us to truly know Christ; with thine intercession thou dost drive away 
the cloud of assailing evils, and with the incorruption of thy relics thou dost show all, 
the radiance of immortality. Wherefore, we praise thee.  
Blessing thee, we praise thee, O divinely wise father Tikhon; approaching thy 
shrine with love, we receive grace; for thou healest the infirm with thy touch, and 
dost save our souls by thy fervent mediation.  
Glory ..., in Tone I: 
O most blessed father Tikhon: standing now before the throne of the Lord, and 
rejoicing with the choirs of heaven in the everlasting kingdom, forget not us who are 
earthly and sorrowful; offer up supplications on behalf of the children of thy flock, 
for whom thou didst travail upon the earth; ask might for our land, peace for the 
Church, steadfastness in the Faith, remission of sins and deliverance from 
misfortunes for all the faithful.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
The cloud of the law, in which Moses and Elijah stood, received the radiant 
darkness of the transfiguration; and, deemed worthy of the most radiant glory, they 
said unto God: “Thou art our God, the King of the ages!”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Acquiring purity of mind and being an abode of the Holy Spirit, thou didst receive 
the grace of the hierarchy, enlightening the people with the knowledge of the Most 
holy Trinity, and didst offer thyself up in the fire of divine love; and now, standing 
before the throne of God, cease not to offer supplication for us who honor thy 
memory.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Blameless was thy life, precious thy death in God’s sight, honorable the tomb 
which holdeth thy grace-endued body, for with miracles doth it enrich those who 
have recourse to thee in faith, O holy hierarch Tikhon, fervent intercessor for our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
O holy hierarch Tikhon, thou hast been deemed worthy of the communion of the 
apostles, the fellowship and joy of the righteous and of all the saints; for, emulating 
them in virtue and travail, thou hast been shown to be a partaker of their heavenly 
glory.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Thou wast a rule of faith, O holy hierarch, and by discourse on the right Faith 
thou didst teach the good life; thou didst reveal thyself to thy flock as a model of the 
virtues, diligently keeping the commandments of Christ. Wherefore, as one who kept 
and taught them, thou hast been called great in the kingdom of heaven, O holy 
hierarch. As one that hast great boldness, entreat Christ God on behalf of those who 
with faith honor thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone II: 
On Mount Tabor * Moses and Elijah beheld God, * Who had become incarnate * 
of the Virgin Maiden, ** for the deliverance of men.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
From thy youth thou didst love Christ, O blessed one; * and thou wast an example 
unto all * by word, life, love, spirit, faith, purity and humility. * Wherefore, thou hast 
made thine abode in the heavenly mansions, * where, standing before the throne of 
the Most holy Trinity, ** do thou pray that our souls be saved, O holy hierarch 
Tikhon.  
Another Troparion, in Tone IV: 
O guide of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety, * preacher of repentance, emulator of 
Chrysostom, * most excellent pastor, new beacon and wonderworker of Russia: * well 
didst thou shepherd thy flock, * and by thy writings thou hast instructed us all. * 
Wherefore, adorned with a crown of incorruption by the Chief Shepherd, ** do thou 
entreat Him that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Come, all ye people of Russia, and with godly hymns let us praise Tikhon, the holy 
hierarch and wonderworker, the divinely radiant beacon of the Church of Christ 
shining in the darkness of this age, the instructor in Orthodox dogmas, the denouncer 
of superstitious teachings, the eloquent preacher of repentance, the true teacher of 
the commandments of Christ, who kept and taught them. And falling down before 
the shrine of his holy and much-healing relics, let us cry out to him with 
compunction: Illumine us with the light of thy divine knowledge, O our father; raise 
us up from the sleep of sin with the fear of punishment and the judgment of God; set 
our feet firmly on the path of Christ’s commandments, and pray thou that our souls 
be saved!  
O divinely wise and God-bearing Tikhon, chosen vessel of grace, pure dwelling 
place of the Trinity, honored abode of the virtues: following Christ from thy youth, 
well didst thou finish thy course and didst keep the Faith to the end. Wherefore thou 
hast received a crown of righteousness from Christ God, Whom do thou entreat 
unceasingly that our souls be saved.  
Most excellent pastor, pillar and adornment of the Church, radiant boast of 
Orthodoxy: well didst thou shepherd the flock of Christ which the Holy Spirit 
appointed thee to tend, ordaining priests and instructing the people. Thou wast a 
defender of the oppressed, a refuge for orphans and widows, and didst provide for 
the poor. And now, standing before the Chief Shepherd, entreat Him that our souls 
be saved.  
O teacher of golden eloquence, divine instrument of the Holy Spirit, herald of the 
truth of Christ, preacher of repentance: deriving precious things from that which is of 
little worth, thou wast like the mouth of the Lord, pouring forth upon all the words 
of eternal life. Wherefore, do thou now pray that our souls be saved.  
Rejoice, O sacred one, emulator of the venerable, fellow laborer with fasters, lover 
of stillness: for, having descended from thine hierarchical throne, thou didst take up 
thine abode in a humble monastery, and regarding tribulations as delight, thou didst 
traverse the narrow way. Thou didst love unfeigned humility, lowliness of attire, 
unceasing labors and prayers, continual lamentation, and the memory of death. O 
Tikhon, our venerable father, pray thou that our souls be saved! (Twice)  
O Tikhon, our compassionate father, our ready helper, fervent intercessor on our 
behalf before God: by thy supplications aid thou Orthodox Christians; defend the 
Orthodox Church from assaults of superstition and unbelief; protect our homeland 
from enemies, visible and invisible; calm the whole world from the turmoil of human 
passions; take from us all malice, enmity and calumny; within our hearts root thou 
peace, love and oneness of mind, that we may be well pleasing unto the Lord and 
Master of our life, and that, throughout the ages, our souls may be saved. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Come, ye faithful, let us glorify Tikhon, the blessed and holy hierarch; for, dwelling 
with the angelic choirs in heaven, with the prophets, holy hierarchs and martyrs doth 
he join chorus, and doth rejoice with the venerable and the righteous, contemplating 
Christ God not in a glass darkly, but face to face; and on earth his precious body is 
adorned with incorruption, pouring forth streams of healing upon those who 
approach with faith and love. Wherefore, we beseech thee, O holy hierarch: be thou a 
fervent intercessor for us at the throne of God, for thou hast great boldness before 
Him.  
Both now ..., Theotokion of the feast, in Tone VI: 
Foreshadowing Thy resurrection, O Christ our God, Thou didst take three of Thy 
disciples - Peter, James and John - and didst ascend Tabor. And as Thou wast 
transfigured, O Savior, Mount Tabor was clothed with light. Thy disciples cast 
themselves upon the ground, O Word, unable to endure the sight of Thine invisible 
countenance. Angels ministered to thee in fear and trembling; the heavens were afraid 
and the earth quaked, beholding the glory of the Lord upon the earth.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three lessons:  
READING FROM THE PROVERBS.  
The memory of the righteous man calleth forth praises, and the blessing of the 
Lord is upon his head. Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that 
getteth understanding. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of 
silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies; and all 
the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her. Length of days is in her 
right hand; and in her left hand riches and honor. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, 
and all her paths are peace. Out of her mouth truth proceedeth, and law and mercy 
she carrieth on her tongue. Hear me, then, O children, for I will speak of excellent 
things; and happy is the man that will keep unto my ways, for my paths are the paths 
of life, and the desire is fashioned of the Lord. Wherefore, I entreat you and put forth 
my voice before the sons of men, for I with wisdom set up everything; I have called 
forth counsel, understanding and knowledge. Counsel is mine and sound wisdom, 
mine is understanding and strength is mine. I love them that love me, and those that 
seek me shall find grace. Understand, then, O ye simple, the cunning, and ye 
uninstructed-direct your hearts unto it. Hearken unto me again, for I will speak of 
honorable things, and the opening of my mouth shall be right things, for my mouth 
shall speak truth and wickedness is an abomination to my lips. All the words of my 
mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing froward or perverse in them. They are all 
plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge. For I will 

--- PAGE 5 ---
teach you the truth, so that your hope may be in the Lord and ye may be filled with 
the Spirit.  
READING FROM THE PROVERBS.  
The mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom; but the froward tongue shall be cut 
out. The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable; but the mouth of the wicked 
speaketh frowardness. A false balance is an abomination to the Lord, but a just 
weight is His delight. When pride cometh, then cometh shame: but with the lowly is 
wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them; but the perverseness of trans-
gressors shall destroy them. Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness 
delivereth from death. The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way: but the 
wicked shall fall by his own wickedness. The righteousness of the upright shall deliver 
them: but transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness. When a wicked man 
dieth, his expectation shall perish: and the hope of unjust men perisheth. The 
righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead. A hypocrite 
with his mouth destroyeth his neighbor: but through knowledge shall the just be 
delivered. When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth; and when the 
wicked perish, there is shouting. By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted: but 
it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked. He that is void of wisdom despiseth his 
neighbor: but a man of understanding holdeth his peace.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
But though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was loved of him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted he to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in their minds, 
That his grace and mercy is with his saints, and that he hath respect unto his chosen.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Let us praise the most blessed Tikhon, the adornment of holy hierarchs and glory 
of the Fathers, the great adornment of the faithful, the new wonderworker who 
abundantly poureth forth streams of miracles, healing the infirm, and inexhaustibly 
bestowing divine gifts; and let us cry out: O most blessed Tikhon, vessel filled with 
grace and fount of mercy, pray to the Lord for us, that He have mercy on our souls!  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
O divinely wise father Tikhon, thou wast a good and faithful servant of the Lord, 
who didst not hide in the ground the talent given thee by Him, but, teaching and 
laboring, didst increase it. Wherefore, being faithful in a very little, thou wast placed 
over many by the heavenly Master of the house, Whom do thou entreat on behalf of 
those who honor thy memory with faith.  
O most blessed Tikhon, thou wast a faithful keeper of the words of the Gospel, 
which say not to lay up for oneself treasure upon earth; but voluntary poverty didst 
thou lay up for thyself as a treasure in heaven, abundantly providing for the poor. 
Wherefore, do thou now ask of the Lord for us rich and great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Today the Monastery of Zadonsk is adorned, and the flock of Voronezh rejoiceth, 
the whole Orthodox Church doth celebrate, keeping thy memory, O holy hierarch 
Tikhon. For, in thy wonders and the incorruption of thy relics, we all have a great 
sign of the grace of the Holy Spirit in the Orthodox Church, a reproof of heresies and 
schisms, and the shaming of impiety.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
all-pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the primal 
curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O most pure 
one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign Lady, ** 
the intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Richly didst thou nourish the souls of the starving with heavenly food, for thy 
word is the bread of angels, O divinely wise Tikhon. With divine gladness thou didst 
fill the hearts of those who thirst, for thy teaching is divine wine and a wellspring of 
the grace of the Holy Spirit, which poureth forth life everlasting.  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of my heart shall be 
of understanding.  
Lovingly praising thee O hierarch and pastor, guileless and venerable, thou faithful 
teacher, we earnestly pray: Offer unto the Lord supplication for the salvation of our 
souls!  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, * all ye that inhabit the world.  
The tares which the evil foe sowed amongst thy flock didst thou manfully uproot. 
For, denouncing the shameless pagan games, thou didst abolish practices harmful to 
the soul, teaching all to piously keep the commandments of Christ.  
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
What shall we call thee, O holy hierarch Tikhon? Good shepherd? For thou wast 
ready to lay down thy life for thy sheep. Enthroned with the apostles? For by thy 
writings thou dost instruct all. Boast of fasters and adornment of monks? For 
monastic labors, vigils and fasting didst thou take up. Earthly angel and heavenly 
man? For in the world thou didst live most peaceably. Child of God? For above all 
else didst thou love to make peace. And now do thou beseech Christ God, that He 
calm the world and make steadfast the Holy Church.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VI: 
To Peter, James and John, Thy foremost disciples, O Lord, Thou hast shown the 
glory of Thy divine countenance today on Mount Tabor; for they beheld Thy 
garments illumined as with light, and Thy face shining more brightly than the sun. 
And unable to endure the unbearable sight of Thine effulgence, they fell face down 
upon the ground, in nowise able to look further. And they heard a voice from above 
bearing witness, saying: “This is my beloved Son, Who hath come into the world to 
save mankind!”  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
From thy youth thou didst love Christ, O blessed one; * and thou wast an example 
unto all * by word, life, love, spirit, faith, purity and humility. * Wherefore, thou hast 
made thine abode in the heavenly mansions, * where, standing before the throne of 
the Most holy Trinity, ** do thou pray that our souls be saved, O holy hierarch 
Tikhon.  
Another Troparion, in Tone IV: 
O guide of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety, * preacher of repentance, emulator of 
Chrysostom, * most excellent pastor, new beacon and wonderworker of Russia: * well 
didst thou shepherd thy flock, * and by thy writings thou hast instructed us all. * 
Wherefore, adorned with a crown of incorruption by the Chief Shepherd, ** do thou 
entreat Him that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
A second Moses wast thou revealed to be; for, having ascended the mount of the 
virtues, the dogmas of pure theology didst thou receive like tablets inscribed by the 
hand of God, not struck with awe by fearsome signs, but guiding the new Israel to 
the calm haven by the teachings of divine words.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
The one God of all entered into the womb of her that kneweth not wedlock, that 
He might unite the lowly with the exalted; and He appeared in fleshly guise and broke 
down the middle wall of enmity, and granted life and divine deliverance.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Christ the Lord, the unapproachable Light of life, resting in thee, O holy hierarch, 
revealed thee to the world as a most radiant flame; for thou dost shed light by thy life, 
enlightening all with the rays of thy teachings, and shining forth in miracles. 
Wherefore, we radiantly celebrate thy memory, O Tikhon most blessed.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O divinely joyous Lady, adornment of hierarchs, confirmation of the righteous and 
boast of all the venerable: from misfortunes, tribulations and grievous transgression 
save us that hymn thee with faith.  
The Polyeleos, and this Magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch 
Tikhon, and we honor thy holy memory, for thou dost entreat Christ God for 
us.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Through abstinence didst thou subject thy body to thy spirit, setting thy mind as 
master over the passions; and illumining thy soul with the travails of fasting, O holy 
hierarch, thou didst offer a pure sacrifice unto Christ, of Whom thou wast beloved, 
for thou didst love Him and wast truly the abode of the divine Trinity.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
With spiritual love I sing to thee, O Lady, thou ray of the most radiant Sun, portal 
of salvation, gate of heaven, noetic ladder for all Christians: accept the entreaty of 
those who bless thee, the hope of our souls, and grant us salvation.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?  
Let every breath ...,  

--- PAGE 9 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN, §36 (JN 10:9-16) 
I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and 
out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to 
destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more 
abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. 
But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth 
the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and 
scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for 
the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As 
the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the 
sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and 
they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone II: 
Thou didst take the Cross upon thy shoulders and crucify thyself to the world, 
following in the steps of Christ the Savior; shaking off the love of life and every 
attachment to the passions, and shining in thy blessed life, thou didst receive a 
heavenly inheritance. Remember thy flock which doth ever honor thee, O holy 
hierarch, father Tikhon.  
The canon to the Theotokos (the Paraklisis), with six Troparia, including the Irmos; 
and that of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: 
 “I glorify Tikhon, the holy hierarch and wonderworker,” in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
O Tikhon, holy hierarch of Christ, do thou thyself grant me understanding and 
speech, that I may worthily hymn the glory whereby Christ the Lord hath glorified 
thee.  
A ray of divine light hast thou shone upon us. Come, ye children of the light, that 
we may be illumined thereby, that, magnifying the holy hierarch with hymns, we may 
become inflamed in spirit.  
Let us glorify the blessed Tikhon, the successor to the apostles, enthroned with the 
holy hierarchs, dweller with the venerable, by whose intercession we obtain salvation.  
Theotokion: The Master of all, having ineffably taken flesh from thee, O Mary, 
Birthgiver of God, became a perfect man; and when thou didst give birth, He kept 
thee as pure as thou hadst been before giving birth. Him do thou entreat, that He 
save our souls from misfortune.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Wounded with the love of Christ, O blessed one, from thy youth didst thou follow 
Him with unwavering desire, disdaining every carnal pleasure.  
The passions of youth which vex the flesh didst thou cut down with the sword of 
philosophy, offering thyself as a sacrifice to Christ the Master.  
O Tikhon, with greater love didst thou cleave unto wisdom, made steadfast in the 
fear of God, for it is the beginning of wisdom.  
Theotokion: Let us hymn the divine temple of God! Let us bless the holy Virgin, 
having been deified and delivered from misfortunes by her!  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
From thy youth wast thou a temple of the Holy Spirit; for, having cleansed thy 
soul of passions through thy faith, the grace of the Comforter doth dwell therein. 
Wherefore, even after thy repose, thy body hath been preserved incorrupt. Entreat 
Christ God that they that honor thee be delivered from corrupting passions.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O Mother of my sweet Jesus, pure and divine Maiden, tabernacle of the Holy 
Spirit: cleanse my soul, which hath been defiled by transgressions, and make it a 
radiant abode of the virtues, O thou who didst bear the Light. Drive from me the 
clouds of the passions, O thou who art incorrupt, that, by thine intercessions, the 
grace of the Comforter may overshadow me.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Like a lamb wast thou tended by Christ; like a shepherd didst thou tend thy flock, 
leading them to the pasture of thy life-bearing teachings.  
An initiate of the mysteries of the doctrine of Christ, thou didst illumine the 
people with the knowledge of Him, showing forth His truth by word and deed.  
A true and faithful guard wast thou over the house of God, watching over it in 
deed, giving an example by thy life, and by word, for thou didst diligently instruct, 
and by thought, for thou didst take thought for its wellbeing.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Finding thee to be a haven and rampart, a refuge and hope, a 
protection and a fervent intercessor, the faithful have recourse to thee and earnestly 
cry out to thee, as the blessed Tikhon hath taught us: O most holy Theotokos, save 
us!  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
O holy hierarch, Christ, Whom thou didst love, Whom thou didst desire, for 
Whose sake thou didst struggle, do thou now beseech on behalf of thy servants, that, 
being merciful, He may grant a peaceful life to all of us who honor thy memory.  
Filled with faith and the love of Christ, thou didst show thyself to be as a river, 
abundantly watering all the land of Russia with the word of thy teachings, O blessed 
Tikhon.  
Like a bee gathering sweet honey from quickly fading blossoms, O father, thou 
didst gather spiritual treasure from the corruptible world, and thereby thou dost 
satisfy us all.  
Theotokion: Fill thou our hearts with gladness, O most pure and divine Maiden, 
who didst give birth to the Cause of joy, destroying all the grief of sin.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Being pure of heart, thou didst cleave unto the pure Christ; being holy, unto the 
Holy One; being loving, unto Him that loveth; being meek, unto the Meek One, 
crying unceasingly: It is good for me to cleave unto God!  
The comfort, pleasure, honor, wealth, glory and all the treasures of the world didst 
thou despise, taking wing to the heavenly Jerusalem, to the home of thy Father, 
wherein there are many mansions.  
Insults, sorrows and abuse didst thou joyfully endure, mindful that there is no 
crown without a victory, no victory without a contest, no contest without battle, and 
no battle without a foe.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Sovereign Lady, Mother of the Creator: thou art the joy of 
the heavenly hosts, the blessed helper of the human race. Pray thou that our souls be 
saved!  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Successor to the apostles, adornment of holy hierarchs, * teacher of the Orthodox 
Church: * beseech the Master of all to grant peace to the world ** and great mercy to 
our souls!  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Ikos: Having adorned thy soul with virtue and enlightened thy mind with the love 
of wisdom, thou wast revealed to be a good shepherd of the flock of Christ, teaching 
it by word and writing, admonishing and instructing, giving an example of what thou 
didst say by thy life. Wherefore, by Christ, the Chief Shepherd, thou hast been 
adorned with a crown of glory in heaven, shining forth on earth in the incorruption 
of thy relics and pouring forth abundant streams of wonders upon those who call 
upon thee in faith, O divinely wise Tikhon. Pray to the Lord, that He grant our souls 
great mercy!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
With patience didst thou acquire thy soul, O blessed one, and traversed the narrow 
path, that alone leadeth to everlasting life, ever directing thy gaze toward the way of 
the Cross of Christ, the Judge of the contest, and setting an image thereof as a model 
for thy life.  
Thy whole self didst thou surrender to the love of God: soul and body, heart and 
mind, memory and will, purpose, ambition, word, deed and thought didst thou 
consecrate to God in love.  
O blessed Tikhon, thou didst show thyself to be a father of orphans, a defender of 
widows, the wealth of the poor, the consolation of the sick and admonition of the 
wealthy, a staff for the aged, the instructor of the young, and a model of virtue for 
monastics.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O Mary! Rejoice, thou who hast given birth to the Savior of 
the world! Be thou a haven for us who are tempest-tossed by the storm of life, a calm 
harbor amid the deep of sorrows, and a guide to the heavenly mansions.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
A Son of the Kingdom while yet on earth, thou didst ever yearn for the Son of 
God, crying out to Him: Be Thou my food and drink; be Thou the light of my soul; 
be Thou my relief amid sorrows; be Thou life everlasting according to the 
Resurrection, that I may supremely exalt Thee throughout the ages!  
Ever mindful of the fall of Adam, the redemption through the sufferings of Christ, 
the hour of death, the dread Judgment, the torment of sinners and the blessed state of 
the righteous, thou didst lament, setting before us an example of compunction and 
purifying thyself aforetime for eternal glory.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Having taken up labors in this life out of faith and piety, thou didst sweetly rest 
from thy labors and wast granted repose; for thou didst descend into the grave, 
maturing like wheat for the harvest of God at the time of the reaping.  
Theotokion: With the hyssop of the life-creating Blood of the Lamb, Who was 
slain for the salvation of the world, and Who took flesh from thy most pure blood, 
do thou sprinkle and cleanse me, who am defiled, O Lady, that I may be made whiter 
than snow by thy maternal assistance.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
A mediator and fervent intercessor for us before God wast thou revealed to be, O 
hierarch, making supplication to the Master through thy prayers. Ask thou 
forgiveness of transgressions, O father, for those who faithfully celebrate thy sacred 
memory and magnify thee with heartfelt love.  
O thou who hast been illumined with the radiance of God the Light, enlighten us 
who are darkened by the passions of life; and, having received of Him the authority to 
loose and to bind, loose thou our transgressions and grant the kingdom of heaven 
unto those who celebrate thy memory and magnify thee as is meet.  
Mercifully accept this, our hymn of praise, which is offered up to thee with 
abundant fervor, from our unworthy and wretched souls, O holy hierarch, granting us 
grace abounding in compassion.  
Theotokion: Thou didst raise up fallen Adam, O Mother of God, who hast given 
birth to the new Adam. Do thou also raise us up, who are fallen like Adam of old, but 
who fervently believe in the grace of the New.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having fallen asleep in the flesh ...”: 
Though thou hast fallen asleep in the flesh, O holy hierarch Tikhon, yet, alive in 
spirit, thou dost reign with Christ in the unwaning kingdom and dost beseech Him on 
behalf of those who call upon thee in faith and love.  
Another Exapostilarion:  
Spec. Mel.: “I behold Thy bridal chamber, O Savior ...”:  
Mindful of thee, shining with ineffable light in the bridal chamber of Christ the 
Bridegroom, O holy hierarch, I fain would attain unto the kingdom of heaven, but my 
mind hath become foolish through the sleep of sin, my lamp hath expired like those 
who had no oil, the garment of my soul hath been befouled, and I perceive that the 
gates of the kingdom are closed unto me. But, rousing me from the sleep of sin by 
thy prayers, grant me the oil of repentance; and covering my nakedness with the 
garment of the excellencies of Christ, make me worthy of the unwaning kingdom. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
 On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: 
O consoler of the sorrowful, thou didst lovingly receive those who were clad in 
rags; thou didst visit the imprisoned; to the poor, dying of fetid diseases, thou didst 
give peace; thou didst console the grieving who were of low estate, for thou wast a 
friend of the least of the brethren of Christ. Wherefore, Christ hath numbered thee 
among the company of His friends. Him do thou beseech, that He soften the hard-
ness of our hearts and make us quick to render help and consolation in the doing of 
good unto those who are needy. (Twice)  
O lover of peace, all abuse didst thou joyfully endure as one dumb, opening not 
thy mouth, forgiving all, that the offender be pacified; and thou didst show thyself to 
be a peacemaker for those at enmity. Wherefore, still our much troubling passions, 
destroying wrath, hatred and strife, and instructing with brotherly love and patience.  
O lover of stillness, who didst set a watch before thy mouth and a door of 
enclosure round about thy lips, that thou mightest converse alone with the One God: 
prevail over the unbridled malice of our tongues, and cure us of idle and vain speech 
and judging, ceaselessly offering thy fervent prayers unto the Lord on our behalf.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
O emulator of the love of the heavenly Father, in that thou art a child of love, ever 
abiding in love, thou didst set love above fasting. We pray thee: take thou and give to 
us of the spirit of thy love, and teach us to perceive our own transgressions and not 
to judge our brethren. For thou art able to do this, in so far as thou dost abide in God 
and God abideth in thee.  
Both now ..., of the feast, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VIII: 
Having taken Peter, James and John alone up upon the lofty mountain, Christ was 
transfigured before them. His face shone like the sun, and His garments were as white 
as light. And Moses and Elijah appeared, speaking with Him, and a cloud of light 
overshadowed them. And, lo! a voice spake from the cloud, saying: “This is my 
beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased! Hear ye Him!”  
Great Doxology. Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia, from ODES III, and VI of the canon to the 
holy hierarch.  
Wounded with the love of Christ, O blessed one, from thy youth didst thou follow 
Him with unwavering desire, disdaining every carnal pleasure. (Twice) 
The passions of youth which vex the flesh didst thou cut down with the sword of 
philosophy, offering thyself as a sacrifice to Christ the Master.  
O Tikhon, with greater love didst thou cleave unto wisdom, made steadfast in the 
fear of God, for it is the beginning of wisdom.  
Being pure of heart, thou didst cleave unto the pure Christ; being holy, unto the 
Holy One; being loving, unto Him that loveth; being meek, unto the Meek One, 
crying unceasingly: It is good for me to cleave unto God!  
The comfort, pleasure, honor, wealth, glory and all the treasures of the world didst 
thou despise, taking wing to the heavenly Jerusalem, to the home of thy Father, 
wherein there are many mansions.  
Insults, sorrows and abuse didst thou joyfully endure, mindful that there is no 
crown without a victory, no victory without a contest, no contest without battle, and 
no battle without a foe.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Sovereign Lady, Mother of the Creator: thou art the joy of 
the heavenly hosts, the blessed helper of the human race. Pray thou that our souls be 
saved!  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
From thy youth thou didst love Christ, O blessed one; * and thou wast an example 
unto all * by word, life, love, spirit, faith, purity and humility. * Wherefore, thou hast 
made thine abode in the heavenly mansions, * where, standing before the throne of 
the Most holy Trinity, ** do thou pray that our souls be saved, O holy hierarch 
Tikhon.  
Another Troparion, in Tone IV: 
O guide of Orthodoxy, teacher of piety, * preacher of repentance, emulator of 
Chrysostom, * most excellent pastor, new beacon and wonderworker of Russia: * well 
didst thou shepherd thy flock, * and by thy writings thou hast instructed us all. * 
Wherefore, adorned with a crown of incorruption by the Chief Shepherd, ** do thou 
entreat Him that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Successor to the apostles, adornment of holy hierarchs, * teacher of the Orthodox 
Church: * beseech the Master of all to grant peace to the world ** and great mercy to 
our souls!  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 
THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE HEBREWS (HEB. 7 :26-8:2)  
Brethren: such a high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; who needeth not daily, as those high 
priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: for this he 
did once, when he offered up himself. For the law maketh men high priests which 
have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, 
who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the 
sum: We have such a high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the 
Majesty in the heavens; a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which 
the Lord pitched, and not man.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his 
tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (MT. 5:14-19)  
The Lord said unto His disciples: Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on 
a hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a 
candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine 
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come 
to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot 
or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever 
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he 
shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach 
them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
