--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 14th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
FOREFEAST OF THE DORMITION OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY PROPHET MICAH  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Let us sound the cymbals, * let us cry out in hymns, * celebrating the feast of the 
Virgin’s departure; * and let us radiantly cry aloud the funeral hymn, * for the Mother 
of God, the ark all of gold, * bound for splendor, * maketh ready today * to pass over 
from earth to the heavens, ** to a new and divine life.  
O choir of the apostles, * assemble today most gloriously from the ends of the 
earth, * for the animate city * of Him Who is Lord over all * departeth gloriously 
from the earth to that which is higher, * to join chorus with the King, her Son. * With 
the heavenly armies * chant ye the hymns of parting with oneness of mind, ** for her 
divine burial.  
Come ye now forth beforehand, * O company of priests, * ye kings and princes, * 
together with the ranks of the virgins! * Assemble together, all ye people, * sending 
up funeral hymns! * For she who is Sovereign Lady over all, * bound for the 
mansions of heaven, ** desireth to commit her soul into the hands of her Son on the 
morrow.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy prophet, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Showing forth most exalted divine knowledge, * thou didst proclaim * the 
manifest and lofty mountain: * the preaching of the Savior * which would be revealed 
at the peak of the mountains, * to which the nations, hastening with faith, * earnestly 
have recourse, * and who learn the ways of the Lord, ** and who are saved with 
eternal salvation.  
With a divinely inspired tongue thou didst prophesy: * the Prince, Whose comings 
forth are truly from everlasting, * doth issue forth * and shepherd His people, * 
coming forth out of Bethlehem, * O Micah, wondrous among the prophets. * And 
beholding thy prophecy now fulfilled, * with divine wisdom we glorify ** Him of 
Whom thou didst speak.  
Standing before the throne of God, * O most honored prophet, * deemed worthy 
of joy, * beholding glory, * and delighting in divine food, * full of spiritual gladness 
and joy, * look down now upon those who celebrate thy memory, * delivering them 
from dangers ** by thine unceasing supplications.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
O most holy and pure Virgin, we, the multitude of angels in the heavens and the 
race of mankind on earth, call thy most honored dormition blessed, in that thou wast 
the Mother of Christ, the Creator and God of all. Cease not, we pray, to entreat Him 
on behalf of us who have set our hope on thee and God, O most hymned Theotokos 
who knewest not wedlock.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
O new wonder! * O strange sign! * O life-bearing Maiden, * how art thou taken by 
death ** and art now covered by the grave?  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
Let all mortal nature * join in chorus! * For, behold! the Virgin, * the daughter of 
Adam, ** is translated to the heavens.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
Let me envision in mind * the bier of the Virgin, * magnificently surrounded * by 
the choir of the apostles ** chanting funeral hymnody.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone II: 
She who is more exalted than the heavens, more glorious than the cherubim and 
more honorable than all creation, who because of her exceedingly great purity, 
became the receptacle of the ever-existing Essence, committeth today her all-holy 
soul into the hands of her Son. In her are all things filled with joy, and He granteth us 
great mercy.  
Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Leap up in anticipation, O ye people, * clapping your hands with faith, * and 
assemble with love, * all rejoicing today and exclaiming with splendor; * for the 
Mother of God, whom we ever glorify with hymns * as the Theotokos, ** will glori-
ously pass over from those on earth to those on high.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
O thou who art more spacious than the heavens, who hast given birth in the flesh 
to the Creator of all: having appeared on earth thou art now translated from the earth 
to the very heavens. And the souls of the righteous and the choirs of the angels, 
gazing upon thee, ever offer thee praise, as is meet for a Queen. Wherefore, cease 
thou never to pray for those who hymn thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
Multitudes of angels glorify thee, and the human race sings hymns of the forefeast 
unto thee, for thou hast been translated from the earth unto Him Who was born of 
thee, O pure Virgin Theotokos, and dost make earnest supplication, that those who 
celebrate thy repose with faith be delivered from misfortunes.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Canon of the forefeast, with 8 Troparia, including its Irmos. 
 And that of the prophet, with 4 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the forefeast, in Tone V: 
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath 
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they 
chanted a song of victory. 
Let us approach the tomb which received the Virgin, O ye faithful, hastening to 
receive divine fragrance; for therein hath been poured the wafting fragrance of the 
phial, which perfumeth the souls of all.  
Sion is set apart from other mountains; and the animate Sion hath come to rest in 
the Garden of Gethsemane, having assented that our immortal God rest in her 
incorrupt womb, in that she is animate.  
O ye mouths of the apostles, having sounded the trumpets of God-bearing 
peoples, cry ye out with a loud voice: “Ye powers, open the gates! Receive the Queen 
into the highest!”  
How can death lay hold of the all-immaculate one who, in a manner transcending 
nature, hath manifestly given birth to everlasting Life? But the Master, having rejected 
this, hath translated thee to the haven of heaven.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Canon of the holy Prophet  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
As a truly clear divine mirror of divine things, O blessed one, thou standest before 
the Creator. Him do thou beseech, that He save from misfortunes those who hymn 
thee with faith.  
Full of spiritual understanding and the wisdom of God, O most excellent Micah, 
as a pure intelligence thou didst learn the things of the future.  
Piously proclaiming thy prophecy, O blessed one, thou didst say that the Lord 
would appear on earth from heaven, recording His appearance unto us.  
Theotokion: He Who was known before time began, O Mother of God, hath 
appeared on earth in the latter days assuming flesh, delivering those who before were 
made captive.  
ODE III  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing * and 
suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * who alone art good * 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Let us now send up funeral hymns to the pure one, the Theotokos who gave birth 
to the Creator, and, rejoicing, with the incorporeal armies let us surround her life-
bearing bier as though it were a divine and holy throne.  
Shedding tears with faithful hearts, come ye, let us touch her incorrupt body, the 
life-bestowing, divine and ever-flowing fountain, gazing upon it with our eyes as it 
lieth, laid out and enshrouded.  
O divine and right noble habitation of God, true seat and animate city of the true 
King of all, through thy memorial grant forgiveness of all our sins, and save us from 
misfortunes.  
Canon of the holy Prophet 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Thy tongue became a pen of the divine Spirit, whereby thou hast revealed to us 
the fulfillment of things to come.  
Thou didst indicate that the pre-eternal Prince, the Savior and Director of all, 
would become incarnate in Bethlehem.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Illumined with prophetic enlightenment, O glorious prophet, thou wast for us an 
excellent instructor in the mysteries of things which pass understanding.  
Theotokion: Thou wast a most manifest mountain, O most pure one, whereon the 
Lord, having ascended it, revealed Himself, and to which we now have recourse.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy Prophet, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
With thine understanding enlightened by the Holy Spirit, O wise one, thou didst 
openly prophesy things to come, making clear the incomprehensible, O most 
noetically rich prophet Micah; for thou didst prophesy that Christ, the Prince and 
Leader Who doth shepherd His people, would come forth from Bethlehem.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Ye virgin maidens, sing in anticipation! Ye mothers, give praise, and chant ye all a 
song of parting, celebrating beforehand, in godly manner, the dormition of the Virgin, 
the Mother of the Lord, with hymns of divine beauty; for she is to be gloriously 
translated to the heavens.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying, O 
Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the salvation 
of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed Ones. 
The choirs of heaven rejoice and prepare to receive the pure Mother of God, the 
Queen Who in piety hath dominion over all creatures.  
Let the air-borne evil spirits withdraw; and let the prince of this world recoil and 
fall back confounded, beholding the Mother of God borne aloft.  
No longer is the ark of the covenant carried by priests symbolically, in an indistinct 
image: the Mother of God is borne in truth by the holy apostles.  
O turtle-dove of Solomon, beauteous, comely and most precious, having fallen 
asleep in a place of divine rest, thou hast found repose among the immutable 
treasures of life.  
Canon of the holy Prophet 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Illumined from on high with the splendors of divine inspiration, O right glorious 
one, thou didst proclaim things to come as though thou didst behold them in the 
present.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
The law went forth out of Sion as Thou didst foretell, O blessed of God, and hath 
continued to the ends of the earth, proclaiming the Word of the Lord.  
The Lord of all appeared in the house of Jacob to exercise dominion, and as a 
shepherd He tendeth His people in the glory of His name, O all-blessed one.  
Theotokion: The Mother of God the Creator is believed to be the descendent of 
David; wherefore, she hath ineffably given birth to Him when He took flesh from 
her.  
ODE V  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise 
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O Christ, 
* in that Thou alone art compassionate!  
On Mount Sinai Thou didst animate the pure and divine habitation of the most 
holy Spirit, and in a manner transcending nature enlightened all creation.  
Thou wast the dwelling-place of all divinity; wherefore, the Godhead hath 
transported thee from the earth to the heavens, utterly and wholly, O Birthgiver of 
God.  
Jesus, the supremely divine Lord of glory, Who, in His tender compassion, was 
born of thy womb, hath Himself translated thee from the earth, soul and body, O 
Mother of God.  
Canon of the holy Prophet 
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Thou didst love to follow after the Lord, O most wise one, ever ready to tread His 
paths.  
Thou didst understand that salvation would come to all nations from the Jews, O 
wondrous one.  
Beholding grace, thou didst proclaim it, O divinely revealed one; and flocks of the 
gentiles have recourse unto it and are saved.  
Theotokion: Thou wast the place of the Lord, O Mother of God, from whence He 
issued forth, delivering the world from deception.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its soul-
destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou art 
compassionate. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
With the angels, archangels, authorities, principalities, thrones and powers, let us 
make haste to Sion and behold the great wonder.  
How can corrupt death lay hold of her who is the Mother of Life, and who hath 
been untainted by any corruption? Truly beyond nature are thy mysteries, O pure 
Virgin!  
Light ye as many lamps as possible, O people of Sion, and come, let us go forth to 
meet in Gethsemane her who hath been wrapped in light; and let us accompany her 
with hymns.  
Canon of the holy Prophet 
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Obedient to the laws of God, preserving the law thou didst denounce all who 
violated them, O most glorious one.  
O godly Micah, honored instrument of the Spirit: by thine entreaties preserve the 
faithful from misfortunes.  
Theotokion: Thou hast founded the house of Judah, O Virgin, revealing Him Who 
shone forth from thy holy womb.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
The universe, embroidered by the immaterial Spirit * for the sake of thy glorious 
memorial, * noetically crieth out to thee with gladness: * Rejoice, O Virgin, ** thou 
boast of Christians!  
Ikos: He Who splendidly assembled His divine apostles on clouds from the ends 
of the earth, to come to thy body, O pure one, revealed thee to all as the Theotokos, 
the awesome bridal-chamber supremely adorned; and, as thy Son and God, He took 
thy most pure soul in His hands and set it in paradise. For the tree of life is there, and 
mortals, eating thereof, have found immortality through thee. Wherefore, we also cry 
out to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin, thou boast of Christians!  
ODE VII  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, * and 
bedewed the Youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed art Thou! 
O ye assemblies of priests, ye companies of the people, all ye maidens and virgins: 
joining chorus, hymn the divine repose of the Virgin!  
O leaders of the law and grace, praise ye the Dormition of the Theotokos, 
chanting and singing together: Blessed art Thou, O God!  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Today is the most pure one, the holy of holies, the great and holy mountain, 
translated to Sion. To her do we cry aloud: Rejoice, O most immaculate one!  
Canon of the holy Prophet 
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Thou didst show thyself to be most valiant and useful to the Master of all, 
denouncing the cruelty of the rulers, teaching and crying aloud, O right glorious one: 
O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Shining with the beams of thy godly life, thou wast shown to be a most pure 
prophet of the manifestation of God, O blessed one, chanting: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: The Word, Whose power is equal to that of the Father and Who is 
the Father’s peer, the blessed God of our fathers, by the Father’s good pleasure is 
formed as a man in the Virgin’s womb.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace chanted a 
hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
O Virgin Queen of all women, bear thou to Christ the entreaty of those who 
lovingly celebrate this thy memorial and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
Thy sanctified countenance, made luminous by the beauty of the Godhead, 
shineth with the glory of thy divine virginity, which is utterly adorned throughout all 
ages, O most immaculate one.  
I cannot speak of thy supremely great works. I tremble and am amazed, and am 
cast into confusion. Yet, beholding Him Who is Love, O Virgin, ever continually 
reward me with divine gifts.  
Canon of the holy Prophet 
Irmos: The instruments of music sounded out in harmony, * and countless 
multitudes worshipped the image in Dura; * but the three Children, refusing 
to bow in obeisance, * hymn and glorify the Lord throughout all ages. 
The Word of God, Who existeth from before time began, hath appeared, 
delivering the descendents of Adam, as the Prophet Micah foretold. Hymn the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Noetically instructed, thou didst cry out: the Master, Who desireth to be merciful, 
in that such is His nature, taketh pity upon the unrighteous deeds of those who with 
faith hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Receiving the effulgence of God, thou wast shown to be like bright lightning, 
becoming like a clear mirror, O Micah, crying: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Having Him Who was born of thee as our mighty consolation, O 
Virgin, like the apostles we cleave to the precious confession of the Faith, hymning 
the Lord and exalting Him supremely throughout the ages.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and man; * and 
Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed. 
Right well hast thou been adorned as a bride, O Virgin Mother of God; for in thee 
the stumbling of Adam and the most destructive suasion of Eve have been set aright. 
Wherefore, with hymns we all unceasingly magnify thee.  
Rightly doth God, as thy Master, give thee glory, O Virgin. But what shall we, who 
are wretched, offer to thee? Yet accept if only the zeal of those who with love honor 
thee as the Theotokos, and preserve us.  
In that the Most High, having descended, issued forth from thy womb, O Virgin 
Bride of God, He hath visited us through thee. Emulating Him, from the mansions of 
heaven do thou visit those who hymn thee on the feast of thy memorial.  
Grant victories over heresy to our Orthodox hierarchs, who hold thine honored 
burial as their sure confirmation and royally honor thy memory, O Mother of God, 
bringing the enemies of our Faith into submission.  
Canon of the holy Prophet 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Shining with beams of piety and praying for the world, thou standest ever before 
the incorrupt and most pure Mind of God.  
The splendid day of thy memorial hath dawned, O prophet, full of the gifts of 
prophecy, and pouring forth rivers of repentance.  
Deified in a manner beyond understanding, O blessed one, thou dost delight in the 
gladness of the Savior Who came into the world in accordance with thy prophecy.  
Theotokion: As thou art more exalted and pure than all, in that thou didst conceive 
the supremely good God, wash away the defilement of my soul.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Exapostilarion of the forefeast:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”: 
Angels and shepherds first hymned thy birthgiving, and now the ranks of the 
angels, the choir of the apostles and every nation hymn thy dormition, O Virgin.  
 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Celebrating the most splendid memory of thine honored dormition, O Theotokos, 
we chant with love: Departing to thy Son and Lord in thy glory, as thou art the most 
pure Mother pray for those Christians who hymn thee with faith.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Following the words of the divine Gabriel, we cry to thee: Rejoice, O pure one! 
And do thou, O most holy Mother of the Lord, be mindful of those who hymn thee 
as thou art translated unto Him.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
Through the Holy Spirit, the immeasurable wisdom of God hath of thee fashioned 
for Himself a temple past understanding, O Theotokos, and now hath translated thee 
to the immaterial mansions, O all-hymned one.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
A slave, I now approach thee, the Mother of the God of all, praying to be 
delivered from all dangers. O Birthgiver of God, who reignest with thy Son, preserve 
thou the Christian race!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone III: 
Come, all ye ends of the earth, let us praise the honored repose of the Mother of 
God; for she hath placed her immaculate soul in the hands of her Son. Wherefore, 
the world, with the incorporeal ones and the apostles, having found life through her 
holy dormition, doth celebrate it splendidly in psalms, hymns and spiritual odes.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the beatitudes, 8 Troparia: from ODES III and VI of the canon of the 
forefeast.  
Let us now send up funeral hymns to the pure one, the Theotokos who gave birth 
to the Creator, and, rejoicing, with the incorporeal armies let us surround her life-
bearing bier as though it were a divine and holy throne. (Twice) 
Shedding tears with faithful hearts, come ye, let us touch her incorrupt body, the 
life-bestowing, divine and ever-flowing fountain, gazing upon it with our eyes as it 
lieth, laid out and enshrouded.  
O divine and right noble habitation of God, true seat and animate city of the true 
King of all, through thy memorial grant forgiveness of all our sins, and save us from 
misfortunes.  
With the angels, archangels, authorities, principalities, thrones and powers, let us 
make haste to Sion and behold the great wonder. (Twice) 
How can corrupt death lay hold of her who is the Mother of Life, and who hath 
been untainted by any corruption? Truly beyond nature are thy mysteries, O pure 
Virgin!  
Light ye as many lamps as possible, O people of Sion, and come, let us go forth to 
meet in Gethsemane her who hath been wrapped in light; and let us accompany her 
with hymns.  
After the Entrance: first, the Troparion of the temple, if it be dedicated to 
Christ; then that of the forefeast and that of the temple, if it be dedicated to a 
saint, Glory ..., the Kontakion of a temple of Christ; Both now ..., that of the 
forefeast.  
Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Leap up in anticipation, O ye people, * clapping your hands with faith, * and 
assemble with love, * all rejoicing today and exclaiming with splendor; * for the 
Mother of God, whom we ever glorify with hymns * as the Theotokos, ** will glori-
ously pass over from those on earth to those on high.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
The universe, embroidered by the immaterial Spirit * for the sake of thy glorious 
memorial, * noetically crieth out to thee with gladness: * Rejoice, O Virgin, ** thou 
boast of Christians!  
 
NOTE: If the forefeast of the dormition of the Theotokos falls on a Sunday, 
we chant the whole service of the forefeast together with that of the 

--- PAGE 12 ---
resurrection and that of the prophet, evening, morning and at liturgy, as is 
indicated for the forefeast of the transfiguration of Christ. Only at matins we 
chant the Irmoi: “All-adorned with divine glory ...” (the Irmoi of the first 
canon of the feast of the Dormition). At the entrance of liturgy, we chant: the 
Troparion of the resurrection, that of the forefeast, and that of the saint to 
whom the temple is dedicated. Then, the Kontakion of the resurrection; Glory 
..., that of the saint to whom the temple is dedicated; Both now ..., that of the 
forefeast.  
 
 
 
