--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 19th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
AFTERFEAST OF THE DORMITION OF THE THEOTOKOS  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR ANDREW THE GENERAL  
& THE 2,593 MARTYRED WITH HIM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Thy holy, most pure and honored repose * was not a separation from those who 
love thee, * but rather an unbreakable union, O Virgin; * for thou dost ever reveal 
thyself * to those who glorify thee * as the true Mother of God, * bestowing thy grace 
* and showing that thou hast been given ** as an intercessor for all mankind.  
Becoming the ark of sanctification * of Him Who made His abode within thee, * 
O pure Theotokos, * thou hast been translated by Him * from the earth to the rest 
which groweth not old, * illumined with His splendor. * Wherefore, from on high 
thou dost watch over * those who hymn thee with love ** and proclaim thy divine 
and mighty working of miracles.  
Accepting thee, O most pure one, * as a bridal chamber of great splendor, * as an 
ark of sanctification for His abode, * thy Son and Lord * showed thee forth to the 
incorporeal armies * and the dwelling-places of the saints * as the ineffable glory * 
which delivereth from corruption and misfortunes ** those who with love hymn thy 
mighty works, O pure one.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
Revealed as a model of manliness, * before the assembly thou didst dare * to give 
thyself over to the arena of suffering, * going forth thereto like a general, * O most 
spiritually rich martyr Andrew, * thou dost now ever pour forth * the water of 
healings upon the faithful, ** receiving grace from the heavens.  
Manifest as the namesake of manliness, * contending manfully thou didst engage 
the enemy and destroy him, * as though he were another Pharaoh, * engulfing his 
whole army * in the streams of thy blood, O right wondrous one. * Wherefore, pray 
thou, * that God grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
O glorious one, thou didst bring to God, * the Bestower of good things, * a great 
army which struggled * and with thee found undying glory * through death, O most 
glorious one. * With them do thou pray, * that He grant unto our souls ** peace and 
great mercy.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
When thou didst depart unto Him Who had been ineffably born of thee, O Virgin 
Theotokos, James the brother of God and first bishop was present, with Peter, the 
most honorable and preeminent, the foremost of theologians, and the whole divine 
choir of the apostles, hymning the divine and awesome mystery of God’s dis-
pensation with manifest theology; and, burying thy Life-giving and God-receiving 
body, they rejoiced, O all-hymned one. And regarding one another, they said, 
marveling at the wonders of her who transcendeth the most holy senior ranks of the 
angels: “Lift up your gates and receive her who gave birth to the Creator of heaven 
and earth, and with glorifications let us hymn the precious and holy body which con-
tained the Lord Who is invisible to us.” Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, we also 
cry out to thee, O most hymned one: Exalt the horn of Christians and save our souls!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...” 
The assembly of the angels rejoiceth * in the immortal repose of the Mother of 
God; * and she, departing for the eternal mansions, is glad * and passeth over to the 
gladness of heaven, ** to divine joy and everlasting delight.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
Desiring the life on high, * thou didst abandon this one, O Birthgiver of God, * O 
Maiden, flower of virginity, * who hast given birth to Christ, the Life of all. * And the 
assembly of the angels * stood by with reverence ** at thine honored burial, O Bride 
of God.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
The air is sanctified * by thy parting burial hymns; * and in thine ascent, * O 
Mother of God, Who lovest mankind, * is an awesome miracle wrought, O 
Theotokos who knewest not a man. * Wherefore, we, the faithful, faithfully do thee 
homage, ** O Theotokos who knewest not wedlock.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Come, ye assembly of those who love the feasts of the Church! Come, let us form 
a choir! Come, and with hymns let us crown the temple, the ark of the rest of God! 
For today heaven expandeth its bosom, receiving her who gave birth to Him Who is 
invisible to all, and the earth receiveth the well-spring of Life, who imparteth blessing 
and is adorned with splendor. The angels form a chorus with the apostles, gazing with 
awe upon her who gave birth to the Author of life, and who is translated from life to 
Life. Let us all bow down before her, praying: O Lady, forget not thy kinship with 
those who celebrate thine all-holy dormition with faith!  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone V:  
Leaving the glory of earthly rank behind, * thou didst inherit the kingdom of 
heaven, * adorning with crowns of incorruption * as with all-wondrous stones, * the 
assembly of spiritual athletes whom thou didst lead to Christ. * Having found Christ, 
the never-setting Sun, together with the choirs of the angels, * in light unwaning, O 
holy general Andrew. * do thou ever entreat Him, with those who suffered with thee, 
** that He save our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death. (Twice) 
Glory ..., that of the holy martyr, in Tone V: 
Leaving the glory of earthly rank behind, * thou didst inherit the kingdom of 
heaven, * adorning with crowns of incorruption * as with all-wondrous stones, * the 
assembly of spiritual athletes whom thou didst lead to Christ. * Having found Christ, 
the never-setting Sun, together with the choirs of the angels, * in light unwaning, O 
holy general Andrew. * do thou ever entreat Him, with those who suffered with thee, 
** that He save our souls.  
Both now ..., that of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
Thy soul is among the noetic beings of heaven, O most immaculate one, and thy 
precious body hath passed over to paradise, away from corruption, to a place of light, 
let the Lord recompense the iniquitous ones, who have spoken falsehoods against 
thine honored body, but we, with the apostles cry out to thee: Rejoice, O thou who 
art full of grace!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
The earth was blessed by thy burial, the air was sanctified by thine ascent, O all-
hymned Mary, and the angels opened unto thee the portals of heaven, where, 
standing now, thou prayest to thy Son for the peace of the world, O Mother who 
knewest not wedlock.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos. 
The composition of John of Damascus, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her dormition. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
O virgin maidens, with Miriam the prophetess raise ye now a hymn of parting! For 
she who alone is Virgin and Mother of God is translated and received into heaven.  
The divine mansions of heaven received thee as an animate heaven, as is meet, O 
most pure one; and thou hast taken thy place as a bride, splendidly adorned, before 
thy King and God, O all-immaculate one.  
Canon of the martyr, with 4 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is:  
“With hymns do I hymn thee, a general Andrew.” 
The composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
O glorious martyr, with the radiant beams of the Spirit illumine my soul and dispel 
the darkness of ignorance, that with zeal I may sing thy sacred festival.  
O blessed one, thou wast abundantly enriched with the splendor of the martyrs, 
and with divine power didst trample underfoot the deceiver with manly wisdom, 
becoming a victor, O Andrew, martyr of great renown.  
Having mortified earthly thoughts, O much-suffering martyr, thou didst manfully 
follow after the Word Who was slain for thy sake, and thou hast passed over to the 
life which is untainted by death.  
Theotokion: He Who in His supreme goodness truly clothed Himself in flesh 
through thee for the salvation of mankind, O all-immaculate one, is known as both 
God and man, in two natures.  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Having issued forth from a mortal womb, O pure one, thou didst receive an end 
conforming to nature; but, having given birth unto Him Who is Life, Thou hast been 
translated to the divine and hypostatic Life.  
At the behest of the Almighty, the choir of theologians journeyed from the ends of 
the earth, and multitudes of angels came from on high to Sion, to minister at thy 
burial as was meet, O Lady.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sailing the deep of temptation with the mast of the Cross, O glorious one, with the 
streams of thy blood thou didst drown the enemy.  
Thou wast glorified as an excellent victor, O martyr, overcoming the stumbling-
blocks of the deceiver and his machinations.  
Adorned with a crown of splendor, O martyr of Christ, thou dost ever stand in joy 
with the chosen martyrs.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Virgin and Sovereign Lady, thou hast given birth to 
the Lord of all Who delivereth mortals from the tyranny of the enemy.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II: 
Standing before the Lord in prayer, * like a star preceding the sun, * thou didst 
gain sight of the desired treasure of the kingdom, * full of ineffable joy; * and for ages 
without end, O general Andrew, * thou dost unceasingly sing to the immortal King 
with the angels. ** With them ever pray thou for us all.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Strengthening thy soul with manliness, O martyr, thou didst destroy the mighty 
savagery of the enemy, and, rejoicing, suffered and pleased God. Wherefore, we all 
celebrate thy most holy memory with gladness of heart, O most noetically rich martyr 
Andrew.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”: 
The choir of the divine apostles assembled to bury thee with surpassing honor, O 
all-pure Theotokos; and with them the ranks of angels hymned thy repose, crying out 
with surpassing praise. Leaping up together with joy, O pure one, we, the faithful, 
offer praise unto thee with voices of hymnody, crying aloud: Rejoice, O intercessor of 
those who ever honor thee!  
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
A wonder was it to see the animate heaven of the King of all, which surpasseth the 
barren places of the earth. How wondrous are Thy works! Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
If her unapproachable Fruit, through Whom the heavens arose, chose of His own 
will to accept burial as a mortal, how can she, who gaveth birth to Him without 
knowing wedlock, refuse burial?  

--- PAGE 7 ---
At thy repose, O Mother of God, with trembling and joy the armies of the angels 
covered with their sacred wings thy most spacious body, which had held God.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Having acquired thee as a mighty rampart, O most wise one, the Church hath been 
revealed to be unbroken by the assaults of the adversary, crying aloud: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
Having fortified the regiment of the martyrs with divine teachings, O glorious one, 
as a general thou didst not spare thyself when thy body was being broken.  
Having armed thyself with courage as with a sword, O most blessed Andrew, thou 
didst destroy the enemy with the precious Cross as with a two-edged sword, in that 
thou art a most valiant general.  
We praise thee as a champion of the Faith, an invincible spiritual athlete, a partaker 
of the splendor of heaven, a well-spring pouring forth the waters of miracles for 
those in need.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate one, thou boast of the martyrs and salvation of 
the faithful, all of us, the generations of mankind, praise thee; for thou hast given 
birth to God, yet remained an incorrupt Virgin.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thine honored dormition; * for thou, O 
Virgin who hast not known wedlock, * hast passed from earth to the 
everlasting mansions; * and to never-ending life, * bestowing salvation unto all 
who hymn thee. 
Let the trumpets of the theologians sound forth today, and let the eloquent 
tongues of men now render praise; let the air resound, shining with boundless light, 
and let the angels hymn the dormition of the most pure Virgin.  
It was fitting for thee, O all-praised Virgin Theotokos, to be the chosen vessel, 
which is wholly marveled at in hymnody at thy departure, wholly consecrated to God, 
divinely pleasing unto all, and truly shown to be such.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
As the namesake of true manliness, O all-blessed Andrew, thou didst rout thine 
enemies and utterly destroy them.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou ever pourest forth the waters of healing upon the faithful, O all-famed one, 
enriching them with the saving grace of the Spirit.  
The fame of thy miracles and thine honored martyrdom hath truly gone through 
all the earth, O divinely inspired one, like the radiance of the grace of God.  
Theotokion: The weaponry of the enemy hath utterly failed, O Theotokos, since 
thou hast given birth to Him Who was wounded by the spear but hath restored the 
world.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
For thee Life shone forth, leaving intact the seal of thy virginity, how, therefore, 
hast thy most pure and life-giving body been permitted to be tempted by death?  
As the temple of Life, thou didst attain life everlasting; for, having given birth to 
the hypostatic Life, thou didst pass through death on to life.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
By thy pangs thou didst break the sting of the evil one and, rejoicing, didst pass 
over to the glory which is without pain, O martyr Andrew, commander of the 
regiments of honored martyrs.  
Thou didst exchange a little blood for the splendor of everlasting glory, joy which 
never faileth, heavenly crowns and never-waning radiance.  
Having assembled a vast army, O blessed martyr, thou didst enroll into the choirs 
of the angels those who suffered with thee; and ye stand now in joy before the Master 
of all.  
Theotokion: Ineffably hast thou given birth to Him Who is co-beginningless with 
the Father, and Who, in a manner beyond understanding and all telling, made Himself 
like unto men, O Birthgiver of God. Him do thou beseech, that thy servants be 
delivered from misfortunes.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II:  
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Ikos: Guard my thoughts, O my Christ, for I make bold to hymn the bulwark of 
the world, Thy pure Mother. Establish me firmly in the bastion of my words, and 
help me in the midst of difficult thoughts; for Thou fulfillest the entreaties of those 
who cry out and ask with faith. Wherefore, grant unto me a deft tongue and a ready 
mind, for every good deed of enlightenment cometh down from Thee, O Bestower 
of light, Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Honoring the memory of the Mother of God, O youths and virgins, elders and 
princes, kings and judges, chant ye: O Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Let the mountains of heaven sound the trumpet of the Spirit! Let the hills rejoice 
and the divine apostles dance! The Queen passeth over to her Son, reigning with 
Him!  
The most sacred repose of Thy divine and incorrupt Mother hath united the 
celestial ranks of the exalted hosts to rejoice with those on earth, chanting unto Thee: 
Blessed art Thou, O God!  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
With the streams of thy blood thou didst cause a well-spring to flow forth which 
truly healeth all manner of infirmities for those who approach thee with undoubting 
faith, O divinely inspired martyr.  
O wise martyr, through thy blood thou didst bring an assembly of saints to the 
most holy Word, and inherited that life which groweth not old; with them entreat 
Christ, the Lover of mankind, on our behalf.  
With divine zeal having dyed a robe of purple for thyself in thy blood, O martyr, 
and clad thyself therein, adorned with a crown of victory thou now reignest with Him 
Who is King over all.  
Theotokion: Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Virgin and 
Sovereign Lady, who by thy divine birthgiving hast clearly deified human nature 
having ineffably given flesh to God.  
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The principalities, authorities and powers, the angels, archangels, thrones, 
dominions, the cherubim and the dread seraphim, glorify thy memory, O pure Virgin; 
and we, the race of mankind, hymn and supremely exalt it throughout all ages.  
He Who, in a strange manner, made His abode, incarnate, within thy pure womb, 
O Theotokos, receiveth thy most sacred spirit and, as thy Son and One in thy debt, 
hath given it rest by His side. Wherefore, we hymn and supremely exalt thee 
throughout all ages, O Virgin.  
O the wonders of the Ever-virgin and Mother of God, which surpass 
understanding! For, taking up her abode in the grave, she hath shown it to be 
paradise; and standing before it today, rejoicing, we chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Thou didst restrain the onslaught of savage lions by thy brave struggles, O glorious 
one, by divine power humbling the arrogance of the ungodly tyrants, and as a victor 
thou hast hastened to the heavens, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord!  
Having contended valiantly and finished thy struggle by being beheaded with a 
sword, thou hast been deemed worthy to behold the splendor of the saints and to 
dwell in joy, O martyr. And now thou dost cry aloud with gladness: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord!  
Hastening to the divine temple, let us receive the light of the godly martyr; and 
ever touching the shrine of his relics with rejoicing, and receiving the sanctity of grace 
imparted thereby, let us cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: O holy Virgin Who hast given birth in holiness to the most holy god, 
Whom all the holy martyrs confessed at the tribunal: send down sanctity and 
enlightenment upon us who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE IX  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the repose of 
the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Come ye to Sion, the divine and fertile mountain of the living God, and let us 
behold the Theotokos; for Christ hath translated her, as His Mother, to the Holy of 
Holies of a far better and divine tabernacle.  
Come, ye faithful, let us approach the tomb of the Mother of God and kiss it with 
hearts and lips, touching to it your eyes and faces, and drawing gifts of abundant 
healings from the ever-flowing fountain.  
Accept from us a hymn of parting, O Mother of the living God, and with thy light-
bearing and divine grace overshadow us, granting victory to Orthodox hierarchs over 
heresies, and forgiveness to all Christian people who hymn thee, and salvation to their 
souls.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Lo! the radiant memorial of the passion-bearer hath shone forth brilliantly, 
dispelling the darkness of the demons and enlightening all the faithful. Let us 
celebrate it splendidly, magnifying him as is meet.  
O Andrew, thou hast been revealed to be like the sun amid those who suffered 
with thee, by thy words guiding them to the never-waning radiance of the splendor of 
heaven. With them we bless thee with faith.  
O martyr Andrew, we magnify thee who hast illumined all creation with the 
radiance of miracles and by thine unwavering martyrdom hast become a pillar of the 
Church and a foundation for the faithful.  
Thou didst blossom forth like a rose in the midst of a garden of spiritual athletes, 
O all-wise one, mystically bearing sweet fragrance, gladdening the fullness of the 
faithful and dispelling the stench of falsehood by divine grace.  
Theotokion: Bearing in thine arms Christ Who holdeth all things in His hand, O 
Lady, entreat Him, that He deliver me from the hand of the alien one, for I 
unceasingly magnify thee with Orthodox faith.  
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Exapostilarion of the feast:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”: 
O ye apostles, having gathered here from the ends of the earth, bury my body in 
the Garden of Gethsemane. And do Thou, O my Son and God, receive my spirit!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
The council * of the divine disciples and apostles * assembled to bury * the God-
receiving body ** of her who alone is the Mother of God.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
O Master * Who shone forth ineffably from her * as her Son, * take in Thy hands 
the all-holy spirit ** of the Theotokos.  
Verse: The Lord hath sword in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
When thou didst pass over * to Him Who had been born of thee, * O Virgin, * the 
apostles descended on clouds ** to bury thy body.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V:  
O ye people, hymn ye, hymn ye the Mother of our God! For today she committeth 
her most radiant soul into the most pure hands of Him Who became incarnate of her 
without seed. And she entreateth Him unceasingly, that He grant peace and great 
mercy to the whole world.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia, from ODE V of both canons of the feast, including 
the Irmos.  
The divine and ineffable goodness of Thy virtues, do we confess O Christ; for 
having shone forth from the pre-eternal glory as the co-eternal and hypostatic 
Effulgence, incarnate from the Virgin’s womb, Thou hast shone forth as the Sun 
upon those in the darkness and shadows.  
The choir of the apostles assembled, borne as on a cloud to Sion from the ends of 
the earth, to serve thee, the cloud of light through whom God Most High, the Sun of 
righteousness, hath shone forth upon those who are in the darkness and shadows.  
More harmonious than trumpets, the God-pleasing tongues of the theologizing 
men sounded forth to the Theotokos, playing a funeral hymn inspired by the Spirit: 
Rejoice, O incorrupt fountain of God’s life-creating incarnation which saveth all!  
All creation stands in awe of thine honored dormition; for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, hast passed from earth to the everlasting mansions; and to 
never-ending life, bestowing salvation unto all who hymn thee. 
Let the trumpets of the theologians sound forth today, and let the eloquent 
tongues of men now render praise; let the air resound, shining with boundless light, 
and let the angels hymn the dormition of the most pure Virgin.  
It was fitting for thee, O all-praised Virgin Theotokos, to be the chosen vessel, 
which is wholly marveled at in hymnody at thy departure, wholly consecrated to God, 
divinely pleasing unto all, and truly shown to be such.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone V:  
Leaving the glory of earthly rank behind, * thou didst inherit the kingdom of 
heaven, * adorning with crowns of incorruption * as with all-wondrous stones, * the 
assembly of spiritual athletes whom thou didst lead to Christ. * Having found Christ, 
the never-setting Sun, together with the choirs of the angels, * in light unwaning, O 
holy general Andrew. * do thou ever entreat Him, with those who suffered with thee, 
** that He save our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II: 
Standing before the Lord in prayer, * like a star preceding the sun, * thou didst 
gain sight of the desired treasure of the kingdom, * full of ineffable joy; * and for ages 
without end, O general Andrew, * thou dost unceasingly sing to the immortal King 
with the angels. ** With them ever pray thou for us all.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II: 
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
 
Prokeimenon of the feast: My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath 
rejoiced in God my Savior. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous, He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §233 (6: 10-17)  
Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.  
Alleluia, of the feast: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy 
holiness.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §106 (21 :12-19) 
The Lord said to His disciples: Beware of men. They shall lay their hands on you, 
and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being 
brought before kings and rulers for my name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a 
testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall 
answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not 
be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, 

--- PAGE 15 ---
and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye 
shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your head 
perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.  
 
NOTE: Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant, in Tone I, the Irmos of ODE IX 
of Canon I, and we continue to do so until the leave-taking of the feast:  
Refrain I: All of us, the generation of men, bless thee, the only Theotokos.  
Irmos I: In thee are the laws of nature overcome, * O pure Virgin, * for 
birthgiving is virginal * and death is betrothed to life. * For after giving birth 
thou didst remain a Virgin, * and after death thou didst remain alive, * O 
Theotokos, do thou ever save thine inheritance.  
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
