--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 18th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST 
 AFTERFEAST OF THE DORMITION  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS FLORUS & LAURUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “With what crowns of praise ...”: 
With what unworthy lips shall we bless the Theotokos, who is more honorable 
than creation and more holy than the cherubim and all the angels: the immovable 
throne of the King, the house wherein the Most High dwelt, the sanctuary of God, 
the salvation of the world, the one who richly bestoweth great mercy upon the 
faithful on the day of her divine memorial?  
What wondrous hymns were they that all the apostles of the Word, who stood 
round about thy bier, offered unto thee, O Virgin, crying out in awe? “The palace of 
the King departeth! The ark of sanctification is borne aloft! Open wide, ye gates, that 
the portal of God may enter into joy, unceasingly entreating great mercy for the 
world!”  
What spiritual hymns shall we now offer unto thee, O all-holy one? For by thine 
immortal dormition thou hast sanctified the whole world and passed over to the 
things which are above the world, to comprehend the beauty of the Almighty, and to 
rejoice in Him, as His Mother, the ranks of angels and the souls of the righteous 
accompanying thee. With them ask for us peace and great mercy.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Revealed as perfect stones * cut by martyrdom and quarried by torments, * O holy 
ones, * ye fashioned yourselves into a church of the Lord, * casting down to the 
ground * the temples and worship of the idols. * Wherefore, we call them blessed, * 
as inhabitants of paradise ** and offerings of the temple of heaven.  
O ye who have touched the relics * of the sacred martyrs Florus and Laurus, * 
draw forth grace * and receive enlightenment, gladness and mercy: * for from them 
the divine action of healing doth richly flow forth! * And blessing them * as favorites 
of the Lord, * let us earnestly cry aloud: ** Glory to Thee, O our God!  
Having been imprisoned in a pit * and hardened within the earth * at the 
command of the tyrant, * by divine utterances and the revelation of the Holy Spirit * 
ye have been revealed to us * to be like stars which shine forth portents and wonders 
* and gifts of healing, * O fraternal spiritual athletes, ** fellow citizens with the 
angels.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
O holy zealots, brethren in Christ, Florus and Laurus; be ye honored with fitting 
hymns! For, having contended mightily and suffered steadfastly for your confession 
of God, ye have received crowns of victory. Wherefore, ye join chorus with the angels 
in the highest, earnestly entreating the Holy Trinity to grant peace to the world and to 
save our souls.  
Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
Come, O ye people, let us hymn the most holy and pure virgin from whom the 
incarnate Word of the Father ineffably came forth; and let us cry aloud, saying: 
Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the womb which contained Christ! 
Having surrendered thy soul into His holy hands, O most pure one, entreat Him, that 
our souls be saved.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Raise a hymn, * all ye choirs of heaven! * For the Virgin Mother * hath been most 
gloriously translated ** from earth to the heavens.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
The choir of the disciples * hath assembled most gloriously * from the ends of the 
earth, * to bury thy divine and incorrupt body, ** O Maiden.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
Be ye lifted up, * O ye gates of heaven, * beholding the only Mother of God, * the 
portal of the Most High ** coming to the highest.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Let us chant today the hymn of David unto Christ God, O ye people: The virgins 
that follow after her, said he, shall be brought to the King, and those near her shall be 
brought in gladness and rejoicing; for she who is of the seed of David, for whose sake 
we have been deified, is gloriously and ineffably placed in the hands of her Son and 
Master. Hymning her as the Mother of God, let us cry aloud and say: Save us, who 
confess thee to be the Theotokos, from every evil circumstance, and deliver our souls 
from misfortunes!  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
O ye faithful, let us praise as is meet * the most blessed Florus and the most 
honored Laurus, * the most comely and divinely wise and radiant twain, * who 
earnestly and manifestly proclaimed the uncreated Trinity to all. * Wherefore, having 
suffered even unto the shedding of your blood * and been crowned with most 
splendid crowns, ** entreat Christ God, that He save our souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death. (Twice) 
Glory ..., that of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
O ye faithful, let us praise as is meet * the most blessed Florus and the most 
honored Laurus, * the most comely and divinely wise and radiant twain, * who 
earnestly and manifestly proclaimed the uncreated Trinity to all. * Wherefore, having 
suffered even unto the shedding of your blood * and been crowned with most 
splendid crowns, ** entreat Christ God, that He save our souls.  
Both now ..., that of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
The whole world is adorned by the immaterial Spirit in thy glorious memory, and 
it crieth out to thee noetically with gladness: Rejoice, O Virgin, thou boast of the 
Christians!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “The portal of tender compassion ...”: 
Praising thy repose, O pure one, all of us, the faithful, hymn thee; for thou hast 
been translated from the earth, from life unto life, and in the heavens thou prayest to 
God, that the human race be delivered from misfortunes.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos. 
The composition of Cosmas of Maiuma, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Thy sacred and glorious memory, * supremely adorned with divine 
glory, O Virgin, * hath gathered all the faithful in gladness, * and led by 
Miriam with choirs and timbrels, * hymn thine only-begotten Son, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified.  
Let the immaterial ranks accompany thy divine and immaterial body to Sion. For 
the multitude of the apostles, coming together of a sudden from the ends of the 
earth, stood before thee, O Theotokos; With them we also glorify thine honored 
memory, O pure one.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
The honors of victory over nature hast thou taken, having given birth unto God, 
O pure one; yet, emulating thy Creator and Son, thou didst submit to the laws of 
nature in a supra-natural manner. Wherefore, having died, thou didst arise with thy 
Son unto everlasting life.  
Canon of the holy martyrs, with 4 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I hymn the two comely martyrs”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Enlightened by the radiant brilliance of the Spirit, dispel ye the dark clouds of my 
soul, that, rejoicing, I may hymn your luminous and honorable memory, O holy and 
most comely martyrs of Christ.  
Having founded yourselves upon the rock of the unsullied Faith through divine 
virtues, O blessed ones, ye showed yourselves to be a most comely and beautiful 
temple, wherein the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit dwelt.  
Cutting off the thorns of deception at the root with the cutting word of the divine 
Faith, O ye of great renown, ye renewed hearts grown stony through falsehood and 
showed them to be fertile, giving rise to the unsullied Faith like a flower.  
Theotokion: From thy virginal womb thou didst put forth the un-watered Root, 
the Husbandman of all, who became a man and endured suffering. Desiring Him, the 
divine martyrs suffered faithfully, O most pure, all-hymned Virgin.  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Thou art the creative and almighty Wisdom, * and the Power of God, * 
do Thou establish the Church immovable and unshaken, O Christ; * for Thou 
alone art holy * Who restest in the saints.  
The glorious apostles, seeing thee to be a mortal woman, yet, in a manner 
transcending nature, the Mother of God, O all-immaculate one, with awe touched 
with their hands, thee who art resplendent in glory, perceiving thee to be a habitation 
acceptable to God.  
When God preserved with the glory of His divinity the honor of the animate ark 
wherein the Word becameth flesh, the judgment of retribution overtook the insolent 
one through the severing of his audacious hands.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Fulfilling the divine law, O all-praised martyrs, ye generously gave bread to the 
poor and guided them to divine piety, becoming mediators of their salvation.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
The two radiant martyrs, shining with beams of miracles, dispelled the darkness of 
the delusion of polytheism and have guided to the effulgence of faith all who have 
been deceived.  
O pious and blessed martyrs, with divine teachings ye guided a childish people to 
the path of divine understanding, and cast down the temples of the demons by your 
supplication.  
Theotokion: O Virgin who knewest not wedlock, for whose sake the Word hath 
shone forth upon us, Who is understood to transcend any beginning; save thy flock, 
and every city and countryside, from every evil circumstance, O thou who art full of 
divine joy.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “As first-fruits ...”: 
The whole world doth most gloriously honor Florus and Laurus today, * as 
martyrs of piety and divinely wise spiritual athletes of Christ, * that we may receive 
grace and mercy through their prayers, * and may be delivered from tribulations and 
dangers, ** and from wrath and sorrow on the day of judgment.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Ye were shown to be spiritual architects, and through faith founded the souls of 
the pious by divine grace on the rock of Faith; and, having made yourselves a 
consecrated temple of the adored Trinity, ye suffered steadfastly. Wherefore, ye pour 
forth healings upon those who have recourse to you with faith, and drive away 
sufferings, O brethren and passion-bearers. Entreat Christ God, that He grant for-
giveness of sins unto those who honor your holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in the same melody:  
Having conceived God without seed and given birth to Him, incarnate, without 
corruption, thou wast clad in the new raiment of the incorruption of the Spirit; for as 
the Mother of Life and the Queen of all, O Virgin, thou hast been translated to 
immaterial life. Wherefore, as is meet, thou hast truly been shown to be a cloud 
pouring forth the waters of our life, O all-immaculate Mother of God. Entreat thy 
Son and God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who celebrate thy holy 
dormition with love.  
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The sayings and imagery of the prophets * revealed Thine incarnation 
from the Virgin, O Christ. * The splendor of Thine effulgence * hath gone 
forth unto the enlightenment of the nations * and the abyss gaveth forth its 
voice to Thee with gladness: * Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind.  
Behold, O ye people, and marvel, for the holy and openly manifest mountain of 
God is exalted on high to the mansions of heaven: the earthly heaven becometh a 
celestial and incorrupt habitation.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thy death hath become a passage to an everlasting and better life, O pure one, 
translating thee from transitory life to that which is truly divine and eternal, that thou 
mightest behold thy Son and Lord in gladness, O pure one.  
The gates of heaven were raised and the angelic choirs chanted; and Christ 
received the vessel of His Mother’s virginity. The cherubim lifted her up with 
gladness, and the seraphim glorify her, rejoicing.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Wrestling with the enemy, like youths O valiant ones, ye firmly cast him down by 
the weapon of the Cross, and those who had been broken by sin ye made into living 
temples of the Lord, who piously chant: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Strengthened, O all-glorious saints, by Christ, the Stone cut, as is written, from the 
mountain of the divine Virgin Maiden, ye broke the idols in pieces and have been 
taken up to the high mountain of martyrdom, having manifestly emulated the angels.  
Rejoicing, Florus and Laurus, the two honored martyrs, proclaimed the single 
effulgence of the three-Sunned Godhead, and zealously drained the cup of 
martyrdom, chanting to Christ: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind.  
Having placed yourselves under the law of God, O divine martyrs, by opening the 
eyes of the ungodly ye inclined them to worship Him alone, illumining their noetic 
sight, casting light upon all the ends of the earth like two beacons.  
Theotokion: God, the Creator of all, chose thee from among all generations as a 
pure Ever-virgin, O Theotokos; and the only King of the ages made thy womb an 
undefiled palace and appeared to men through thee.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The divine and ineffable goodness of Thy virtues, * do we confess O 
Christ; * for having shone forth from the pre-eternal glory * as the co-eternal 
and hypostatic Effulgence, * incarnate from the Virgin’s womb, * Thou hast 
shone forth as the Sun * upon those in the darkness and shadows.  
The choir of the apostles assembled, borne as on a cloud to Sion from the ends of 
the earth, to serve thee, the cloud of light through whom God Most High, the Sun of 
righteousness, hath shone forth upon those who are in the darkness and shadows.  
More harmonious than trumpets, the God-pleasing tongues of the theologizing 
men sounded forth to the Theotokos, playing a funeral hymn inspired by the Spirit: 
Rejoice, O incorrupt fountain of God’s life-creating incarnation which saveth all!  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
The two godly martyred brethren did not suffer separation; for, believing in the 
indivisible Holy Trinity with a single hope, through grace they united those held fast 
by unseemly division.  
Piously quarrying stony minds with the measuring-line of Truth and the 
stonecutter’s maul of divine understanding, O spiritual athletes, through divine faith 
ye made most glorious temples for the Trinity through the power of the Spirit.  
Ye were shown to be severers of all wickedness at the root, O glorious martyrs, 
and planters of all piety by your words and deeds: in impassive hearts ye planted the 
Flower of Jesse which sprang forth from a divine root.  
Theotokion: The pre-eternal Word of the Father, the great mystery hidden from 
before time began, which was unknown to the first generations, O all- immaculate 
one, was revealed through thee, incarnate, having become a man.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The inner fire of the whale * born in the depths of the sea, * was a 
prefiguring of Thy three-day burial, * of which Jonah showed himself to be a 
prophet, * having been delivered before being sent forth unharmed, crying: * I 
will sacrifice to Thee * with a voice of praise, O Lord!  
God, the King of all, giveth thee that which transcendeth nature; for, as He kept 
thee a virgin during thy birthgiving, so did He preserve thy body untouched by 
corruption in the tomb; and He glorified thee with Himself by a divine translation, 
rendering thee honor as a Son to His Mother.  
Truly, O Virgin, thine Offspring set thee in the Holy of Holies as the splendid 
candles tick of the immaterial Light, the golden censer of the divine Ember, the jar 
and the staff, the divinely inscribed tablet, the holy ark, the table of the Word of life. 
 Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Vanquishing the iniquitous with unwavering endurance, O spiritual athletes, in 
accordance with the law ye brought a right praiseworthy death unto Christ, without 
being covered by the vainglory of ungodliness.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Revealed as swords of the mighty Spirit, O blessed ones, ye conquered the 
incorporeal foe, piously emulating the blessed suffering of Him Who was pierced by 
the spear.  
O glorious ones, ye were shown to be like two most comely breasts for the Church 
of Christ, not exuding milk, but pouring forth the free and saving gift of healings.  
Theotokion: Heal thou my soul, which hath become sick through sin, O most 
pure one who hast given birth to the Physician of souls and bodies, confessing 
Whom, the divine martyrs were shown to be physicians of the passions.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II: 
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
Ikos: Guard my thoughts, O my Christ, for I make bold to hymn the bulwark of 
the world, Thy pure Mother. Establish me firmly in the bastion of my words, and 
help me in the midst of difficult thoughts; for Thou fulfillest the entreaties of those 
who cry out and ask with faith. Wherefore, grant unto me a deft tongue and a ready 
mind, for every good deed of enlightenment cometh down from Thee, O Bestower 
of light, Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Divine desire, opposing the rage and fire * of the shameless one, * 
bedewed the fire and put his rage to shame, * countering the musical 
instruments * with the divinely inspired sound of the three-stringed harp * of 
the venerable ones in the midst of the flame. * Blessed art Thou, O supremely 
glorious God of us and our fathers!  
Enraged, Moses smashed the divinely wrought tablets which had been inscribed by 
the divine Spirit; but the Master, preserving unharmed her who gaveth birth to Him, 
hath now caused her to dwell in the mansions of heaven. Celebrating with her, let us 
cry out to Christ: O supremely glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
 On the cymbals of pure lips, with the music of a radiant heart, on the high-
sounding trumpet of exalted thought, clapping our diligent hands on the renowned 
and chosen day of the repose of the pure Virgin, let us cry aloud: O supremely 
glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Gather ye together, O divinely wise people, for the dwelling-place of the glory of 
God is translated from Sion to the habitation of heaven, where is the pure voice of 
those who keep festival, the voice of the unutterable rejoicing of those who cry out to 
Christ in gladness: O supremely glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Florus and Laurus of great renown, the pillars of divine knowledge, destroyed the 
wooden and stone gods of the ungodly and have set themselves before those who 
chant: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Full of the divine fire of the Spirit, O glorious martyrs, with the showers of your 
divine supplications ye preserved the righteous men who were about to be unjustly 
cast into the furnace.  
The martyrs Florus and Laurus ever impart healing to the sick, deliverance to the 
oppressed and salvation to all the persecuted, chanting: Blessed is the God of our 
fathers!  
Theotokion: O Maiden, Christ chose thee like a rose in the valley of life, and, 
making His abode within thee, O all-immaculate one, He passed forth in the flesh, 
perfuming with exhalations of divine knowledge us who ever confess thee to be the 
Theotokos.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The flame which bedewed the venerable children, * but utterly 
consumed the ungodly, * did the almighty Angel of God reveal to them; * and 
He rendered the Theotokos a life-creating well-spring * pouring forth 
destruction for death but life for those who chant: * O ye who have been 
delivered, * let us hymn and supremely exalt the only Creator * throughout all 
ages!  
With discourses the whole multitude of theologians accompanied the sacred coffin 
of the Theotokos in Sion, exclaiming: Whither goest thou, O tabernacle of the living 
God? Cease not to regard those who chant with faith: O ye who have been delivered, 
let us hymn and supremely exalt the only Creator throughout all ages!  
Thou goest forth, O all-immaculate one, lifting up thine hands, the hands 
wherewith thou didst bear God in the flesh; and as a Mother didst boldly say to Him 
Who was born of thee: Preserve Thou forever those whom Thou hast given to me, 
and who cry out to Thee: O ye who have been delivered, let us hymn and supremely 
exalt the only Creator throughout all ages!  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Nourishing souls with the living word, O ever all-memorable ones, ye have shown 
yourselves to be saving food for those famished with hunger, and care for the poor 
and the orphaned, seeing to the needs of all and chanting to Christ: Ye children bless; 
ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Having your life and end sanctified, and being hidden for a long time, O wise 
ones, ye were given forth by the earth, shining forth beams of most glorious miracles 
brighter than the rays of the sun upon us who chant with faith: Ye children bless; ye 
priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Ye were shown to be two beacons in the noetic firmament, adorning the Church 
with sanctity; and ye ever radiantly illumine all creation with miracles, crying aloud: Ye 
children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O most holy Virgin who art holier than the angels, thou hast given 
birth to Him Who, in His tender compassion, became a man without commingling, as 
we are, that He might save those who cry out to Him unceasingly: Ye children bless; 
ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In thee, O pure Virgin, have the laws of nature * been overcome: * for 
thy birthgiving remaineth virginal * and thy life is betrothed unto death; * and 
remaining a Virgin after giving birth * and alive after dying, O Theotokos, * 
thou dost ever save thine inheritance.  
The angelic hosts were amazed, seeing their Master in Sion, bearing in His arms a 
woman’s soul; for as befitteth a Son, He exclaimed to her in a most pure manner: 
Come, O pure one, and be glorified with thy Son and God!  
The choir of angels buried thy body, which had received God, gazing upon it with 
fear, and exclaiming with a loud voice: O Theotokos who ascendest to thy Son in the 
heavenly mansions, thou ever savest thine inheritance!  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Behold now, David cried of old, what is so good, or so beautiful and saving, as for 
godly brethren, who have manifestly struggled and won victory over the devil, to 
dwell together in the Spirit? Wherefore we bless them as is meet.  
Through grace ye have been revealed to be the beautiful eyes of the honored 
Church; and before your death and after your sacred end, O holy and right laudable 
Florus and Laurus, ye have opened the eyes of those blinded from of old by the 
darkness of evil, unto the glory of the Benefactor of all.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
By manifest and awesome signs, as He foretold of old, Christ hath revealed your 
tomb and shrine, where your longsuffering bodies lie in sanctity, richly emitting rays 
of healing and right laudable fragrance.  
O Florus and Laurus, ye two truly godly and radiant right victorious martyrs: ever 
standing in the heavens before the all-accomplishing Trinity, ask deliverance from evil 
sins for those who celebrate your divine memory on earth with faith.  
Theotokion: Awesome is thy birthgiving, O pure Mother; for thou hast given birth 
supra-naturally to the Word of God, Who became a man on earth, and before Whom 
the ranks of heaven tremble; yet thou remainest a virgin as before. Wherefore, 
confessing thee to be the Theotokos with tongue and heart, we magnify thee.  
Exapostilarion of the feast:  
Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars ...”: 
O ye apostles, having gathered here from the ends of the earth, bury my body in 
the Garden of Gethsemane. And do Thou, O my Son and God, receive my spirit!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Brought together from the ends of the earth * by the hand of God, * the choir of 
the disciples, * gathereth together ** to bury the Mother and Theotokos.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
The Bride of God, * the Virgin Queen, * the glory of the elect, * the boast of 
virgins; ** passeth over to dwell with her Son.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
Thy body * was untouched by corruption, * and though given over for burial * 
according to the law of nature, ** it remaineth incorrupt.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV:  
O most holy and pure virgin, we, the multitude of angels in heaven and the 
generation of mortals on earth, bless thy most honored dormition, for thou wast the 
Mother of Christ God, the Creator of all We pray thee: Him do thou never cease to 
entreat on behalf of us who have set our hope on thee and God, O most hymned 
Theotokos who knewest not wedlock.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia, from both canons of the feast, ODE IV, including 
the Irmoi.  
The sayings and imagery of the prophets revealed Thine incarnation from the 
Virgin, O Christ. The splendor of Thine effulgence hath gone forth unto the 
enlightenment of the nations and the abyss gaveth forth its voice to Thee with 
gladness: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind.  
Behold, O ye people, and marvel, for the holy and openly manifest mountain of 
God is exalted on high to the mansions of heaven: the earthly heaven becometh a 
celestial and incorrupt habitation.  
Thy death hath become a passage to an everlasting and better life, O pure one, 
translating thee from transitory life to that which is truly divine and eternal, that thou 
mightest behold thy Son and Lord in gladness, O pure one.  
A wonder was it to see the animate heaven of the King of all, which surpasseth the 
barren places of the earth. How wondrous are Thy works! Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
If her unapproachable Fruit, through Whom the heavens arose, chose of His own 
will to accept burial as a mortal, how can she, who gaveth birth to Him without 
knowing wedlock, refuse burial?  
At thy repose, O Mother of God, with trembling and joy the armies of the angels 
covered with their sacred wings thy most spacious body, which had held God.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
O ye faithful, let us praise as is meet * the most blessed Florus and the most 
honored Laurus, * the most comely and divinely wise and radiant twain, * who 
earnestly and manifestly proclaimed the uncreated Trinity to all. * Wherefore, having 
suffered even unto the shedding of your blood * and been crowned with most 
splendid crowns, ** entreat Christ God, that He save our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
The whole world doth most gloriously honor Florus and Laurus today, * as 
martyrs of piety and divinely wise spiritual athletes of Christ, * that we may receive 
grace and mercy through their prayers, * and may be delivered from tribulations and 
dangers, ** and from wrath and sorrow on the day of judgment.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II: 
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
 
Prokeimenon of the feast: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath 
rejoiced in God my Savior. 
Prokeimenon of the martyrs, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath 
the Lord been wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §233 (6: 10-17)  
Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. 
Alleluia, of the feast: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy 
holiness.  
Alleluia of the martyrs, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard 
them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §63 (12: 2-12)  
The Lord said: “There is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; neither hid, 
that shall not be known. Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be 
heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be 
proclaimed upon the housetops. And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of 
them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do. But I will 

--- PAGE 15 ---
forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which after he hath killed hath power to 
cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him. Are not five sparrows sold for two 
farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God? But even the very hairs of 
your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore: ye are of more value than many 
sparrows. Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the 
Son of man also confess before the angels of God: But he that denieth me before 
men shall be denied before the angels of God. And whosoever shall speak a word 
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth 
against the Holy Spirit it shall not be forgiven. And when they bring you unto the 
synagogues, and unto magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing 
ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: For the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same 
hour what ye ought to say.  
 
NOTE: Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant, in Tone I, the Irmos of ODE IX 
of Canon I, and we continue to do so until the leave-taking of the feast:  
Refrain I: All of us, the generation of men, bless thee, the only Theotokos.  
Irmos I: In thee are the laws of nature overcome, * O pure Virgin, * for 
birthgiving is virginal * and death is betrothed to life. * For after giving birth 
thou didst remain a Virgin, * and after death thou didst remain alive, * O 
Theotokos, do thou ever save thine inheritance.  
Communion verse of the feast: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call 
upon the name of the Lord. 
Communion verse of the martyrs: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is 
meet for the upright.  
 
 
 
 
 
