--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 16th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
AFTERFEAST OF THE DORMITION OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS  
COMMEMORATION OF THE TRANSLATION OF THE IMAGE NOT-MADE-BY-
HANDS OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST FROM EDESSA TO CONSTANTINOPLE  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the divine image, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Honoring the image of man, * the Savior took on our image, * yet remained 
unaltered by His humanity; * and He hath sent to those who are afar off * the very 
truth of His most pure image ** in the portion of His napkin. (Twice)  
Elevating the image of Adam * which had fallen, * to that of the Prototype, * the 
Savior dwelt with mankind on earth; * He Who is uncircumscribable in His essence 
** is seen, touched and delineated.  
The Savior restoreth creation * which hath grown old, * and He hath clothed 
Himself in the image of a servant, * in truth, and not in mere appearance; * and the 
very lineaments of His image ** hath He given to those who love Him for veneration.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
O unapproachable Lord, Thou didst bow down the heavens and enter into the 
womb of the Virgin, becoming a man in the nature and essence of her, that Thou, O 
Uncircumscribable One, mightest save mankind for the sake of Thine extreme mercy.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the divine image, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
With psalms let us celebrate * in spiritual gladness, * crying out with David: * The 
light of Thy countenance, ** O Lord, hath been signed upon us today!  
Verse: The light of Thy countenance, * O Lord, hath been signed upon us.  
Rejoicing, let us clap together * the cymbals of our spirit, * and with honor let us 
go forth to meet * the holy depiction ** of the Master’s image.  
Verse: O Lord, in the light of Thy face shall they walk, * and in Thy name shall 
they rejoice all the day long.  
From the East to the West * is the seal of the very image * of the Savior’s 
countenance * brought with glory, ** shining like a neversetting sun.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody: 
Grant to those who hymn * Thy most pure image, O Lord, * strength against the 
adversary * and remission of sins, ** through the prayers of the pure Mother of God. 
 
  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Troparion of the divine image, in Tone II: 
We bow down before Thy most pure image, O Good One, * asking forgiveness of 
our transgressions, O Christ God; * for of Thine own will Thou wast well pleased to 
ascend the Cross in the flesh, * that Thou mightest deliver from slavery to the enemy 
those whom Thou hadst fashioned. * Wherefore, we cry to Thee in thanksgiving: * 
Thou hast filled all things with joy, O our Savior, ** when Thou camest to save the 
world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the divine image: 4 in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”:  
He Who is God, * the effulgent glory of God, * and the express image of the 
Father, * through His infinite loving-kindness, * and by His divine will, * is seen in an 
image, * having worn the guise of a servant. * As He alone knoweth how, * He hath 
clearly depicted His likeness, * with divine lineaments * in the image of His face, * 
and by His advent * He hath brought together a multitude of angels and mortals, ** 
illumining the world, visible and invisible. (Twice)  
Lo, God Who once glorified the face of Moses * by the divine vision of His back 
parts, * and through him sent the divinely inscribed law * to the unbelieving people of 
Israel, * hath come forth from Egypt, * from the land of the Only-begotten * to the 
Christian city of the people of the new Israel, * in the divine lineaments * of His 
original, awesome image. * And we who have been deemed worthy to see Him face 
to face ** glorify Him.  
He who reigneth over all creation, * having taking upon Himself voluntary 
poverty, * doth enrich with divinity * those who acknowledge His lordship. * 
Wherefore, He sent a divinely written letter to Abgar * who asked of Him salvation 
and health, * which he received through the likeness of Christ’s divine countenance. * 
And now joyously celebrating * its arrival there, * we rejoice with faith, ** drawing 
forth enlightenment therefrom.  
And 4 Stichera, in Tone VI:  
O Lord, Who fillest all things with divine grace, having in Thy goodness united 
Thyself to mankind, didst come forth as one Hypostasis in two natures, from the 
pure one. Thou Who art invisible was seen, and having received an image of Thy 
fleshly countenance, which thou didst fashion, we worship Thee, Who art depicted 
thereon, acknowledging Thee as Creator and Master. (Twice)  
O Lord, Thou Who hast come forth fulfilling the unapproachable dispensation 
which was foretold of old, and confirming it for the sake of Thy letter divinely sent to 
Abgar, hast revealed to the world Thine image, and thereby filled all things with joy. 
And now, Thou adornment of the crown of kings, Thou hast renewed Thine image 
again for us. Blessed art Thou, O Savior! Have mercy upon us!  
We, who have seen the glorious works of Thine unapproachable descent, on earth 
and in the highest, O Lord, have been exalted. We, having obtained the image of the 
countenance of Thee Who art in the bosom of the Father; have been delivered from 
sufferings for its sake, and are enlivened, O Savior; for we who honor Thee, the 
Master depicted thereon, have thereby slain the serpent adversary. Blessed art Thou, 
O Savior! Have mercy upon us!  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
O Master, and Lover of mankind, great is the depth of Thy dispensation; for unto 
the benefit of Thy creation for generations of generations, Thou hast depicted the 
image of Thy most pure countenance, and sent it to Abgar who desired to see Thee, 
Who art invisible in Thy divinity, even to the cherubim, that he might see the image 
of Thee Who became incarnate for our sake, and suffered of Thine own will; and we 
are set afire by Thy love, which Thou hast poured forth upon us, for the sake of Thy 
great mercy.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
Choirs of virgins now mystically stand around the bed of the Virgin Mother today, 
and the souls of the righteous, surrounding it, glorify the Queen. The virgins offer 
their virginity to her as a gift, instead of myrrh; and the righteous offer her the 
immaterial hymnody of their virtues. For it befitteth the Mother of God, as Queen, to 
be escorted with radiant royal virtues. And we, entering with them upon a pure life, 
go forth to the burial of the Mother of our God, blessing her together in hymns and 
spiritual songs.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the Day. Three Lessons:  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY 
Moses said unto the people; hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the 
judgments, which I teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go in and possess 
the land which the Lord God of your fathers giveth you. Keep therefore and do 
them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, 
which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and 
understanding people. For what nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto 
them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for? Only take heed 
to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes 
have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life: but teach them 
thy sons, and thy sons’ sons; specially the day that thou stoodest before the Lord thy 
God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, Gather me the people together, and I 
will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the days that they 
shall live upon the earth, and that they may teach their children. And ye came near 
and stood under the mountain; and the mountain burned with fire unto the midst of 
heaven, with darkness, clouds, and thick darkness. And the Lord spake unto you out 
of the midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude; only 
ye heard a voice. And he declared unto you his covenant, which he commanded you 
to perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote them upon two tablets of stone. 
And the Lord commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and judgments, that 
ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to possess it. Take ye therefore good 

--- PAGE 5 ---
heed unto yourselves; for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord 
spake unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire.  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY  
And Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and 
judgments which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and keep and 
do them. The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb. The Lord made not 
this covenant with our fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this 
day. The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount out of the midst of the fire, 
(I stood between the Lord and you at that time, to show you the word of the Lord: 
for ye were afraid by reason of the fire, and went not up into the mount,) saying, I am 
the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of 
bondage. Thou shalt have none other gods before me. Thou shalt not bow down 
thyself unto them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting 
the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of 
them that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and 
keep my commandments. And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the 
midst of the darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near unto 
me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your elders; and ye said, Behold, the Lord 
our God hath showed us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out 
of the midst of the fire: we have seen this day that God doth talk with man, and he 
liveth. Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume us: if we 
hear the voice of the Lord our God any more, then we shall die. For who is there of 
all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the 
fire, as we have, and lived? And the Lord heard the voice of your words, when ye 
spake unto me; and the Lord said unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of 
this people, which they have spoken unto thee: they have well said all that they have 
spoken. Now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which 
the Lord your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the land 
whither ye go to possess it: that thou mightest fear the Lord thy God, to keep all his 
statutes and his commandments, which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy 
son’s son, all the days of thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged. Hear therefore, 
O Israel, and observe to do it; that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase 
mightily, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth 
with milk and honey. Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord: and thou shalt 
love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy 
might. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his name. 
And thou shalt do that which is right and good in the sight of the Lord; that it may be 
well with thee. 
  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
READING FROM THE THIRD BOOK OF THE KINGS 
And Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord in the presence of all the 
congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven: and he said, Lord 
God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who 
keepest covenant and mercy with thy servants that walk before thee with all their 
heart. But will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and heaven of 
heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I have builded? Yet have 
thou respect unto the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, O Lord my God, 
to hearken unto the cry and to the prayer, which thy servant prayeth before thee 
today: that thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even toward the 
place of which thou hast said, My name shall be there: that thou mayest hearken unto 
the prayer which thy servant shall make toward this place. And hearken thou to the 
supplication of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward this 
place: and hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place: and when thou hearest, forgive 
them.  
At Litiya, these Stichera of the divine image, in Tone I:  
Come, ye company of the faithful! Come, let us form a choir on the eminent 
festival of the glorious translation of the image of the Savior, the God-man; and let us 
cry aloud: Blessed are the image and lineaments of the Prototype, Him Who cometh 
in the name of the Lord! Thou hast blessed us with Thine appearance, and hast 
preserved the Church from heresy, and therein we faithful worship Thee.  
O ye multitude of monks, assemble with diligence today, to greet the image not 
fashioned by the hands of mortals, offering it virtues instead of gifts, chanting and 
saying: Let the light of Thy countenance be signed upon us, O Lord! By its power 
protect Thy flock, driving away the wicked wolves, granting peace to the whole world 
and great mercy to our souls.  
Rejoice, O reigning city, for the glory of the Lord hath shone upon thee in the 
arrival of the napkin which is more spacious than the heavens! For, without leaving 
Edessa, it hath been borne to thee, working most glorious wonders and dispelling the 
spirits of wickedness, giving strength against heresies and schisms to Orthodox 
hierarchs; and it is a rampart and buttress for those who with faith bow down before 
it.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Without leaving the bosom of the Father, Thou didst dwell among us, O greatly 
merciful Lord, fulfilling, as is fitting, the mystery of Thy love for mankind, which hath 
been hidden from before the ages; and Thou didst assume human weakness, having 
arrayed Thyself immutably therein through the Ever-virgin Theotokos. And Thou 
hast left us the depiction of Thy most pure face for our sanctification, which Thou 
didst prepare even before Thy voluntary suffering. Glory to Thy great mercy towards 
us!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the divine image, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Previously on the mountain, the Master * elevated Peter and those with him, * 
being transfigured before them, * revealing the effulgence of His divinity * and its 
uncreated light. * And today He hath shown us His depiction. * Let us bow down 
before it and venerate it with love, * glorifying the dispensation of Jesus Who is the 
Lover of mankind, ** the Savior of our souls.  
Verse: The light of Thy countenance, * O Lord, hath been signed upon us.  
Falling down, the pre-eminent apostles * worshipped the Master on the holy 
mountain, * as they beheld Him * laying bare the light of the divine effulgence; * and 
now we bow down before the image not made by human hands, * which shineth 
more brightly than the sun, * glorifying Jesus Who is the Lover of mankind, * Who 
hath given it to us as a consolation, ** the Savior of our souls.  
Verse: O Lord, in the light of Thy face shall they walk, * and in Thy name shall 
they rejoice all the day long.  
Making white the blackened image of man, O Creator, * Thou didst reveal it on 
Tabor * to Peter and the sons of thunder, * removing all doubt concerning Thy Cross 
and suffering, * and showing forth the effulgence * of Thy second coming. * And 
now, O Lover of mankind, * do Thou bless and sanctify us, O Lord, ** with the 
splendor of Thy most pure image.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Thou didst become incarnate as Thou didst desire, O Lord; Thou didst will to 
assume our poverty, and didst show forth riches of compassion, whereby Thou hast 
deified me who am dust. We glorify Thee Who lovest mankind, gazing upon the 
image of Thy countenance. Thereby, O Savior, grant unto Thy servants entry into 
Eden unhindered, overlooking all our transgressions.  
Both now ..., the composition of Emperor Leo the Wise, in Tone VIII: 
Jesus, thy Son and our God, O Theotokos, confirming His two natures, dieth as a 
man and riseth as God; and it was His good pleasure, O Mother of God, that thou 
diest also, lest the unbelieving consider His dispensation but a phantasm. For thou 
didst pass over to the land of heaven, O celestial Bride, taken up from the earth as 
from the chamber of thy dwelling. The air was sanctified by thy passage, as the earth 
was illumined by thy birthgiving. The apostles send thee forth, and the angels bear 
thee up. Wherefore, having buried thy most pure body and chanted funeral hymnody 
for thee, they gazed in awe and said with fear: This change is from the right hand of 
the Most High; for He dwelt within thee, and thou shalt not be shaken! O all-hymned 
Mother, depart not from thy watch over us; for we are thy people and the sheep of 
thy pasture, and we call upon thy name, asking salvation and great mercy for thy sake.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
At the Blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the divine image, in Tone II: 
We bow down before Thy most pure image, O Good One, * asking forgiveness of 
our transgressions, O Christ God; * for of Thine own will Thou wast well pleased to 
ascend the Cross in the flesh, * that Thou mightest deliver from slavery to the enemy 
those whom Thou hadst fashioned. * Wherefore, we cry to Thee in thanksgiving: * 
Thou hast filled all things with joy, O our Savior, ** when Thou camest to save the 
world. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Thy grace was poured forth upon us, O Savior, when Thou didst become visible, 
and the darkness of deception was extinguished, O Unapproachable One. Wherefore, 
direct our steps in the light of Thy countenance, that, walking in Thy commandments, 
we may be accounted worthy to behold Thee, O Light unapproachable. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone was sealed ...”: 
The choir of the divine apostles gathered together to bury thee with all honor, O 
most pure Theotokos; and with them the ranks of angels hymned thy repose, crying 
aloud with all praise. And with them we the faithful, leaping up with love, O pure 
one, offer thee praise with sounds of hymnody, and cry out: Rejoice, thou intercessor 
for those who ever honor thee!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word...”: 
O Son Who art pre-eternal and equally co-beginningless with the Father, Who art 
invisible in essence and intangible, Thou, coming under time in Thine ineffable 
mercy, O Master, hast left us the sweet depiction of Thy flesh, for the salvation of our 
souls. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
The angelic armies, truly gazing upon thy repose, O most pure Lady, blessed and 
all-hymned Theotokos, possessing the will of Him Who was born of thee, when the 
choir of His disciples had gathered together, bore thine honored body to paradise 
with rejoicing, hymning Christ, the Bestower of life, throughout the ages.  
Polyeleos, and this Magnification: We magnify Thee, O Christ, Thou Bestower 
of life, and we honor the most glorious depiction of Thy most pure 
countenance.  
Or this Magnification: We magnify Thee, O Christ, Thou Bestower of life, and 
we honor Thy holy image, whereby Thou hast saved us from bondage to the 
enemy.  
Psalm verse: 
A: Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, in the city of our God, in His 
holy mountain.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 

--- PAGE 10 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn of the divine image, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
No longer did grief mar the countenance of Adam when He Who had created 
Adam robed Himself in him. In the likeness of His face He revealed Himself to all 
and moveth all the assemblies of the pious to love and to cry out together: Glory to 
Thine extreme condescension, O Lover of mankind. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody: 
Say aloud, O David, what this feast is, of which thou didst sing in the Book of 
Psalms: how Christ, Who without seed was born of her, hath brought over to His 
mansions, as daughter, the divine maiden and Virgin. Wherefore, rejoice, ye mothers, 
daughters and brides of Christ, crying aloud: Rejoice, thou who hast been translated 
to the kingdom on high!  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: O Lord, in the light of Thy face shall we walk, * and 
in Thy name shall we rejoice all the day long.  
Verse: All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
THE GOSPEL ACC. TO ST. LUKE (9:51-56; 10:21-24) 
And it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be received up, he 
steadfastly set his face to go up to Jerusalem, and sent messengers before his face: and 
they went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him. And 
they did not receive him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem. 
And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord, wilt thou that we 
command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elijah did? 
But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are 
of. For the Son of man is not come to destroy men’s lives, but to save them.  
After Psalm 50, the Sticheron of the divine image, in Tone VI: 
Thou didst become incarnate as Thou didst desire, O Lord; Thou didst will to 
assume our poverty, and didst show forth riches of compassion, whereby Thou hast 
deified me who am dust. We glorify Thee the Lover mankind, gazing upon the image 
of Thy countenance. Thereby, O Savior, grant unto Thy servants entry into Eden 
unhindered, overlooking all our transgressions.  
Canon of the feast, in Tone I, with six Troparia, including the Irmos; 
And the canon of the divine image, with 8 Troparia, in Tone IV.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE I 
Canon I, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her dormition. 
On the renowned day of our festival, O ye people, let us open our mouths and 
cleanse our tongues, radiantly glorifying the revelation of the divine image of Christ 
our God.  
Fulfilling the words of the Father, the pre-eternal Light became visible to us in the 
image and likeness of the flesh; and now He hath revealed Himself in the image not 
made by the hands of man, shining forth upon us the light of His divine incarnation.  
Desiring to speak forth His grace, the Most High assumed the image of a servant 
and, as an assurance of His human nature, hath given the faithful the likeness of His 
countenance today.  
Theotokion: The account of thy giving birth unto the God-man have we truly 
come to know, honoring thee, O most pure one, and being deemed worthy to behold 
the image not fashioned by the hands of man of the countenance of Him Who was 
born of thee.  
Canon II, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: He Who in ancient times * hid the pursuing tyrant beneath the waves 
of the sea, * hath drawn together and covered the streams of the Jordan, * 
cleansing now my humanity with purity, * for gloriously hath He been 
glorified.  
Illumining now the earthly world, with its gifts of divine grace from on high it 
filleth those who chant: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been 
glorified!  
It was meet to bear unto the city which reigneth over all cities the lineaments of 
the King of heaven and earth, which He, incarnate, didst limit by Himself, and that 
the translation be accomplished through the efforts of the Christ-loving emperors. 
 The divinely radiant beams have fueled all things, illumining and adorning human 
nature, proceeding from the image which the seraphim cover with the glory of Christ.  
Theotokion: O thou who art full of the grace of God, though thou hast given flesh 
unto God, Who in a manner past understanding descended upon thee, thou who wast 
fashioned of earth art, because of the deception of the enemy, returned to the earth; 
yet, taken from the earth, thou hast ascended to heaven.  
Katavasia: Thy sacred and glorious memory, * supremely adorned with divine 
glory, O Virgin, * hath gathered all the faithful in gladness, * and led by 
Miriam with choirs and timbrels, * hymn thine only-begotten Son, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE III  
Canon I  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
As Master in essence, Thou didst unite Thyself to Thy servants through the flesh; 
and working out and planning our salvation in divers ways, O Christ, Thou art seen 
by us in Thine image.  
The most honorable city of Edessa hath for its faith received Thine honorable and 
divine image as a firm pledge; and Thine imperial city now receiveth it as the best of 
gifts.  
As hypostatic Life Thou hast now tasted of the death of the flesh, whereby Thou 
hast poured forth life upon the dead by Thine arising, O Christ, and hast now given 
us the image of Thy countenance as a source of life. 
Theotokion: Before, salvation shone forth from thee in the flesh upon those who 
are in the world; and now, through thy mediation, Life hath appeared to the faithful 
in the world, the light-bearing arrival of the likeness of the image of Christ.  
Canon II  
Irmos: When creation beheld Thee, * Who founded the whole earth upon the 
waters, * covered in the flesh by the waters, * it was seized with awe, and cried 
aloud: * None is holy save Thee, O Lord!!  
With the angels we glorify Thee, O Christ, Who of old created many according to 
Thine image, wherein Thou didst give Thyself form in Thy tender compassion, truly 
taking on an immutable likeness of us.  
O Compassionate One, Who in Thy great goodness art right accessible and 
inclined to hearken unto all who seek Thee, we marvel at the beauty of Thy love 
which is manifest in the approach of Thine icon.  
When the local prince beheld Thee in Thy depiction O Savior, by Thine all-
accomplishing might Thou didst grant His desires which he expressed to Thee: of 
love and the healing of his infirmity, by Thy gladsome gift.  
Theotokion: David described thee beforehand, O all-hymned one, as the place of 
the Lord which was to appear; for He Who can in no wise be contained was 
contained in thy womb, and the Immaterial One is clad in material flesh.  
Katavasia: Thou art the creative and almighty Wisdom, * and the Power of 
God, * do Thou establish the Church immovable and unshaken, O Christ; * 
for Thou alone art holy * Who restest in the saints. 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II: 
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
Ikos: Guard my thoughts, O my Christ, for I make bold to hymn the bulwark of 
the world, Thy pure Mother. Establish me firmly in the bastion of my words, and 
help me in the midst of difficult thoughts; for Thou fulfillest the entreaties of those 
who cry out and ask with faith. Wherefore, grant unto me a deft tongue and a ready 
mind, for every good deed of enlightenment cometh down from Thee, O Bestower 
of light, Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
Sessional Hymn of the divine image, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
O compassionate Savior, Who camest down from heaven in the tender 
compassion of Thy mercy, today Thou hast given the most pure countenance of Thy 
most holy flesh to the city which honoreth Thee as a treasure and to the Christian 
people as a strong suit of armor. And drawing forth sanctification therefrom, we 
fervently receive it with faith. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody: 
Having surrendered thy holy soul now into the hands of thy Son and God, neither 
didst thou leave thy body in the grave; for as thou didst receive the Life of all, thus, 
translated to life after thy death, thou pourest forth everlasting life upon those who 
know thee to be the true Theotokos.  
ODE IV 
Canon I  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
The divine image of the likeness of the flesh of Him Who drew nigh to mankind 
in the flesh hath today come to the newly-chosen Israel as from Egypt, enlightening 
the ends of the earth.  
Moses of old, asking, was deemed worthy to behold obscurely a divine vision of 
the glory of Thy back parts; and the new Israel now clearly beholdeth Thee, the 
Redeemer, face to face.  
O all ye people, behold ye wondrous things and be merry now in spirit, hymning 
Christ Who hath given us the depiction of His countenance as riches of great value.  
Theotokion: Of old Christ revealed Himself to those on earth, seated upon thine 
arm as upon a cloud; and now, in latter times, He hath revealed Himself to the people 
who honor thee, O most pure one, in His divine image.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: Foreseeing Thy divine self-emptying upon the Cross, * Habakkuk, in 
amazement, cried out: * “Thou hast cut asunder the strength of the mighty, * 
O Good One, * and preached to those in Hades, * as the Almighty One. 
Thou hast cut down the dominion of the mighty, O Good One, entering into 
fellowship with those who are in Hades, as Thou art almighty! They who are now clad 
in royal purple, who have been ordained by the King of kings to reign, glorifying 
Him, receive the majestic sight of His likeness.  
The visage of the Savior, for which the prophets longed of old, the emperors 
behold, blessed by all, depicted in the image He Himself wrought without the use of 
men’s hands.  
O all ye princes and judges of the earth, bless ye Christ today, together with the 
high priests, the hierarchs and all the people, deemed worthy to behold His 
countenance.  
Theotokion: For the people who acknowledge thee to be the Mother of the ever-
existent Christ, ask thou heavenly blessedness, for with faith they hymn thine 
ineffable birthgiving.  
Katavasia: The sayings and imagery of the prophets * revealed Thine 
incarnation from the Virgin, O Christ. * The splendor of Thine effulgence * 
hath gone forth unto the enlightenment of the nations * and the abyss gaveth 
forth its voice to Thee with gladness: * Glory to Thy power, O Lover of 
mankind. 
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thine honored dormition; * for thou, O 
Virgin who hast not known wedlock, * hast passed from earth to the 
everlasting mansions; * and to never-ending life, * bestowing salvation unto all 
who hymn thee. 
Let us clap our hands today and cry out praises to the Lord; for, lo! He hath truly 
come and revealed Himself, illumining all the faithful with the divine likeness of His 
pure flesh.  
Today hath the assembly of the Orthodox been enlightened. Let the hordes of 
heretics be put to shame, seeing the image fashioned not by men’s hands venerated, 
which hath been set forth for us by the flesh of the Redeemer.  
The coming solemnity is a great mystery; for the light of the Lord’s countenance 
hath shone forth upon the world through the precisely inscribed image and the divine 
letters written by the hand of God Himself, whereby Abgar of old was strengthened.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: Let the clouds now drop sweetness upon mortals through thy 
mediation, O Virgin; for thy Son and God hath taken pity on the world and hath 
given the horn of salvation to the faithful: His divine image.  
Canon II  
Irmos: I seek Thee early in the morning, * Who for our sake didst mercifully 
empty Thyself * and willingly submit to be baptized by the hand of a servant, * 
O Word of God, * Grant Thy peace unto me the fallen one, * O Lover of 
mankind. 
The godly crown-bearers rejoice not in purple cloaks, nor in scarlet, nor yet in 
precious crowns, but in the Lord God, beholding Whose beauty, they are adorned.  
The righteous eyes of the Lord are upon the king, and His ears are open to the 
supplication of kings who reason with piety.  
Beholding now the visage of the undepictable countenance of the immutable God 
and Savior, the people stand before it to behold it are inspired, and they make haste 
to be enlightened thereby.  
Theotokion: Thy purity unaffected by thy birthgiving, thou wast known to be a 
Mother even though thou didst not receive that which pertaineth to mothers. For the 
divine will accomplished both within thee, O Mother of God.  
Katavasia: The divine and ineffable goodness of Thy virtues, * do we confess 
O Christ; * for having shone forth from the pre-eternal glory * as the co-eternal 
and hypostatic Effulgence, * incarnate from the Virgin’s womb, * Thou hast 
shone forth as the Sun * upon those in the darkness and shadows.  
ODE VI 
Canon I  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Life hath shone forth upon the dead, light hath come for the blind, healing hath 
been disclosed for those who are grievously afflicted, and salvation hath drawn nigh 
for all today.  
Every mind is bewildered, seeing the divine image of the immaterial countenance 
of Christ now clearly inscribed, pouring forth enlightenment upon those who 
venerate it.  
Let us prepare the way of Christ, crying out now to Christ: Hosanna! Blessed is the 
name of the glory of God, which hath in His divine image been revealed to those on 
earth!  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Theotokion: Salvation hath been revealed to be known to the countries of the 
world, O pure Mother of God, for we have now been deemed worthy, through thy 
mediation, to see the depiction of our Savior Who was born of thee.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Jonah was caught but not held * in the belly of the whale; * for, bearing 
the image of Thee, * Who hast suffered and wast given to burial, * he came 
forth from the sea-monster as from a bridal chamber, * and he called out to the 
watch: * “O ye who keep guard falsely and in vain, * ye have forsaken your 
own mercy.” 
Thou didst not disdain to suffer with those who are held fast by evil and have 
fallen into corruption, O Creator and Restorer of our race; but, emptying Thyself, O 
Most High, and showing Thyself to be in my likeness and lowliness, Thou hast most 
wisely built me up, giving me man’s primeval beauty.  
When I believed not in Thy heavenly kingdom, to which, O Good One, Thou hast 
brought us up who are corrupt and lie below, Thou Who art inaccessible to the 
immaterial cherubim didst bring me down to Hades; and to King Abgar Thou didst 
send Thine apostle, who confirmed the mystery, O Christ.  
O Word and Wisdom of God the omnipotent Father, Who from before the ages 
hath been ever continually invisible, the local ruler, beholding the image of Thine all-
human countenance, marveled, beholding Thee, God Who assumed flesh, blood and 
a noetic soul.  
Theotokion: The destroyer transformed the immortal founder of our race through 
his disbelief in the dread commandment of God Who created him; but, having given 
birth to the Bestower of life, thou alone hast made us steadfast with power and 
incorruption.  
Katavasia: The inner fire of the whales * born in the depths of the sea, * 
prefigure Thy three-day burial, * of which Jonah showed himself forth as a 
prophet, * having been saved before being sent forth unharmed, crying: * I 
will sacrifice to Thee * with a voice of praise, O Lord! 
Kontakion of the divine image, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “In thy supplications ...”: 
O uncircumscribable Word of the Father, * knowing the victorious image, un-
inscribed and divinely wrought, * of Thine ineffable and divine dispensation towards 
mankind, * of Thy true incarnation, ** we honor it with veneration.  
Ikos: Persuading men of the dread mystery of His incarnation, the Lord Himself 
hath imprinted the image of His divine manhood upon the napkin and, taking up the 
Prototype from the Mount of Olives, He seateth it upon the throne of the Father to 
be worshipped by the bodiless angels; and embracing it with heart and soul, we honor 
it with veneration.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Every city rejoiceth with faith, celebrating with the new Sion; for its King hath 
meekly come, not on a foal as before, but in His image, saving those who chant with 
faith: Blessed art Thou, O God!  
The divine words of the incorporeal ones, who heard the voice of the Lord before, 
have been fulfilled; and we, illumined by the light-giving splendors of His appearance, 
have now seen His visage.  
Those of heaven make merry with those of earth, and the multitude of all the 
saints rejoice together; kings and princes, rich and poor, celebrating the divine image 
which hath appeared today.  
Theotokion: Clothe yourselves in righteousness, ye priests, and rejoice with 
splendor, all ye venerable; for, lo! Christ hath prepared for us a lamp: the divinely 
wrought likeness of His image, which He received from the Virgin.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O ineffable wonder! * He Who delivered the holy Children from the 
fiery furnace * boweth His head and asketh baptism of a servant, * cleansing 
those who cry: * O God our Redeemer, blessed art Thou!  
Let us prepare our eyes for a divine vision, and let us make haste, as is meet, to 
behold the image of Christ precious to all, for the salvation of us who chant: O God 
our Redeemer, blessed art Thou!  
Up borne as on Mount Tabor, beholding the radiant effulgence in the divine 
manhood of Christ, with eyes uplifted, we ever theologize Him as being in two 
natures, yet a single Hypostasis.  
Composed and filled with every voice may the hymnody be of all of us who keep 
festival and rejoice fervently in the Lord, chanting together: O God our Redeemer, 
blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Thou alone wast radiant in the beauty of virginity, O Birthgiver of 
God, nourisher of the Creator, and hast cleansed away all the defilement of sin from 
us who cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O God!  
Katavasia: The divine will, opposing the shameless wrath and fire, * bedewed 
the fire and put the wrath to shame * by the divinely inspired three-stringed 
lyre of the venerable children, * opposing the musical instruments amid the 
flames: * O supremely glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon I  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Being perfect in essence, the God-man becameth visible, truly saving in perfect 
manner according to both His natures; for as God, confirming the image of man, He 
transformed it as One Incorporeal, and gaveth it to us as a rampart and protection.  
O Word of God, exalt Thou the horn of those who confess Thee to be God and 
man, and who bow low before Thy divinely imprinted image, whereby everlasting life 
hath been given to all the faithful; and set at naught the arrogance of the pagans who 
know not Thy divine power.  
The new Church shineth, for the light of glory hath shone forth the image of the 
corporeal aspect of our God; and, as He Himself knoweth, He hath adorned His 
incorporeal countenance, illumining it for the salvation of the Christian people.  
Theotokion: He Who before shone forth from thy holy womb, O Virgin, hath 
sanctified all creation; and today He hath shone forth yet more, His divine image 
having appeared most gloriously from a heathen land, as from a region of unwaning 
light, giving it to His faithful people and city for their salvation.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The divine Children rebuked the wicked god-hating idol; * and the 
lawless Sanhedrin raged against Christ, * vainly taking council to kill Him * 
who doth hold life in the hollow of His hand, * wherefore the whole of creation 
doth bless and glorify Him throughout all ages. 
Being invisible to all in Thy divine essence, O Savior, yet visible as a man in Thy 
human nature, having depicted Thyself by the illumination of Thy very face, without 
the use of pigments, Thou didst not deprive Thy servants of the sight thereof, who 
sang: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The chosen one, who hath authority over all, doth gaze with reverence and honor 
at the self-imprinted prototypical depiction of the countenance of the Savior, the 
divinely wrought image, for those who put their trust therein are protected and made 
steadfast.  
More than Moses the God-beholder, who received the divinely inscribed tablets of 
the law, wast thou magnified, O honored King Abgar, receiving the precious epistle 
of God the Word, which calleth thee blessed who believed in the piety of Christ’s 
wonderworking which thou didst not see.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Theotokion: Beholding the one Hypostasis, consisting of two natures 
uncommingled, which was incarnate of thy most precious blood, O Mother of God, 
we confess Him to be both God and man, Who was begotten of the timeless Father 
before time, without pain or mingling.  
Katavasia: The flame which bedewed the venerable children, * but utterly 
consumed the ungodly, * did the almighty Angel of God show forth unto 
them; * and He rendered the Theotokos a life-creating well-spring * pouring 
forth destruction for death and life for those who chant: * O ye who have been 
delivered, * let us hymn and supremely exalt the only Creator * throughout all 
ages! 
ODE IX 
Canon I  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
repose of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Rejoice now mystically, O great Christ-loving city of God, for to thee hath come 
He Who reigneth over all in the likeness of His divine prototypical image; and thee 
hath He chosen to be His dwelling place.  
Let us chant a hymn of thanks unto God, Who was pleased to give us great riches, 
an unassailable rampart, and a firm foundation: the divinely formed countenance of 
His godly flesh, which honoring, we the faithful magnify.  
O the wonders which surpass understanding, and which Thou hast wrought upon 
us who hope on Thee! For as Thy birth was ineffable, so also hast Thou revealed the 
depiction of Thy countenance, which is strange and incomprehensible to all. From all 
wrath deliver us who honor it.  
Theotokion: The height and depth of thy mystery are truly ineffable, O pure one; 
for as the Most High ineffably came forth from thee, so hath He become visible, 
coming to us today in the incorporeal light of His countenance, and mingling with 
mortals in the matter of His flesh.  
Canon II  
Irmos: More honorable than the cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word: * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Unimaginable beauty and comeliness surpassing nature in splendor have truly 
become visible to those who desire to see them, as is meet! Let us therefore make 
haste, sanctifying our countenances.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
A rampart and mighty foundation, a weapon of peace, an unassailable buttress 
impermeable to all the artifices of the adversary, a bulwark, hath been given to our 
city.  
O immutable image of the Father, Effulgence of the glory of the everlasting light, 
Seal of the Most High, Word, Power and Wisdom; be Thou readily reconciled with 
those who theologize concerning Thee.  
Theotokion: Thou didst abolish the reproach of women, and didst remove and 
annul the curse on men; and hast poured forth joy and blessing upon all, O most pure 
Virgin Birthgiver of God.  
Katavasia: In thee are the laws of nature overcome, * O pure Virgin, * for 
birthgiving is virginal * and death is betrothed to life. * For after giving birth 
thou didst remain a Virgin, * and after death thou didst remain alive, * O 
Theotokos, do thou ever save thine inheritance. 
Exapostilarion of the divine image:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
O Christ, Thou never-waning Light, through the prayers of the Theotokos, who 
gaveth birth to Thee, illumine us with the visage of Thy countenance, and deem us 
worthy of the splendor of the saints, when Thou wilt sit to render unto each 
according to his works.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the feast:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”: 
O ye apostles, having gathered here from the ends of the earth, bury my body in 
the Garden of Gethsemane! And do Thou, O my Son and God, receive my spirit!  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the divine image, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Rejoice, most precious image of Him Who created Adam, adored by the angels, 
desired of men, and truly frightening to the demons, token of the love of God, 
imprint of the face of sweet Jesus, surety of blessing to come, great treasure of the 
whole world, which never feareth exhaustion! Grant us unity of mind, peace and great 
mercy. (Twice)  
Rejoice, divine image of Him about Whom the cherubim stand and to Whom the 
seraphim minister, before Whom all the hosts of heaven tremble, Whom all creation 
obeyeth and the deeps fear; whereby darkness hath been banished and the devil set at 
naught, Adam freed of the bonds of sin and the tears of Eve assuaged! Grant us unity 
of mind, peace and great mercy.  
Rejoice, image of the King more comely in beauty than all the sons of mankind, 
Jesus the Redeemer Who covered Himself with flesh and came to seek the lost sheep 
which was sought as prey by the world, and carried it upon His shoulder and brought 
it to His Father purified by His Cross and Blood. Grant to the whole world unity of 
mind, peace and great mercy.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Glory ..., of the divine image, in Tone IV: 
Let the clouds drop sweetness, and let the mountains leap up in joy over the most 
glorious mighty works of Christ our God; for previously on Mount Tabor the light of 
the Godhead shone forth, assuring the pre-eminent disciples, and presenting Moses 
and Elijah with glory, bearing witness unto Him Who hath authority over the law and 
dominion over the living and the dead. Today, in the midst of the world, the radiant 
depiction hath shone forth, assuring all that He is our God incarnate, to Whom we 
chant: Glory to Thy love for mankind, O Christ!  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone I:  
It was fitting that the servants of the Word, who saw Him with their own eyes, see 
also the repose of His Mother in the flesh, inasmuch as it was the final mystery 
concerning her, that they might behold not only the Savior’s ascension from the 
earth, but also witness the translation of her who gaveth Him birth. Wherefore, 
assembled from all parts of the earth by the power of God, they reached Sion and 
bade farewell to her who is more highly exalted than the cherubim as she passed on 
to heaven. And we also, with them, bow down to her as one who prayeth for our 
souls.  
Great Doxology. Ektenias. Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia; 4 from ODE I of the canon of the Dormition, 
and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the divine image.  
Thy sacred and glorious memory, supremely adorned with divine glory, O Virgin, 
hath gathered all the faithful in gladness, and led by Miriam with choirs and timbrels, 
hymn thine only-begotten Son, for gloriously hath He been glorified. (Twice) 
Let the immaterial ranks accompany thy divine and immaterial body to Sion. For 
the multitude of the apostles, coming together of a sudden from the ends of the 
earth, stood before thee, O Theotokos; With them we also glorify thine honored 
memory, O pure one.  
The honors of victory over nature hast thou taken, having given birth unto God, 
O pure one; yet, emulating thy Creator and Son, thou didst submit to the laws of 
nature in a supra-natural manner. Wherefore, having died, thou didst arise with thy 
Son unto everlasting life.  
Thou didst not disdain to suffer with those who are held fast by evil and have 
fallen into corruption, O Creator and Restorer of our race; but, emptying Thyself, O 
Most High, and showing Thyself to be in my likeness and lowliness, Thou hast most 
wisely built me up, giving me man’s primeval beauty.  
When I believed not in Thy heavenly kingdom, to which, O Good One, Thou hast 
brought us up who are corrupt and lie below, Thou Who art inaccessible to the 
immaterial cherubim didst bring me down to Hades; and to King Abgar Thou didst 
send Thine apostle, who confirmed the mystery, O Christ.  
O Word and Wisdom of God the omnipotent Father, Who from before the ages 
hath been ever continually invisible, the local ruler, beholding the image of Thine all-
human countenance, marveled, beholding Thee, God Who assumed flesh, blood and 
a noetic soul.  
Theotokion: The destroyer transformed the immortal founder of our race through 
his disbelief in the dread commandment of God, Who created him; but, having given 
birth to the Bestower of life, thou alone hast made us steadfast with power and 
incorruption.  
After the Entrance, the Troparion of the divine image, in Tone II: 
We bow down before Thy most pure image, O Good One, * asking forgiveness of 
our transgressions, O Christ God; * for of Thine own will Thou wast well pleased to 
ascend the Cross in the flesh, * that Thou mightest deliver from slavery to the enemy 
those whom Thou hadst fashioned. * Wherefore, we cry to Thee in thanksgiving: * 
Thou hast filled all things with joy, O our Savior, ** when Thou camest to save the 
world.  
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
 
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  
Glory ..., Kontakion of the divine image, in Tone II: 
O uncircumscribable Word of the Father, * knowing the victorious image, un-
inscribed and divinely wrought, * of Thine ineffable and divine dispensation towards 
mankind, * of Thy true incarnation, ** we honor it with veneration.  
Both now ..., Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II: 
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: The Hymn of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: O sing unto the Lord a new song, for the Lord hath 
wrought wondrous things.  
Verse: All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.  
 
THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS (1:12-18) 
Brethren, give thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers 
of the inheritance of the saints in light: who hath delivered us from the power of 
darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. In whom we have 
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins; who is the image of the 
invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: for by him were all things created, that 
are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or 
dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him: 
and he is before all things, and by him all things consist: and he is the head of the 
body, the church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things 
he might have the pre-eminence.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: O Lord, in the light of Thy face shall we walk, and in Thy 
name shall we rejoice unto the ages.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy 
holiness.  
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (9:51-56; 10:21-24) 
At that time; when the time was come that he should be received up, he 
steadfastly set his face to go up to Jerusalem, and sent messengers before his face: and 
they went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him. And 
they did not receive him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem. 
And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord, wilt thou that we 
command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elijah did? 
But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are 
of. For the Son of man is not come to destroy men’s lives, but to save them. In that 
hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and 
earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed 
them unto babes: even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight. All things are 
delivered to me of my Father: and no man knoweth who the Son is, but the Father; 
and who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. And he 
turned him unto his disciples, and said privately, Blessed are the eyes which see the 
things that ye see: for I tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see 
those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye 
hear, and have not heard them.  
NOTE: Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant, in Tone I, the Irmos of ODE IX 
of Canon I:  
Refrain I: All of us, the generation of men, bless thee, the only Theotokos.  
Irmos I: In thee are the laws of nature overcome, * O pure Virgin, * for 
birthgiving is virginal * and death is betrothed to life. * For after giving birth 
thou didst remain a Virgin, * and after death thou didst remain alive, * O 
Theotokos, do thou ever save thine inheritance.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
 
