--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 15th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
THE DORMITION OF OUR MOST HOLY, GLORIOUS SOVEREIGN LADY, THE 
THEOTOKOS & EVER-VIRGIN MARY  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the feast, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
The assembly of the angels rejoiceth * in the immortal repose * of the Mother of 
God; * and she, departing for the eternal mansions, is glad * and passeth over to the 
gladness of heaven, ** to divine joy and everlasting delight. (Twice)  
Desiring the life on high, * thou didst abandon this one, O Birthgiver of God, * O 
Maiden, flower of virginity, * who hast given birth to Christ, the Life of all. * And the 
assembly of the apostles stood by with reverence ** at thine honored burial, O Bride 
of God.  
The air is sanctified by thy parting burial hymns; * and in thine ascent, O Mother 
of God, the Lover of mankind, * is an awesome miracle wrought, * O Theotokos 
who knewest not a man. * Wherefore, we, the faithful, faithfully do thee homage, ** 
O Theotokos who knewest not wedlock.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Come ye, let us celebrate the universal dormition of the all-immaculate Theotokos; 
for today the angels celebrate the honored repose of the Mother of God and call us 
mortals to gladness, that we may cry out with never-failing voices: Rejoice, O thou 
who hast been translated from earth and made thy habitation in the mansions of 
heaven! Rejoice, thou who hast brought together the choir of the disciples on clouds 
of light! Rejoice, our hope and salvation; for we, the Christian race, unceasingly bless 
thee!  
Prokeimenon of the day.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
The council * of the divine disciples and apostles * assembled to bury * the God-
receiving body ** of her who alone is the Mother of God.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
O Master * Who shone forth ineffably from her * as her Son, * take in Thy hands 
** the most holy spirit of the Theotokos.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
When thou didst pass over * to Him Who had been born of thee, * O Virgin, * the 
apostles descended on clouds ** to bury thy body.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody: 
Be ye lifted up, * O ye gates of heaven, * beholding the only Mother of God, * the 
portal of the Most High, ** coming to the highest.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  
Litany & dismissal.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the Man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the feast, in Tone I:  
O wondrous marvel! The well-spring of Life is laid in a tomb, and the grave 
becometh a ladder to the heavens! Be glad, O Gethsemane, thou holy dwelling-place 
of the Theotokos! O ye faithful, let us cry aloud, with Gabriel as our leader: Rejoice, 
O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee, granting great mercy to the world 
through thee! (Thrice) 
Wondrous are thy mysteries, O Theotokos! Thou hast been revealed to be the 
throne of the Most High, O Lady, and hast been translated from earth to heaven 
today. Thy glory is majestic, shining with godly miracles! O ye virgins, ascend on high 
with the Mother of the King! Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with 
thee, granting great mercy to the world through thee! (Thrice) 
The authorities and thrones, the principalities and dominions, the powers, the 
cherubim and the awesome seraphim glorify thy dormition, and mortals rejoice, 
adorned by thy divine glory. Kings fall down in homage with the archangels and 
angels, and chant: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee, 
granting great mercy to the world through thee! (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
At the behest of God, the God-bearing apostles were caught up from whence they 
were, and, coming to thy most pure and life-creating body, they venerated it with 
love. And the hosts of heaven above, arriving with their Master, were seized with awe 
as they accompanied the most pure body which had received God; and they went 
forth in beauty and cried aloud invisibly to the hierarchies above: “Behold! the divine 
Maiden, the Queen of all, is come! Lift up your gates, and receive her above the 
world, who is the Mother of everlasting Light; for it is through her that salvation hath 
come to all the human race. We cannot gaze upon her, we are unable to render her 
fitting honor; for her excellence passeth all understanding!” Wherefore, O most pure 
Theotokos, dwelling ever with thy life-bearing King and Offspring, pray thou without 
ceasing, that He preserve and save thy new people from every attack of the adversary; 
for we have acquired thine intercession, manifestly blessing thee with splendor 
throughout the ages.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM GENESIS  
Jacob went forth from the well of the oath, and departed into Haran. And he came 
to a certain place, and slept there, for the sun had gone down; and he took one of the 
stones of the place, and put it at his head, and lay down to sleep in that place, and 

--- PAGE 4 ---
dreamed: and behold a ladder fixed on the earth, whose top reached to heaven, and 
the angels of God ascended and descended on it. And the Lord stood upon it, and 
said: “I am the God of thy father Abraham, and the God of Isaac. Fear not; the land 
on which thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And thy seed shall be like 
the sand of the earth; and it shall spread abroad to the sea, and the south, and the 
north, and the east; and in thee and in thy seed shall all tribes of the earth be blessed. 
And behold I am with thee to preserve thee continually in all the way wherein thou 
shalt go; and I will bring thee back to this land; for I will not desert thee, until I have 
done all that I have said to thee.” And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said: “The 
Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.” And he was afraid, and sad: “How fearful is 
this place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!”  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF EZEKIEL  
Thus saith the Lord: “It shall come to pass from the eighth day and onward, that 
the priests shall offer your wholeburnt-offerings on the altar, and your peace-
offerings; and I will accept you,” saith the Lord. Then He brought me back by the 
way of the outer gate of the sanctuary that faceth eastward; and it was shut. And the 
Lord said to me: “This gate shall be shut; it shall not be opened, and no one shall pass 
through it; for the Lord God of Israel shall enter by it, and it shall be shut. For the 
Prince, He shall sit in it, to eat bread before the Lord; He shall go in by the way of the 
porch of the gate, and shall go forth by the way of the same.” And He brought me in 
by the way of the gate that faceth northward, in front of the house: and I looked, and, 
behold! the house was full of the glory of the Lord.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
Wisdom hath built a house for herself and set up seven pillars. She hath killed her 
beasts; she hath mingled her wine in a bowl and prepared her table. She hath sent 
forth her servants, calling with a loud proclamation to the feast, saying: “Whoso is 
foolish, let him turn aside to me.” And to those who want understanding, she saith: 
“Come, eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you. Leave folly, 
that ye may reign forever; and seek wisdom, and improve understanding by 
knowledge.” He that reproveth evil men shall get dishonor to himself; and he that 
rebuketh an ungodly man shall disgrace himself. Rebuke not evil men, lest they 
should hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. Give an opportunity to a 
wise man, and he will be wiser: instruct a just man, and he will receive more 
instruction. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the counsel of the 
law is the character of a sound mind. For in this way thou shalt live long, and years of 
thy life shall be added to thee.  
At Litiya, these Stichera: 
In Tone I: It was fitting that the servants of the Word, who saw Him with their 

--- PAGE 5 ---
own eyes, see also the repose of His Mother in the flesh, inasmuch as it was the final 
mystery concerning her, that they might behold not only the Savior’s ascension from 
the earth, but also witness the translation of her who gaveth Him birth. Wherefore, 
assembled from all parts of the earth by the power of God, they reached Sion and 
bade farewell to her who is more highly exalted than the cherubim as she passed on 
to heaven. And we also, with them, bow down to her as one who prayeth for our 
souls.  
The composition of Anatolius, in Tone II: As she was more exalted than the 
heavens, more glorious than the cherubim and higher in honor than all creation, and 
in her exceeding purity becameth the dwelling-place of the ever-existent Essence, she 
surrendereth her all-holy soul into the hands of her Son today. By her are all things 
filled with joy; and He granteth us great mercy.  
The composition of John: The all-immaculate Bride and Mother of Him in Whom 
the Father was well-pleased, who was foreordained by God to be the habitation of 
His uncommingled Union, doth commit her most pure soul to God the Creator. Her 
do the hosts of the incorporeal ones bear aloft, and she passeth over to life, in that 
she is the Mother of the Life, the light of the Light unapproachable, the salvation of 
the faithful and the hope of our souls.  
The composition of Germanus, in Tone III: Come, all ye ends of the earth, let us 
praise the honored translation of the Mother of God; for she hath placed her 
immaculate soul in the hands of her Son. Wherefore, the world hath been given life 
through her holy dormition; and in psalms, hymns and spiritual songs it doth 
celebrate splendidly with the incorporeal hosts and the apostles.  
Glory ..., the composition of Theophanes, in Tone I: 
Come, ye assembly of those who love the feasts of the Church! Come, let us form 
a choir! Come, and with hymns let us crown the temple, the ark of the rest of God! 
For today heaven expandeth its bosom, receiving her who gave birth to Him Who is 
invisible to all, and the earth receiveth the well-spring of Life, who imparteth blessing 
and is adorned with splendor. The angels form a chorus with the apostles, gazing with 
awe upon her who gave birth to the Author of life, and who is translated from life to 
Life. Let us all bow down before her, praying: O Lady, forget not thy kinship with 
those who celebrate thine all-holy dormition with faith!  
Both now ..., in Tone I: 
O ye people, hymn ye, hymn ye the Mother of our God! For today she committeth 
her most radiant soul into the most pure hands of Him Who became incarnate of her 
without seed. And she entreateth Him unceasingly, that He grant peace and great 
mercy to the whole world.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Come, O ye people, let us hymn the most holy and pure virgin from whom the 
incarnate Word of the Father ineffably came forth; and let us cry aloud, saying: 
Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the womb which contained Christ! 
Having surrendered thy soul into His holy hands, O most pure one, entreat Him, that 
our souls be saved.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
Let us chant today the hymn of David unto Christ God, O ye people: The virgins 
that follow after her, said he, shall be brought to the King, and those near her shall be 
brought in gladness and rejoicing; for she who is of the seed of David, for whose sake 
we have been deified, is gloriously and ineffably placed in the hands of her Son and 
Master. Hymning her as the Mother of God, let us cry aloud and say: Save us, who 
confess thee to be the Theotokos, from every evil circumstance, and deliver our souls 
from misfortunes!  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
O most holy and pure virgin, we, the multitude of angels in heaven and the 
generation of mortals on earth, bless thy most honored dormition, for thou wast the 
Mother of Christ God, the Creator of all We pray thee: Him do thou never cease to 
entreat on behalf of us who have set our hope on thee and God, O all-hymned 
Theotokos who knewest not wedlock.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
When thou didst depart unto Him Who had been ineffably born of thee, O Virgin 
Theotokos, James the brother of God and first bishop was present, with Peter, the 
most honorable and preeminent, the foremost of theologians, and the whole divine 
choir of the apostles, hymning the divine and awesome mystery of God’s dis-
pensation with manifest theology; and, burying thy Life-giving and God-receiving 
body, they rejoiced, O all-hymned one. And regarding one another, they said, 
marveling at the wonders of her who transcendeth the most holy senior ranks of the 
angels: “Lift up your gates and receive her who gave birth to the Creator of heaven 
and earth, and with glorifications let us hymn the precious and holy body which con-
tained the Lord Who is invisible to us.” Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, we also 
cry out to thee, O most hymned one: Exalt the horn of Christians and save our souls!  
After the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death. (Thrice)  

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death. (Thrice)  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
The most honorable choir of the most wise apostles was gathered together 
miraculously to bury thy most pure body gloriously, O all-hymned Theotokos. With 
them a multitude of the angels sang, with honor praising thy repose which we 
celebrate with faith.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
Thy seedless conception in thy birthgiving and thine incorrupt mortality in thy 
dormition, a twofold wonder within a wonder, have merged in thee, O Theotokos. 
For how art thou who hast not known a man a pure Nourisher of an Infant? And 
how dost thou, the Mother of God, perfume with myrrh a mortal body? Wherefore, 
with the angel we cry to thee: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Polyeleos, and magnification: We magnify thee, O all-immaculate Mother of 
Christ our God, and we glorify thy most glorious Dormition.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Shout with jubilation unto the Lord all the earth. Chant ye unto His name.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Cry aloud, O David! What is this feast of which thou didst sing of old in the book 
of psalms? For Christ, Who was born of her without seed, hath translated thy 
daughter, the divine Maiden and Virgin, to His mansions. Wherefore, mothers and 
daughters, and the brides of Christ rejoice, crying: Rejoice, O thou who hast been 
translated to the kingdom on high!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Hymn of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I shall commemorate thy name in every generation 
and generation.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Let every breath ...,  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, § 4 (LK. 1: 39-49, 56)  
And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city 
of Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came 
to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her 
womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit: and she spake out with a loud 
voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 
And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo! as 
soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my 
womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of 
those things which were told her from the Lord. And Mary said, My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath re-
garded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all 
generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; 
and holy is His name. And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to 
her own house.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VI: 
When the repose of thy most pure body drew nigh, the apostles, standing about 
thy bed, looked upon thee with trembling; and they, gazing at thy body, were seized 
with awe. And Peter cried aloud to thee, weeping: O Virgin, I behold thee clearly 
stretched out, the life of all, and I am amazed, for in thy body the Delight of the life 
to come made His abode! O most pure one, earnestly entreat thy Son and God, that 
thy flock be saved unharmed.  
Two canons, with a total of 12 Troparia, including the irmoi.  
ODE I 
Canon I of the Dormition, the acrostic whereof is: 
 “Let the divinely wise hold festival” 
The composition of Cosmas of Maiuma, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Thy sacred and glorious memory, * supremely adorned with divine 
glory, O Virgin, * hath gathered all the faithful in gladness, * and led by 
Miriam with choirs and timbrels, * hymn thine only-begotten Son, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Let the immaterial ranks accompany thy divine and immaterial body to Sion. For 
the multitude of the apostles, coming together of a sudden from the ends of the 
earth, stood before thee, O Theotokos; With them we also glorify thine honored 
memory, O pure one.  
The honors of victory over nature hast thou taken, having given birth unto God, 
O pure one; yet, emulating thy Creator and Son, thou didst submit to the laws of 
nature in a supra-natural manner. Wherefore, having died, thou didst arise with thy 
Son unto everlasting life.  
Canon II of the Dormition, the composition of John of Damascus, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her dormition. 
O virgin maidens, with Miriam the prophetess raise ye now a hymn of parting! For 
she who alone is Virgin and Mother of God is translated and received into heaven.  
The divine mansions of heaven received thee as an animate heaven, as is meet, O 
most pure one; and thou hast taken thy place as a bride, splendidly adorned, before 
thy King and God, O all-immaculate one.  
Katavasia: The right choir chanteth the Irmos of Canon I, and the left choir that of 
Canon II.  
ODE III  
Canon I  
Irmos: Thou art the creative and almighty Wisdom, * and the Power of God, * 
do Thou establish the Church immovable and unshaken, O Christ; * for Thou 
alone art holy * Who restest in the saints.  
The glorious apostles, seeing thee to be a mortal woman, yet, in a manner 
transcending nature, the Mother of God, O all-immaculate one, with awe touched 
with their hands, thee who art resplendent in glory, perceiving thee to be a habitation 
acceptable to God.  
When God preserved with the glory of His divinity the honor of the animate ark 
wherein the Word becameth flesh, the judgment of retribution overtook the insolent 
one through the severing of his audacious hands.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Having issued forth from a mortal womb, O pure one, thou didst receive an end 
conforming to nature; but, having given birth unto Him Who is Life, Thou hast been 
translated to the divine and hypostatic Life.  
At the behest of the Almighty, the choir of theologians journeyed from the ends of 
the earth, and multitudes of angels came from on high to Sion, to minister at thy 
burial as was meet, O Lady.  
The Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
All of us, the generations of mankind, bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos; for Christ 
our God, Who is infinite, was well-pleased to be contained within thee. Blessed are 
we to enjoy thine intercession; for thou prayest for us day and night, and by thy 
supplications the scepters of kingdoms are made steadfast. Wherefore, chanting, we 
cry aloud to thee: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord is with thee!  
ODE IV  
Canon I  
Irmos: The sayings and imagery of the prophets * revealed Thine incarnation 
from the Virgin, O Christ. * The splendor of Thine effulgence * hath gone 
forth unto the enlightenment of the nations * and the abyss gaveth forth its 
voice to Thee with gladness: * Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind.  
Behold, O ye people, and marvel, for the holy and openly manifest mountain of 
God is exalted on high to the mansions of heaven: the earthly heaven becometh a 
celestial and incorrupt habitation.  
Thy death hath become a passage to an everlasting and better life, O pure one, 
translating thee from transitory life to that which is truly divine and eternal, that thou 
mightest behold thy Son and Lord in gladness, O pure one.  
The gates of heaven were raised and the angelic choirs chanted; and Christ 
received the vessel of His Mother’s virginity. The cherubim lifted her up with 
gladness, and the seraphim glorify her, rejoicing.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
A wonder was it to see the animate heaven of the King of all, which surpasseth the 
barren places of the earth. How wondrous are Thy works! Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
If her unapproachable Fruit, through Whom the heavens arose, chose of His own 
will to accept burial as a mortal, how can she, who gaveth birth to Him without 
knowing wedlock, refuse burial?  

--- PAGE 11 ---
At thy repose, O Mother of God, with trembling and joy the armies of the angels 
covered with their sacred wings thy most spacious body, which had held God.  
ODE V  
Canon I  
Irmos: The divine and ineffable goodness of Thy virtues, * do we confess O 
Christ; * for having shone forth from the pre-eternal glory * as the co-eternal 
and hypostatic Effulgence, * incarnate from the Virgin’s womb, * Thou hast 
shone forth as the Sun * upon those in the darkness and shadows.  
The choir of the apostles assembled, borne as on a cloud to Sion from the ends of 
the earth, to serve thee, the cloud of light through whom God Most High, the Sun of 
righteousness, hath shone forth upon those who are in the darkness and shadows.  
More harmonious than trumpets, the God-pleasing tongues of the theologizing 
men sounded forth to the Theotokos, playing a funeral hymn inspired by the Spirit: 
Rejoice, O incorrupt fountain of God’s life-creating incarnation which saveth all!  
Canon II  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thine honored dormition; * for thou, O 
Virgin who hast not known wedlock, * hast passed from earth to the 
everlasting mansions; * and to never-ending life, * bestowing salvation unto all 
who hymn thee. 
Let the trumpets of the theologians sound forth today, and let the eloquent 
tongues of men now render praise; let the air resound, shining with boundless light, 
and let the angels hymn the dormition of the most pure Virgin.  
It was fitting for thee, O all-praised Virgin Theotokos, to be the chosen vessel, 
which is wholly marveled at in hymnody at thy departure, wholly consecrated to God, 
divinely pleasing unto all, and truly shown to be such.  
ODE VI 
Canon I  
Irmos: The inner fire of the whale * born in the depths of the sea, * was a 
prefiguring of Thy three-day burial, * of which Jonah showed himself to be a 
prophet, * having been delivered before being sent forth unharmed, crying: * I 
will sacrifice to Thee * with a voice of praise, O Lord!  
God, the King of all, giveth thee that which transcendeth nature; for, as He kept 
thee a virgin during thy birthgiving, so did He preserve thy body untouched by 
corruption in the tomb; and He glorified thee with Himself by a divine translation, 
rendering thee honor as a Son to His Mother.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Truly, O Virgin, thine Offspring set thee in the Holy of Holies as the splendid 
candlestick of the immaterial Light, the golden censer of the divine Ember, the jar 
and the staff, the divinely inscribed tablet, the holy ark, the table of the Word of life.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
For thee Life shone forth, leaving intact the seal of thy virginity, how, therefore, 
hast thy most pure and life-giving body been permitted to be tempted by death?  
As the temple of Life, thou didst attain life everlasting; for, having given birth to 
the hypostatic Life, thou didst pass through death on to life.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II:  
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
Ikos: Guard my thoughts, O my Christ, for I make bold to hymn the bulwark of 
the world, Thy pure Mother. Establish me firmly in the bastion of my words, and 
help me in the midst of difficult thoughts; for Thou fulfillest the entreaties of those 
who cry out and ask with faith. Wherefore, grant unto me a deft tongue and a ready 
mind, for every good deed of enlightenment cometh down from Thee, O Bestower 
of light, Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
ODE VII  
Canon I  
Irmos: Divine desire, opposing the rage and fire * of the shameless one, * 
bedewed the fire and put his rage to shame, * countering the musical 
instruments * with the divinely inspired sound of the three-stringed harp * of 
the venerable ones in the midst of the flame. * Blessed art Thou, O supremely 
glorious God of us and our fathers!  
Enraged, Moses smashed the divinely wrought tablets which had been inscribed by 
the divine Spirit; but the Master, preserving unharmed her who gaveth birth to Him, 
hath now caused her to dwell in the mansions of heaven. Celebrating with her, let us 
cry out to Christ: O supremely glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
On the cymbals of pure lips, with the music of a radiant heart, on the high-
sounding trumpet of exalted thought, clapping our diligent hands on the renowned 
and chosen day of the repose of the pure Virgin, let us cry aloud: O supremely 
glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Gather ye together, O divinely wise people, for the dwelling-place of the glory of 
God is translated from Sion to the habitation of heaven, where is the pure voice of 
those who keep festival, the voice of the unutterable rejoicing of those who cry out to 
Christ in gladness: O supremely glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon II 
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Honoring the memory of the Mother of God, O youths and virgins, elders and 
princes, kings and judges, chant ye: O Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Let the mountains of heaven sound the trumpet of the Spirit! Let the hills rejoice 
and the divine apostles dance! The Queen passeth over to her Son, reigning with 
Him!  
The most sacred repose of Thy divine and incorrupt Mother hath united the 
celestial ranks of the exalted hosts to rejoice with those on earth, chanting unto Thee: 
Blessed art Thou, O God!  
ODE VIII  
Canon I  
Irmos: The flame which bedewed the venerable children, * but utterly 
consumed the ungodly, * did the almighty Angel of God reveal to them; * and 
He rendered the Theotokos a life-creating well-spring * pouring forth 
destruction for death but life for those who chant: * O ye who have been 
delivered, * let us hymn and supremely exalt the only Creator * throughout all 
ages!  
With discourses the whole multitude of theologians accompanied the sacred coffin 
of the Theotokos in Sion, exclaiming: Whither goest thou, O tabernacle of the living 
God? Cease not to regard those who chant with faith: O ye who have been delivered, 
let us hymn and supremely exalt the only Creator throughout all ages!  
Thou goest forth, O all-immaculate one, lifting up thine hands, the hands 
wherewith thou didst bear God in the flesh; and as a Mother didst boldly say to Him 
Who was born of thee: Preserve Thou forever those whom Thou hast given to me, 
and who cry out to Thee: O ye who have been delivered, let us hymn and supremely 
exalt the only Creator throughout all ages!  
Canon II 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
The principalities, authorities and powers, the angels, archangels, thrones, 
dominions, the cherubim and the dread seraphim, glorify thy memory, O pure Virgin; 
and we, the race of mankind, hymn and supremely exalt it throughout all ages.  
He Who, in a strange manner, made His abode, incarnate, within thy pure womb, 
O Theotokos, receiveth thy most sacred spirit and, as thy Son and One in thy debt, 
hath given it rest by His side. Wherefore, we hymn and supremely exalt thee 
throughout all ages, O Virgin.  
O the wonders of the Ever-virgin and Mother of God, which surpass 
understanding! For, taking up her abode in the grave, she hath shown it to be 
paradise; and standing before it today, rejoicing, we chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
We do not chant the Magnificat before ODE IX, but sing the refrain (s) of the feast:  
Refrain I: All of us, the generation of mortals, bless thee, the only Theotokos.  
Or, Refrain I: Beholding the Dormition of the most pure one, the angels were 
amazed that the Virgin ascended from earth to heaven.  
And thereafter the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I. The second choir chanteth the 
same refrain and Irmos. And at each Troparion of the canons the chosen refrain is 
chanted.  
ODE IX  
Canon I  
Irmos: In thee, O pure Virgin, have the laws of nature * been overcome: * for 
thy birthgiving remaineth virginal * and thy life is betrothed unto death; * and 
remaining a Virgin after giving birth * and alive after dying, O Theotokos, * 
thou dost ever save thine inheritance.  
The angelic hosts were amazed, seeing their Master in Sion, bearing in His arms a 
woman’s soul; for as befitteth a Son, He exclaimed to her in a most pure manner: 
Come, O pure one, and be glorified with thy Son and God!  
The choir of angels buried thy body, which had received God, gazing upon it with 
fear, and exclaiming with a loud voice: O Theotokos who ascendest to thy Son in the 
heavenly mansions, thou ever savest thine inheritance!  
Canon II  
Refrain II: Magnify, O my soul, the honored passing of the Mother of God 
from earth to heaven.  
And then the Irmos of Canon II.  
The refrain is chanted before each of the Troparia of Canon II  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the repose of 
the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Come ye to Sion, the divine and fertile mountain of the living God, and let us 
behold the Theotokos; for Christ hath translated her, as His Mother, to the Holy of 
Holies of a far better and divine tabernacle.  
Come, ye faithful, let us approach the tomb of the Mother of God and kiss it with 
hearts and lips, touching to it your eyes and faces, and drawing gifts of abundant 
healings from the ever-flowing fountain.  
Accept from us a hymn of parting, O Mother of the living God, and with thy light-
bearing and divine grace overshadow us, granting victory to Orthodox hierarchs over 
heresies, and forgiveness to all Christian people who hymn thee, and salvation to their 
souls.  
Then both choirs, having descended together, chant the refrain of Canon I and its 
Irmos, and the refrain of Canon II and its Irmos. Prostration.  
Refrain I: All of us, the generation of men, bless thee, the only Theotokos.  
Katavasia I: In thee are the laws of nature overcome, * O pure Virgin, * for 
birthgiving is virginal * and death is betrothed to life. * For after giving birth 
thou didst remain a Virgin, * and after death thou didst remain alive, * O 
Theotokos, do thou ever save thine inheritance.  
Refrain II: Magnify, O my soul, the honored passing of the Mother of God 
from earth to heaven.  
Katavasia II: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap 
for joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
repose of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”:  
O ye apostles, having gathered here from the ends of the earth, bury my body in 
the Garden of Gethsemane. And do Thou, O my Son and God, receive my spirit! 
(Thrice) 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
The heavens rejoice * in thy glorious dormition, * the armies of the angels are jubi-
lant, * and all the earth is glad, * giving utterance unto a parting hymn for thee, * the 
Mother of Him Who is Master over all, * O most holy Virgin who knewest not 
wedlock, * and who hast delivered the human race ** from its ancestral 
condemnation. (Twice)  
At the behest of God * the foremost among the apostles * hastened from the ends 
of the earth to bury thee; * and beholding thee taken upon high from the earth, * with 
joy they cried to thee the words of Gabriel: * Rejoice, O chariot of Him * Who is 
God over all! * Rejoice, O thou who alone hast joined together ** those on earth with 
those in heaven.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
O thou who hast given birth to Life, * by thine honored dormition * thou hast 
passed over to immortal life, * the angels escorting thee, * the principalities and 
powers, * the apostles and prophets, * and all creation, as thine immaculate soul * was 
taken into the incorrupt hands of thy Son, ** O Virgin Mother, Bride of God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
O Theotokos, Mother of Life, the apostles, who were scattered throughout the 
world, were caught up in the air by clouds and borne to thy dormition; and in a single 
choir they stood before thy most holy body; and, burying it with honor, they sang, 
chanting to thee the cry of Gabriel: Rejoice, thou who art full of grace, Virgin Mother 
unwedded, the Lord is with thee, with them entreat thou thy Son and our God, that 
our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I, and 4 from ODE VI 
of Canon II.  
The glorious apostles, seeing thee to be a mortal woman, yet, in a manner 
transcending nature, the Mother of God, O all-immaculate one, with awe touched 
with their hands, thee who art resplendent in glory, perceiving thee to be a habitation 
acceptable to God. (Twice) 
When God preserved with the glory of His divinity the honor of the animate ark 
wherein the Word becameth flesh, the judgment of retribution overtook the insolent 
one through the severing of his audacious hands. (Twice) 
For thee Life shone forth, leaving intact the seal of thy virginity, how, therefore, 
hast thy most pure and life-giving body been permitted to be tempted by death? 
(Twice) 
As the temple of Life, thou didst attain life everlasting; for, having given birth to 
the hypostatic Life, thou didst pass through death on to life. (Twice) 
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II:  
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: The Hymn of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS, § 240 (PHIL. 2: 5-11)  
Brethren: Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who, being in 
the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made Himself of 
no reputation, and took upon Himself the form of a servant, and was made in the 
likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, and 
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath 

--- PAGE 18 ---
highly exalted Him, and given Him a name which is above every name: that at the 
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and 
things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, 
to the glory of God the Father.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy 
holiness.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, and He will not annul it.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 54 (LK. 1: 38-42; II: 27-28)  
At that time, Jesus entered into a certain village: and a certain woman named 
Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat 
at Jesus’ feet, and heard His word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, 
and came to Him, and said, Lord, dost Thou not care that my sister hath left me to 
serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me. And Jesus answered and said unto 
her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing 
is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from 
her. And it came to pass, as He spoke these things, a certain woman of the company 
lifted up her voice, and said unto Him, Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the 
paps which Thou hast sucked. But He said, Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the 
word of God, and keep it.  
 
NOTE: Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant, in Tone I, the Irmos of ODE IX 
of Canon I, and we continue to do so until the leave-taking of the feast:  
Refrain I: All of us, the generation of men, bless thee, the only Theotokos.  
Irmos I: In thee are the laws of nature overcome, * O pure Virgin, * for 
birthgiving is virginal * and death is betrothed to life. * For after giving birth 
thou didst remain a Virgin, * and after death thou didst remain alive, * O 
Theotokos, do thou ever save thine inheritance.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
 
 
