--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 17th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST 
 AFTERFEAST OF THE DORMITION OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR MYRON  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 for the feast, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
Having conceived Life, O Theotokos, * thou didst repose in accordance with the 
law of nature * and pass over from earth to the heavens * at the behest of Him Who 
was incarnate * of thy most pure and divine blood. * Wherefore, the apostles of godly 
eloquence came from all the ends of the earth * and stood before thee to bury thee, * 
exclaiming to thee in hymnody: * Rejoice, O animate throne of the King of all * and 
precious ark of His holy place! ** Rejoice, O thou who alone hast given birth to the 
Savior of our souls!  
When the apostles of the Savior, * the habitations of the most pure Light, * the 
beacons dispelling the night of polytheism, * learned through the Spirit that thou, O 
blessed one, * the divine cloud * from whence the unwaning Light shone forth, * 
wast to be translated from among the things of this earth * to transcendent joy, * they 
arrived on clouds, * conducting thee to the life-bearing tomb ** with songs of 
parting, O Theotokos, our hope.  
Let creation hold festival in supplication! * The Queen of all * hath passed over to 
the noetic kingdom * to reign with Him Who reigneth * over all creation. * Because 
of her the kingdom of Hades hath been destroyed, * and we have been borne up 
from the earth * and deemed worthy to dwell with the angels. * For her dormition 
hath all noetic nature come together: * patriarchs and prophets, ** the apostles and 
martyrs.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
When the immolation * wrought by the godless * was consuming every land, O 
blessed one, * then wast thou set afire by the fervor of the Spirit, * and preached the 
Word Who, in His goodness, * wrapped Himself in flesh * taken from the divine 
Virgin Maiden. * Wherefore, strengthened by the power of grace, ** thou didst 
endure fire, torments and cruel persecutions.  
When the ignominious foe * strove with enticements * to sway thee from thine 
intention, * then, adorned with courage, * thou didst oppose him steadfastly, * and 
endured the pangs * which brought thee to a rest without pain, * to the kingdom of 
heaven and everlasting delight, ** O right laudable martyr Myron.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
When the enemy flogged thee with thongs of hide, * laying waste thy sacred flesh * 
with continuous lashings, O martyr, * thou didst direct thy gaze unto Christ, * the 
Judge of the contest, * who stretched forth unto thee His hand of divine power. * 
Wherefore, having finished the race, * thou hast received great honors, ** O most 
valiant spiritual athlete Myron.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II:  
As she was more exalted than the heavens, more glorious than the cherubim and 
higher in honor than all creation, and in her exceeding purity becameth the dwelling-
place of the ever-existent Essence, she surrendereth her most holy soul into the hands 
of her Son today. By her are all things filled with joy; and He granteth us great mercy.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Accompanying with hymns * thy precious body * which was acceptable unto God, 
* the divine apostles cried aloud: ** Whither goest thou now, O Lady?  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
Come, O ye who are born of earth, * let us form a chorus, * chanting hymns * of 
parting, at the repose ** of the Theotokos today.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
The earth was blessed * by thy burial, O Virgin; * and the air was sanctified * by 
thy strange ascent, ** when thou didst die according to the law of nature.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II:  
The all-immaculate Bride and Mother of Him in Whom the Father was well-
pleased, who was foreordained by God to be the habitation of His uncommingled 
Union, doth commit her all-pure soul to God the Creator. Her do the hosts of the 
incorporeal ones bear aloft, and she passeth over to life, in that she is the Mother of 
the Life, the light of the Light unapproachable, the salvation of the faithful and the 
hope of our souls.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death. (Thrice)  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in tone III: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
Thy soul dwelleth among the noetic beings of heaven, O most immaculate one, 
and thy precious body hath passed over to paradise, away from corruption, to a place 
of light. Thus, let the Lord recompense the iniquitous, for they have spoken 
falsehoods against thine honored body. Therefore, with the apostles we cry aloud: 
Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Having surrendered thy soul into the hands of thy Creator and God, Who for our 
sake became incarnate of thee, thou didst pass over to life incorruptible. Wherefore, 
with honor we all call thee blessed who alone art pure and unblemished; and 
confessing thee to be the Theotokos, we cry aloud: Entreat Christ, to Whom thou 
hast passed over, to save our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, with 8 Troparia, including its Irmos:  
The composition of John of Damascus. In Tone IV: 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her dormition. 
O virgin maidens, with Miriam the prophetess raise ye now a hymn of parting! For 
she who alone is Virgin and Mother of God is translated and received into heaven.  
The divine mansions of heaven received thee as an animate heaven, as is meet, O 
most pure one; and thou hast taken thy place as a bride, splendidly adorned, before 
thy King and God, O all-immaculate one.  
Canon of the holy martyr, with 4 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I hymn thy grace redolent of myrrh, O Myron” 

--- PAGE 4 ---
The composition of Joseph, in Tone II: 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Joining chorus today in memory of the spiritual athlete Myron, let us offer praise 
unto God Who bestowed upon him the strength to destroy the might of the enemy.  
Suffering under the law, O most suffering martyr, thou didst offer thyself to the 
Benefactor as a gift, a sacred oblation, a goodly victim, a sacrifice of sweet savor.  
As one wise, as a pure temple of Him Who shone forth from the Virgin, O 
glorious one, thou didst drive away the soul-destroying wolf who tried to harass the 
flock of God.  
Theotokion: The passion-bearing martyrs set delusion at naught, confessing God 
Who became like unto us and to Whom thou alone hast given birth without knowing 
wedlock, O pure Sovereign Lady.  
ODE III 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Having issued forth from a mortal womb, O pure one, thou didst receive an end 
conforming to nature; but, having given birth unto Him Who is Life, Thou hast been 
translated to the divine and hypostatic Life.  
At the behest of the Almighty, the choir of theologians journeyed from the ends of 
the earth, and multitudes of angels came from on high to Sion, to minister at thy 
burial as was meet, O Lady.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
Having lifted the desire of thy heart up to the Lord Who was lifted up upon the 
Cross, O most glorious one, lacerated on the tree thou wast exalted, crying out with 
fervor: There is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!  
With the keen darts of thy words thou didst pierce the heart of the tyrant, O 
valiant and all-praised warrior of Christ the King; and, chanting, thou didst say: There 
is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Shining forth like the dawn, like the morn thou hast dispelled the gloom of 
ignorance, O much-suffering Myron, enlightening those who ever chant: Thou art our 
God, and there is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Having given birth unto the Healer, O Virgin, thou hast most 
gloriously healed all creation, which is sickened with ungodliness. Wherefore, 
rendering thanks, we cry out to thee: There is none more pure than thee, O Lady!  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up on the Cross ...”: 
Having loved Christ from childhood * and having observed His divine 
commandments, O most glorious one, * thou didst wholly make haste to Him, O 
most honorable Myron, * and dost pray earnestly with the angels. ** Ask for the 
forgiveness of sins of those who honor thy memory.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Thou wast shown to be a sweet fragrance and fiery of spirit, O adornment of 
martyrs and ornament of the faithful; and, in accordance with thy name, thou dost 
render our hearts redolent by thy suffering. Wherefore, celebrating thy most holy 
memory today, all of us who honor thee are hallowed with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
The most honorable choir of the most wise apostles was gathered together 
miraculously to bury thy most pure body gloriously, O all-hymned Theotokos. With 
them a multitude of the angels sang, with honor praising thy repose which we 
celebrate with faith.  
ODE IV 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
A wonder was it to see the animate heaven of the King of all, which surpasseth the 
barren places of the earth. How wondrous are Thy works! Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
If her unapproachable Fruit, through Whom the heavens arose, chose of His own 
will to accept burial as a mortal, how can she, who gaveth birth to Him without 
knowing wedlock, refuse burial?  
At thy repose, O Mother of God, with trembling and joy the armies of the angels 
covered with their sacred wings thy most spacious body, which had held God.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.  
Confessing the Savior, God and Lord, Who shone forth from the Virgin, O 
glorious one, in the midst of the tribunal, with thine endurance thou didst humble the 
insolence of the tyrants, setting polytheism at naught.  
Lacerated and beaten, O thou of valiant mind, thou wast not afraid, and thus didst 
astonish the angels who beheld thine endurance. And destroying the incorporeal foe 
therewith, thou wast shown to be a victorious martyr.  
Full of divine dew, with valiant mind thou didst pass through the fiery furnace, and 
wast seen therein rejoicing with the angels, O wise and blessed Myron, and in nowise 
consumed.  
Theotokion: The great and awesome mystery of thy birthgiving doth astonish the 
heavenly intelligences, O pure one; for in His goodness, God was pleased to become 
incarnate through thee, for the salvation and establishment of the world.  
ODE V 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thine honored dormition; * for thou, O 
Virgin who hast not known wedlock, * hast passed from earth to the 
everlasting mansions; * and to never-ending life, * bestowing salvation unto all 
who hymn thee. 
Let the trumpets of the theologians sound forth today, and let the eloquent 
tongues of men now render praise; let the air resound, shining with boundless light, 
and let the angels hymn the dormition of the most pure Virgin.  
It was fitting for thee, O all-praised Virgin Theotokos, to be the chosen vessel, 
which is wholly marveled at in hymnody at thy departure, wholly consecrated to God, 
divinely pleasing unto all, and truly shown to be such.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
Thy divinely radiant and light-bearing memory, which, through the power of the 
Holy Spirit, hath spread throughout the world, hath illumined with the light of piety 
those who honor it and proclaim thy valiant deeds. 
 As if one without a body didst thou undergo bitter persecution in thy youth, O 
courageous martyr; for, manifestly strengthened by invisible power, thou didst endure 
the flaying of thy skin, as though it was not thee, but another who was suffering, O 
glorious one.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thy fragrant myrrh hath poured forth in drops upon our sores, O martyr, 
dispelling all the stench of ungodliness, and ever perfuming the Holy Church of 
Christ, which manifestly blesseth thee with faith and love.  
Theotokion: O blessed and most pure one, on our behalf entreat Him Who 
ineffably became incarnate from thee, that those who ever confess thee to be the 
Theotokos may be delivered from all enemies, visible and invisible, O all-immaculate 
one.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
For thee Life shone forth, leaving intact the seal of thy virginity, how, therefore, 
hast thy most pure and life-giving body been permitted to be tempted by death?  
As the temple of Life, thou didst attain life everlasting; for, having given birth to 
the hypostatic Life, thou didst pass through death on to life.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: From within the sea monster Jonah cried unto the Lord: * “Lead me up 
from the abyss of Hades, I pray Thee; * for with a voice of praise as to my 
Redeemer, * in the spirit of truth * I offer myself to Thee.”  
With the sprinkling of thy sacred blood thou didst drown legions of the demons, 
O valiant warrior; and, wearing thy wreath as an exemplary victor, thou didst hasten 
to God.  
Seeing thy countenance illumined with divine splendor, O passion-bearer, the 
tyrants were amazed; but, refusing to acknowledge God, they chose the darkness 
instead, and have been sent into eternal torment.  
At the command of the cruel tormenter, in a manner surpassing human nature 
thou didst endure the flaying of thy skin, O right laudable one, showing thy pure 
desire for God and thine unwavering gaze toward Him.  
Theotokion: The laws of nature are renewed in thee, O Virgin; for, in a manner 
surpassing nature, and for our regeneration, thou hast given birth most gloriously 
unto God-Emmanuel, Who is unapproachable in His nature.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II:  
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Ikos: Guard my thoughts, O my Christ, for I make bold to hymn the bulwark of 
the world, Thy pure Mother. Establish me firmly in the bastion of my words, and 
help me in the midst of difficult thoughts; for Thou fulfillest the entreaties of those 
who cry out and ask with faith. Wherefore, grant unto me a deft tongue and a ready 
mind, for every good deed of enlightenment cometh down from Thee, O Bestower 
of light, Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Honoring the memory of the Mother of God, O youths and virgins, elders and 
princes, kings and judges, chant ye: O Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Let the mountains of heaven sound the trumpet of the Spirit! Let the hills rejoice 
and the divine apostles dance! The Queen passeth over to her Son, reigning with 
Him!  
The most sacred repose of Thy divine and incorrupt Mother hath united the 
celestial ranks of the exalted hosts to rejoice with those on earth, chanting unto Thee: 
Blessed art Thou, O God!  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Seeing thee standing in the flame amongst angels, thy countenance shining with 
ineffable light, O wise one, those who looked on marveled and, moved to hymnody, 
they chanted to the Master: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Standing with the angelic intelligences in the midst of the furnace with a pure 
mind, rejoicing thou didst hymn the supremely good Lord as the One Who bridled 
the flame and saved thee who chanted: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O most pure virgin, thou hast been revealed to be the dwelling-place 
and beauteous palace of God, and the divine throne whereon He sat and prepared for 
all a seat in heaven. Wherefore, we cry aloud: Blessed art thou who hast given birth 
unto God in the flesh!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
The principalities, authorities and powers, the angels, archangels, thrones, 
dominions, the cherubim and the dread seraphim, glorify thy memory, O pure Virgin; 
and we, the race of mankind, hymn and supremely exalt it throughout all ages.  
He Who, in a strange manner, made His abode, incarnate, within thy pure womb, 
O Theotokos, receiveth thy most sacred spirit and, as thy Son and One in thy debt, 
hath given it rest by His side. Wherefore, we hymn and supremely exalt thee 
throughout all ages, O Virgin.  
O the wonders of the Ever-virgin and Mother of God, which surpass 
understanding! For, taking up her abode in the grave, she hath shown it to be 
paradise; and standing before it today, rejoicing, we chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Of old in the furnace of the holy children, * Thou didst prefigure Thy 
Mother, O Lord, * in the image of those who entered therein, * and rescued 
therefrom remained unconsumed. * Her who hath been revealed today do we 
hymn * unto the ends of the earth, * supremely exalting her throughout all 
ages.  
Beholding thee unvanquished, O thou of courageous mind, when they were 
cutting strips of thy flesh down to the very bone, the mindless tormenter ordered that 
yet another torture be added: that thou be lacerated with claws of iron, afflicting thee 
incurably with unbearable wounds.  
In the hearing of all the people, O glorious martyr Myron, the voice of God was 
borne to thee, summoning thee to the ineffable places of rest and the beauteous 
choirs of the angels in heaven.  
Like Daniel, thou didst stand in the midst of wild beasts which stood in awe of thy 
blessed suffering, and the immeasurable magnitude of thy struggles, O most blessed 
one, and which were obedient to thy voice.  
Theotokion: Pierced by the arrow of the enemy, I have utterly wounded my soul 
and suffer incurably. As thou art she who gaveth birth to Christ the Savior, O most 
immaculate one, heal and save me, thou hope of the hopeless.  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the repose of 
the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Come ye to Sion, the divine and fertile mountain of the living God, and let us 
behold the Theotokos; for Christ hath translated her, as His Mother, to the Holy of 
Holies of a far better and divine tabernacle.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Come, ye faithful, let us approach the tomb of the Mother of God and kiss it with 
hearts and lips, touching to it your eyes and faces, and drawing gifts of abundant 
healings from the ever-flowing fountain.  
Accept from us a hymn of parting, O Mother of the living God, and with thy light-
bearing and divine grace overshadow us, granting victory to Orthodox hierarchs over 
heresies, and forgiveness to all Christian people who hymn thee, and salvation to their 
souls.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
That thou mightest be deemed worthy to behold the future glory and ineffable 
comeliness of Christ the Judge of the contest, O valiant one, thou didst bow thy neck 
and accept beheading with the sword; filling the divine legions of the martyrs with 
joy.  
Thy right praiseworthy memory, like a sweet-smelling myrrh perfuming the hearts 
of the faithful, hath dawned for those who desire it; by thy supplications fill us with 
divine fragrance, who celebrate thereon, O right laudable Myron.  
Achaia boasteth in thy swaddling bands and sufferings, O valiant spiritual athlete 
of Christ; and Cyzicus is greatly adorned, possessing thy much-suffering body as a 
veritable treasure, a well-spring of healings and a cure purging away illness.  
The beauteous Church, the noetic Sion, Mother of cities, elect of all that is holy in 
the highest, as it is written, hath thee as eminent among the martyrs, who as a martyr 
dost pray on our behalf.  
Theotokion: O virgin, thou palace and throne of God, we all cry out to thee with 
the voice of the angel: Rejoice, thou through whom we, who of old were rejected 
because of corruption and foolishly ruined our pristine beauty, have been deemed 
worthy of the kingdom of heaven.  
Exapostilarion of the feast:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the disciples beheld ...”: 
Though thou hast passed over from earth to heaven, forsake not thine inheritance, 
O pure one: make firm the rule of our land; subdue the nations, and pour forth peace 
upon the ends of the world.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Following the words of the divine Gabriel, we cry to thee: Rejoice, O pure one! 
Wherefore, O most holy Mother of the Lord, having passed over to Him, be thou 
mindful of those who hymn thee.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
The infinite Wisdom of God in a manner past understanding, through the Holy 
spirit made of thee a temple for Himself, O Theotokos. And now He hath translated 
thee to the immaterial mansions of heaven, O most hymned one.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
A slave, I come to thee, the Mother of the God of all, begging to be delivered from 
all perils. O Birthgiver of God, who reignest with thy Son, preserve thou the Christian 
race.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone III: 
Come, all ye ends of the earth, let us praise the honored translation of the Mother 
of God; for she hath placed her immaculate soul in the hands of her Son. Wherefore, 
the world hath been given life through her holy dormition; and in psalms, hymns and 
spiritual songs doth it celebrate splendidly with the incorporeal hosts and the apostles.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia: from ODE III of both canons of the Dormition, 
with their Irmoi. 
Thou art the creative and almighty Wisdom, and the Power of God, do Thou 
establish the Church immovable and unshaken, O Christ; for Thou alone art holy 
Who restest in the saints.  
The glorious apostles, seeing thee to be a mortal woman, yet, in a manner 
transcending nature, the Mother of God, O all-immaculate one, with awe touched 
with their hands, thee who art resplendent in glory, perceiving thee to be a habitation 
acceptable to God.  
When God preserved with the glory of His divinity the honor of the animate ark 
wherein the Word becameth flesh, the judgment of retribution overtook the insolent 
one through the severing of his audacious hands.  
O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, grant strength to those united in 
spiritual fellowship, who sing hymns of praise to thee: and in thy divine glory grant 
unto them crowns of glory.  
Having issued forth from a mortal womb, O pure one, thou didst receive an end 
conforming to nature; but, having given birth unto Him Who is Life, Thou hast been 
translated to the divine and hypostatic Life.  
At the behest of the Almighty, the choir of theologians journeyed from the ends of 
the earth, and multitudes of angels came from on high to Sion, to minister at thy 
burial as was meet, O Lady.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Having loved Christ from childhood * and having observed His divine 
commandments, O most glorious one, * thou didst wholly make haste to Him, O 
most honorable Myron, * and dost pray earnestly with the angels. ** Ask for the 
forgiveness of sins of those who honor thy memory.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II:  
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
 
NOTE: Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant, in Tone I, the Irmos of ODE IX 
of Canon I, and we continue to do so until the leave-taking of the feast:  
Refrain I: All of us, the generation of men, bless thee, the only Theotokos.  
Irmos I: In thee are the laws of nature overcome, * O pure Virgin, * for 
birthgiving is virginal * and death is betrothed to life. * For after giving birth 
thou didst remain a Virgin, * and after death thou didst remain alive, * O 
Theotokos, do thou ever save thine inheritance.  
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
 
 
