--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 10th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
AFTERFEAST OF THE TRANSFIGURATION OF THE LORD  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR & ARCHDEACON LAURENCE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast granted a sign ...”: 
Thou hast shone forth today * in manifest splendor on Mount Tabor * like the 
radiant sun, * O Savior, Thou Word of the Father, * showing Thy friends that Thou 
art He Who in His tender compassion * didst assume human nature, O Christ. * 
Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving dispensation, * O almighty Jesus, ** Thou Savior of 
our souls.  
Today the angels of heaven rejoice with mankind, * celebrating Thy glorious 
effulgence, O Christ, * and Thine appearance upon Mount Tabor, * whereon Thou 
didst stand * in the presence of Moses and Elijah, * and Peter, James and John, * who 
hymned Thee, O Christ the Lover of mankind, * almighty Jesus, ** Thou Savior of 
our souls.  
Let all the worldly and supra-natural orders * now be moved to praise * Christ our 
God * Who hath dominion over both the living and the dead; * for, divinely 
transfigured, * He stood on Tabor * in the presence of the first heralds of the law and 
grace, * as He, the Savior of our souls, ** was well pleased to do.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Having served the Word blamelessly, O venerable one, * thou wast offered unto 
the Lord as a sacrifice of sweet savor, * consumed by material fire; * wherefore thou 
hast been deemed worthy of the joy of heaven, ** where thou dost ever pray on 
behalf of those who honor thee, O Laurence.  
Having laid thyself up as a treasure for the Lord * and submitted to His words, * 
O divinely blessed one, * thou didst richly distribute inviolate wealth unto the poor, * 
O wise martyr, ** wisely and wondrously enduring torments.  
Let Laurence now be splendidly praised: * the beauty of the martyrs, * the glorious 
and wondrous warrior, * the well-spring of miracles, * the helper of the oppressed, ** 
the star of great radiance, the sacred martyr.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV:  
Before Thy crucifixion, O Lord, the mountain emulated the heavens and the cloud 
spread itself out like a tabernacle when Thou wast transfigured and borne witness to 
by the Father. There were Peter, James and John, for they were to be with Thee also 
at the time of Thy betrayal, that, beholding Thy wonders, they might not be afraid of 
Thy sufferings, which do Thou grant that we may venerate in peace, for the sake of 
Thy great mercy.  
Aposticha Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Ineffably hath the Lord * shown forth the glory * of His divinity * on Mount 
Tabor ** unto those disciples whom He wished.  
Verse: Thine are the heavens, * and Thine is the earth.  
Come ye, * let us make haste with the disciples * to the heights of the virtues, * 
that with them ** we too may be counted worthy of grace.  
Verse: Tabor and Hermon * shall rejoice in Thy name.  
O all ye born of earth, * let us cleanse our hearts, * that straightway there may 
come unto us * the glory of the grace ** of the threefold Sun.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
Taking the disciples up upon the lofty mountain before Thy crucifixion, O Lord, 
Thou wast transfigured before them, illumining them with the effulgence of power, 
desiring both in Thy love for mankind and in Thine authority to show them the 
splendor of the resurrection, which do thou grant unto us in peace, in that Thou art 
merciful and the Lover of mankind.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Laurence O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion of the feast, in Tone VII:  
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord”, the Troparion of the feast, in Tone VII:  
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. (Twice); 
 Glory ..., the Troparion of the  
holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Laurence O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Both now ..., the Troparion of the feast, once.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Thou wast transfigured on Mount Tabor, O Jesus, and a radiant cloud, stretching 
forth like a shadow, covered the apostles with glory. Wherefore, they fell face down 
upon the ground, unable to bear the sight of the splendor of the unapproachable 
glory of Thy countenance, O beginningless Savior. O Christ our God, Who then 
shone forth Thy light upon them, illumine Thou our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Transfigured in the unapproachable glory of Thy divine light, O Christ, Thou didst 
illumine Thy godly disciples, John, Peter and James, moving them to awe by Thy 
divine grace. And they heard the voice of the Father bearing witness unto Thee as His 
beloved Son, and beheld the glory of Thy countenance, O Savior. O Word Who 
desirest to save all mankind, enlighten Thou our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, in Tone VIII, with 8 Troparia, including its Irmos:  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Moses of old, prophetically beholding the glory of the Lord upon the sea in the 
cloud and the pillar of fire, cried out: Unto our God and Redeemer let us sing!  
His body shielded as by a stone, Moses the beholder of God, seeing Him Who is 
invisible in His divinity, cried aloud: Unto our God and Redeemer let us sing!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Of old Thou wast seen by Moses in darkness on the mount of the law; but now 
Thou art seen in the unapproachable light of the Godhead on Tabor.  
And this canon of the holy martyr, with 4 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is:  
“Most wisely do I hymn the mighty Laurence”, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
Taking delight in the garden of sweetness and joining chorus with the angelic hosts 
as is meet, as a warrior of Christ, pray thou that He grant effulgent radiance unto me 
who hymn thee, O blessed Laurence.  
Entering upon the feats of honored torment, O Laurence, in steadfastness of soul 
thou didst show thyself to be a victorious spiritual athlete, magnificently arrayed in 
the crown of righteousness and a diadem of victory.  
As thou wast a child of the light and of the day, thou hast shone forth upon us 
sensibly like the sun from the west, illumining the ends of the earth with a most 
splendid radiance, O all-glorious martyr Laurence.  
Theotokion: Delivered from the bonds of Hades and corruption, and from the 
condemnation of the law, by thine honored birth giving, O most holy Virgin, we cry 
to thee in thanksgiving: Rejoice, O thou who art full of joy, thou saving portal of 
grace!  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
The overshadowing glory in the tabernacle of old, when Thou didst converse with 
Moses, Thy favored one, was a figure of Thy transfiguration which shone forth 
ineffably on Tabor, O Master.  
Thou didst summon the foremost of the apostles to Thee on Mount Tabor, O 
only-begotten Word; and Moses and Elijah stood before Thee, as servants of God, O 
Thou Who alone lovest mankind.  
Through God the Word, Thou didst become wholly of earth, uniting humanity to 
Thy whole divinity in Thy hypostasis, which Moses and Elijah beheld on Mount 
Tabor in two natures.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
With the Cross as thy standard, thou didst valiantly array thyself against the enemy, 
and wast shown to be crowned with victory, O right wondrous one.  
Protected by the law of Christ, as one invincible thou didst oppose the laws of the 
impious with courageous endurance, O all-blessed one.  
Strengthened by the power of God, thou didst destroy the feebleness of 
polytheism and didst elucidate the pre-eternal divinity of Christ.  
Theotokion: Equal to the Father and the Spirit in nature, essence and divinity, and 
to men also, was the Word Who becameth incarnate of thee, O all-immaculate one.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Kindling thy heart with divine fire, * thou didst utterly reduce the fire of the 
passions to ashes, * O God-bearing martyr Laurence, * thou confirmation of spiritual 
athletes; * and in the midst of thy sufferings * thou didst cry aloud with faith: ** 
Nothing can separate me from the love of Christ!  
Ikos: Assembling, O ye faithful, with hymns let us all honor the spiritual athlete 
Laurence, who shone forth in the world like a steady beacon, as an initiate of 
ineffable mysteries; for by his supplications we are delivered from grievous 
transgressions. And having cleansed our hearts, let us glorify Christ Who glorifieth 
him who is mighty amid sufferings and who saith: Nothing can separate me from the 
love of Christ!  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having amassed heavenly riches and brought them to the poor, thou didst 
distribute them, and gave thy bread also to the hungry, and thereby having acquired 
life incorruptible, thou didst shine forth in thy confession of Christ, O glorious one. 
Wherefore, having courageously suffered under the law, thou didst receive from God 
a crown for thy labors, O spiritual athlete Laurence. Entreat Christ God, that He 
grant forgiveness of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded ...”: 
The lightning hidden under the flesh of Thy nature and divine majesty, O Christ 
our Benefactor, didst thou show forth upon the holy mountain, shining upon the 
disciples who were with Thee. And when they perceived Thine unbearable glory, they 
cried aloud: “Holy art Thou, for, though Thou art unapproachable, Thou art visible 
to the world in the flesh, O Thou only Lover of mankind!”  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Rays of divinity issued forth from Thy flesh * upon the prophets and 
the apostles. * Wherefore, chanting, the leaders cried aloud: * glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
O Master, Who preserved intact the bush which had been touched by fire, Thou 
didst show Thy divinely radiant flesh unto Moses, who chanteth: Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord!  
The material sun was eclipsed by the radiance of the Godhead, seeing Thee 
transfigured on Mount Tabor, O my Jesus. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
When Thou didst reveal Thyself to Moses, Elijah and the apostles, O Master, Thou 
wast seen to be an immaterial fire which consumeth not the matter of the body, being 
One in two essences, in two perfect natures.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
For love of the Word, the servant of the Word, adorned with eloquence and 
spirituality, hath been slaughtered, and now reigneth in righteousness with the Word, 
enjoying gladness and His glory.  
Piously fighting off the slumber of impiety with divine vigilance, O sacred martyr 
of Christ, by thy martyr’s stand thou didst cut off from thine eyes the sleep which is 
unto death.  
Protected by the true armor of piety against the proponents of the impious 
opposition, for the sake of the Faith thou didst utterly cast down the memory of 
them by thy love of morality.  
Theotokion: Having put aside all the defilement of the primeval food, we are 
nurtured with the Grain of Life from heaven, Which arose from the earth from the 
Virgin. Let us hymn her as the mediatress of good things.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
The tongue of the orator is unable to proclaim Thy greatness; for Thou, Who hast 
control over life and dominion over death, didst stand forth on Mount Tabor before 
Moses and Elijah, who bore witness to Thy divinity. 
  

--- PAGE 7 ---
O Christ Who with invisible hands fashioned mankind according to Thine image, 
Thou hast shown forth Thy primal beauty in Thy creation; for Thou wast both God 
and man, not in image, but as Thou Thyself art in essence.  
United without commingling, on Mount Tabor Thou didst show us the burning 
ember of divinity, which burneth up sins and enlighteneth souls; and Thou didst 
strike Moses, Elijah and the foremost apostles with awe.  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
Thine eyes fixed with unwavering vision upon divine beauties, O right wondrous 
Laurence, Thou didst spurn all the beautiful things on earth and the cruel pangs of 
thy body.  
Having recognized Christ, Who became a servant for us, through gifts received 
from the Father, and having become His servant, thou didst depart unto Him 
through the shedding of thy blood, O most blessed one.  
O blessed one, thou didst offer thyself unto Christ as a sacred oblation and a 
magnificent adornment; and having adorned the tabernacle of heaven, thou dost now 
abide there delighting in radiance.  
Theotokion: The only-begotten Son, of the same essence and like unto the Father, 
of His own will becameth akin to mankind, the Most High being incarnate from thy 
womb, O Virgin Mother.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
How great and awesome was the vision beheld this day! From the sky the material 
sun shone forth, while from the earth the noetic Sun of righteousness, which is 
beyond compare, shone forth on Mount Tabor.  
Beholding Thy divinity on Tabor, Moses cried: “The shadow of the law, grown 
weak, hath passed away, and Christ the Truth is manifestly come!”  
The pillar of fire and the cloud most manifestly prefigured the transfigured Christ 
and the grace of the Spirit which overshadowed Him on Tabor.  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Kindling a material fire, thou didst prepare thyself as sweet food for the King of 
all, Who loveth and craveth our salvation, O all-glorious one.  
Thou didst draw nigh wholly to the light of the ruling Trinity, and being radiant, as 
God’s servant, thou dost illumine those who hymn thee, O spiritual athlete.  
Strengthened with divine power, lying on the heated grill thou didst endure 
torment for the love of Christ, enkindling thy soul with fire and spiritual dew.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother, thou wast the place of God’s lodging, an animate 
throne, the holy mountain, the ark, the divinely wrought tabernacle, and the golden 
candle-stand.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain O Christ God, * and Thy disciples beheld 
Thy glory as far as they could endure; * that when they would see Thee crucified, * 
they would comprehend that Thy suffering was voluntary, * and proclaim to the 
world that Thou art of a truth ** the Effulgence of the Father.  
Ikos: Arise, ye slothful thoughts of my soul, which are ever dragged down unto the 
earth! Be ye borne up and rise aloft to the summit of divine ascent! Let us make haste 
to Peter and the sons of Zebedee, and with them let us go to Mount Tabor, that we 
may see the glory of our God with them, and may hear the voice which they heard 
from on high; and they preached the Effulgence of the Father.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Now have invisible things become visible to the apostles: the Divinity which 
shone forth in the flesh on Mount Tabor shineth upon those who cry out: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
The apostles were moved to awe by fear on Mount Tabor, marveling at the 
majesty of the kingdom of God, and crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages!  
Now have things never before heard become audible; for the Son, Who was born 
of the Virgin without father, is borne witness gloriously by the voice of the Father, in 
that He is God and man, the same throughout the ages.  
Being from the beginning the beloved Son by nature, Thou wast not such by the 
adoption of the Most High, and Thou hast approached us without changing. Blessed 
art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
Forechosen to celebrate the Mysteries and serve the Word, thou wast shown to be 
a sacred vessel and oblation of the temple of heaven, chanting unto the Creator: O 
supremely hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Covered by the law of the life which is in Christ, O most blessed Laurence, thou 
didst not bow thy mind to those who imposed laws of death and corruption, but 
chanted: O supremely hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Clad in a body as one who manifestly felt no pain, O most blessed one, with 
valorous mind, and as one most noetically rich, thou didst dare the all-devouring fire, 
crying aloud: O supremely hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be the noetic eastward portal of the Most High 
Who, in a manner beyond speech and understanding, appeared to mankind on earth 
through thee, O Bride of God: the blessed God of our fathers.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Thy disciples, O Master, having heard Thee borne witness to by the Father, and 
unable to bear the sight of the splendor of Thy countenance, though it was a most 
firm human visage, fell face down upon the ground, crying out in fear: Ye priests 
bless; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou art the most comely King of kings, the mighty Lord of all who rulest in 
every place, the Blessed One Who dwellest in light unapproachable. And marveling at 
Thee, the disciples, Moses and Elijah cried out: Ye children, bless; ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
The apostles, from among those on earth, and Elijah the Tishbite and Moses, from 
among the dead, stood before Thee, O Christ, as before the Master of heaven, the 
Lord of earth, the One Who hath dominion over the nethermost depths; and they 
chanted together: Ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
When they followed Thee to the exalting of the divine life from the earth, Thy 
chosen apostles left behind on earth the grief which giveth rise to despondency, O 
Lover of mankind. Wherefore, having received Thy divine manifestation according as 
they were worthy, they chanted: Ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
In thy steadfastness of mind thou wast mightier than the unbearable flame, 
burning as if in another’s body, O blessed one, yet chanting with faith: All ye works 
bless and hymn the Lord!  
Like unto the three children, thou didst quench the burning embers of the fire 
with the dew of divine grace, crying aloud and chanting: All ye works bless and hymn 
the Lord!  
As Christ was thine enlightenment, He girded thee about with His own might, and 
led thee up to Himself as thou didst piously chant: All ye works bless and hymn the 
Lord!  
Theotokion: A rod sprung forth from the root of Jesse wast thou, and in a manner 
past nature thou gavest rise to Christ my God and Lord, the Flower of the Godhead. 
Let all works bless thy birthgiving, O Virgin!  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
That Thou mayest clearly show forth Thine ineffable second coming, that Thou 
mayest reveal Thyself as the Most High God, standing in the midst of gods, on Tabor 
Thou didst ineffably illumine the apostles, Moses and Elijah. Wherefore, all glorify 
Thee, O Christ.  
Come and submit yourselves to Me, O ye peoples! And ascending the holy and 
supra-celestial mountain, let us stand immaterially in the city of the living God, and 
noetically behold the immaterial Godhead of the Father and the Spirit which shineth 
forth in the only-begotten Son.  
Thou hast drawn me to Thyself with love, O Savior, and hast transformed me by 
Thy divine desire; but burn up my sins with immaterial fire, and deem me worthy to 
partake of Thy food, that, rejoicing in both, I may magnify Thy mighty works, O 
Good One.  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Thou didst offer thyself as a perfect sacrifice and incense pleasing unto the Master, 
being tried by the fire of suffering like gold in a crucible; whereby thou didst become 
a foremost adornment of the Church, O right wondrous one.  
Deified by the direct sight of God and by a higher union, O Laurence, in word and 
by divine vision thou wast radiantly illumined by the uttermost Light. Wherefore, we 
all call thee blessed.  
Thou didst shine forth from the West like the sun, O blessed one, O great and 
most glorious wonder; illumining all the Church with thy beams, O right wondrous 
one; and warming all with the fervor of faith. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed.  
Theotokion: The prophets, beholding images of thy birthgiving, O all-immaculate 
one, were instructed thereby from afar by divine inspiration, loudly proclaiming it to 
the world, and we now marvel at their fulfillment.  
Exapostilarion of the feast:  
O Word, Thou immutable Light of the light of the unbegotten Father: today on 
Mount Tabor we have seen in Thy light the manifest light of the Father and the light 
of the Spirit Who guideth all creation with light. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “The angelic hosts ...”:  
Shining forth past understanding from the most holy Virgin, O Word of God, and 
clothing Thyself wholly in Adam, with the divine transformation of Thy countenance 
Thou didst illumine our whole nature which of old had become darkened, when 
Thou O Master, wast transfigured on Mount Tabor before Thine honored 
crucifixion, O Christ our God.  
Verse: Thine are the heavens, * and Thine is the earth.  
Behold, the mountain which before was gloomy and enshrouded, is now honored 
and holy. Christ Who of old guided Israel, as it is written, with a pillar of fire and 
cloud, today hath shone forth ineffably thereon more brightly than the sun, illumining 
all things, in that He is God.  
Verse: Tabor and Hermon * rejoice in His name.  
Now as he was conversing with the Master as a servant, Peter beheld two men on 
Tabor, and he cried out: “It is good to be here! Let us fashion three tabernacles, if 
Thou desirest: one for Thee, O my Christ, and others for Moses and Elijah, Thy 
servants!” But he knew not what he said, being held fast by wonder.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O pure and most holy Lady Theotokos, deliver those who trust in thee from 
misfortunes, and save from all harm those who, day and night, now and always, pray 
to thee; and entreat thy Son, Who shone forth ineffably on Tabor, to deliver us from 
the coming judgment.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia from ODE V of both canons of the feast.  
Thou hast parted light from the primal chaos, that Thy works might hymn Thee in 
light, O Christ, as their Creator: do Thou direct our paths in Thy light. 
The mountains bowed themselves before Thy face; for Thou wast well pleased to 
accept, in Thine earthly form, the light and heavenly rays which the sun came and laid 
at Thy feet.  
Moses and Elijah cried to the disciples who were being instructed on holy Mount 
Tabor: “Behold, Christ the Savior is the God Whom we proclaimed of old!”  
The tongue of the orator is unable to proclaim Thy greatness; for Thou, Who hast 
control over life and dominion over death, didst stand forth on Mount Tabor before 
Moses and Elijah, who bore witness to Thy divinity.  
O Christ Who with invisible hands fashioned mankind according to Thine image, 
Thou hast shown forth Thy primal beauty in Thy creation; for Thou wast both God 
and man, not in image, but as Thou Thyself art in essence.  
United without commingling, on Mount Tabor Thou didst show us the burning 
ember of divinity, which burneth up sins and enlighteneth souls; and Thou didst 
strike Moses, Elijah and the foremost apostles with awe.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone VII:  
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain, O Christ, our God, * showing to Thy 
disciples Thy glory as each one could endure. * Shine forth Thou on us, who are 
sinners all, * Thy light ever-unending. * Through the prayers of the Theotokos, ** 
Light-Bestower, glory to Thee. (Twice); 
 Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Laurence O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II:  
Kindling thy heart with divine fire, * thou didst utterly reduce the fire of the 
passions to ashes, * O God-bearing martyr Laurence, * thou confirmation of spiritual 
athletes; * and in the midst of thy sufferings * thou didst cry aloud with faith: ** 
Nothing can separate me from the love of Christ!  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone VII: 
Thou wast transfigured on the mountain O Christ God, * and Thy disciples beheld 
Thy glory as far as they could endure; * that when they would see Thee crucified, * 
they would comprehend that Thy suffering was voluntary, * and proclaim to the 
world that Thou art of a truth ** the Effulgence of the Father.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Instead of “It is truly meet...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Lord Who was transfigured on Tabor!  
Thy birthgiving was shown to be incorrupt: God issued forth from thy womb, 
and appeared as a mortal being on earth, and dwelt with men. Wherefore, we 
all magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
Communion Verse of the feast: O Lord, in the light of Thy face shall we walk, 
and in Thy name shall we rejoice all the day long.  
 
 
 
 
 
