--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 24th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HIEROMARTYR EUTYCHES,  
THE DISCIPLE OF SAINT JOHN THE THEOLOGIAN  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O blessed martyr Eutyches, * having been taught the word of God in sacred 
manner by the honored disciple, * the preacher of divine eloquence, * thou didst learn 
from him every sacred doctrine, * and wast shown to be a light, * illumining every 
thought with grace * through thy sacred theology. * Wherefore, we honor ** thy holy 
memory.  
Thou didst cast down the fortress of delusion, * O most noetically rich 
hieromartyr, * by thy steadfast struggle of endurance, * by thy wounds and stripes and 
thy glorious death. * Wherefore, thou hast received immortality, * making thine abode 
with the choirs of the martyrs * and with the ranks of the angels, * being well and 
perfectly deified in godly manner ** by a higher communion.  
Imprisoned in a dungeon, * thou didst receive the Bread of life from heaven, * 
and, cast into the flame O glorious one, * thou didst remain unconsumed. * Lacerated 
with wounds cruelly inflicted, * thou didst tame the raging of the wild beasts by thy 
prayers. * By the sword was thy head severed, * and thou wast drawn up to the 
heavens, ** as upon a divine chariot.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
Save me, O most pure Lady, * who hast ineffably given birth to Christ the Savior; 
* for thee alone have I acquired as our intercessor, * an invincible rampart, * 
protection and joy, * and the divine consolation of my soul. * Wherefore, deliver me 
from the worm which sleepeth not * and from the everlasting fire, ** O Mother of 
Christ God.  
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all? * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  
Aposticha from the Oktoechos.  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Eutyches, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and that of the holy hieromartyr, with 4 Troparia. 
The composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
As thou dwellest together with the apostles and the martyrs, and art ever full of 
divine radiance, O right glorious martyr Eutyches, show forth those who celebrate 
thine honored feast today to be partakers of the light.  
As a disciple of the beloved disciple, O blessed one, with piety thou didst greatly 
emulate his ways, and didst love the Lord, observing His divine laws, and emulating 
His sufferings, O Eutyches.  
Piously submitting to the law of God, thou didst mortify thy flesh with the pangs 
of fasting, withdrawing from the world and abiding in the mountains, O glorious 
martyr; and, having cleansed thy soul, thou art known to be godly.  
Theotokion: In thee, O Virgin, have I placed the hope of my salvation. Cleanse 
me wholly of the defilement within, since thou art eminently well-pleasing to thy Son, 
and able to do His most holy will.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Like a great star illumining men’s hearts with the Spirit, O blessed and divinely 
wise one, thou didst seek out Paul, to travel with him, as with the sun shining with the 
light of most wise preaching.  
John, the faithful friend of the Savior, the foundation of theologians, eminent 
among the disciples, having been divinely translated from the earth, entrusted to thee 
the flock of God, to shepherd it.  
Most comely, radiant and full of the Spirit of God, thou didst stand before him 
who sat in judgment unrighteously, denouncing his impiety, O most noetically rich 
hieromartyr; and didst confess the divine humanity of Christ.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, thou who alone hast given birth ineffably to Joy! Rejoice, 
chariot and cloud of the Word! Rejoice, O Mother of God, Virgin who hast not 
known wedlock! Rejoice, glory of the venerable! Rejoice, crown of the martyrs!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Emitting the effulgence of divine knowledge, thou didst dispel the darkness of 
polytheism, finishing thy race in martyrdom. And thou pourest forth gifts of healing 
and dost wash away the ailments of those who have recourse unto thee. O glorious 
martyr, entreat Christ God, that He grant our souls great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only most pure Virgin Mother, 
* who hast surpassed the angels in purity. * With the divine waters of thy 
supplications cleanse me, * who more than all others am dust and defiled * by carnal 
transgressions, O pure one, ** and grant me great mercy. 
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Departing with all thy mind unto the Lord, thou didst now feel thyself cruelly 
beaten and lacerated; and like sweet-smelling incense thou didst fill all who stood by 
with divine fragrance through the action of the Spirit, O right glorious and divinely 
wise one.  
Preserved by God while imprisoned, bound in the dungeon, O divinely wise 
martyr, rejoicing thou didst manifestly receive the Bread of heaven, God, the only 
Judge of the contest, strengthening thee, O God-bearing Eutyches, and didst emulate 
His divine sufferings.  
Standing before the tribunal of the tyrants, thou didst open thine honored mouth 
and with the Spirit didst clearly explain the true Faith in the Trinity, denouncing the 
delusion of idolatry and the reasoning of the ungodly tormenters, O blessed one.  
Aflame with love for God, O blessed one, after sustaining many other wounds on 
thy body thou didst pass, rejoicing, through the consuming flame of the fire, in 
nowise daunted by the threats of the tyrant; for a divine dew from heaven came down 
upon thee, O Eutyches.  
Theotokion: Alone among women, thou wast virgin both before and after giving 
birth; for God, Who existed before time began, became ineffably incarnate from thee 
and was born on earth in the latter days, renewing nature in a manner past 
understanding, O most immaculate one.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Made rich by the divine Word, thou didst give unto all who asked, O martyr, and 
as a priest didst shepherd the flock of Christ, chastening and guiding it to salvation, O 
Eutyches, much-suffering spiritual athlete.  
Having shaken off soul-destroying delusion through the power of the divine Spirit, 
thou didst come to Christ, leading to Him multitudes of those saved by faith through 
thine honored and godly preaching, O Eutyches, adornment of sufferers.  
How beautiful are thy feet which walked the path of divine knowledge and trod 
well therein, and attained unto the broad expanse of the kingdom of heaven, O most 
blessed and glorious martyr!  
Theotokion: O Virgin Maiden and Mother, who hast given birth in the flesh unto 
the Unapproachable One! O Bride of God, glory of the angels and wounding of 
demons: grant divine healing unto my heart which is wounded by sin.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Receiving thine end for Christ in Ephesus, O wise one, thou didst depart from 
Ephesus a prisoner, and, adorned with sufferings in thy native land, didst find rest.  
Being a beauteous and most pure temple of God, O Eutyches, by grace thou didst 
destroy the vile temples of the idols, and ascended unto the temple of heaven to stand 
before God.  
The angel of God strengthened thee as thou didst walk the road, describing those 
things which would manifestly come to pass for thee who art the peer of the angels in 
spirit, apart from the flesh, O most noetically rich Eutyches.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, set aright the wanderings of my mind and the grievous 
movements of the passions within my soul; and preserve me whole from those who 
ever assail me without mercy.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
As one who shared the throne of the apostles * and the adornment of holy 
hierarchs, O Eutyches, * thou wast glorified in martyrdom, * shining forth like the 
sun, illumining all, * and dispelling the profound night of ungodliness. * Wherefore, 
we honor thee as a truly divine initiate ** of the mysteries of Christ.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Ikos: Abiding now with the choirs on high, O initiate of the mysteries of God, as a 
priest of God, a minister of heaven, a shepherd of shepherds, an invincible spiritual 
athlete, send down light upon me, and inspire me with discourse, that I may praise 
thy divine sufferings, thy persecutions and exemplary battles, the manfully endured 
breaking of thy bones and severing of thy members, for the sake of which thou hast 
been numbered with the angels, O blessed one, as a truly divine initiate of the 
mysteries of Christ.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
With a divine gesture thou didst extinguish the fire kindled for thy destruction, O 
divinely wise one; for thunder was heard from the sky, and flakes of snow descended, 
burying those who would not believe in Christ.  
Mightily lacerated, thou didst exude a sweet-smelling myrrh, which was poured 
forth to perfume thy sufferings, O martyr. For, hastening to the Word and Creator, 
thou didst cry out to Him: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thy life was blameless, thy torment was most wondrous, and the holy shrine of 
thy relics is salvific for all who have recourse thereto, gushing forth healings and 
taking away the defilement of many passions.  
Theotokion: The honored prophets, perceiving from afar the ineffable depth of 
thy mystery, explained thy birth giving to all in many ways, O virgin, crying out: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Stretching forth thy hands to Christ our God, O glorious one, while wrestling with 
lions before the tribunal, thou didst remain unharmed, like Daniel the prophet before 
thee, having an angel by thy side ever protecting thee; and thou didst chant 
unceasingly: Ye priests bless; ye people supremely exalt God throughout all ages!  
The wild beast prepared for the destruction of thee who had been bestially 
condemned by the iniquitous, prophesied with his mighty expression and proclaimed 
the mighty acts of Christ the Savior, astonishing those who cried out: Ye priests bless; 
ye people supremely exalt God throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having passed through the great contest of martyrdom by the power and grace of 
God, rejoicing, thou didst receive the crown of victory, and wast enrolled among the 
choirs of all the apostles and martyrs, with whom thou criest out unceasingly: Ye 
priests bless; ye people supremely exalt God throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, who alone didst clearly give birth to Life, 
enliven my soul which hath been slain by the sting of the serpent, and grant me to do 
the will of Him Who for our sake was born of thee, O Virgin, for I cry out: Ye priests 
bless; ye people supremely exalt God throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
O divinely wise spiritual athlete, thou pourest forth divers healings, soothing 
grievous illnesses, truly receiving grace, and having fought well and vanquished the 
enemy, O eminent among the martyrs, thou dwellest now with the angels.  
Thou wast comely amid thy struggles, and hast made thine abode in the beautiful 
mansions, thy holy head having been severed with the sword, thy head upon which 
Jesus hath placed a magnificent crown of victory, O lamp of the Church, 
confirmation and boast of those who piously call thee blessed.  
Thou didst crush the might of the wicked one, O all-famed spiritual athlete 
Eutyches, and like a youth didst hold the trophy of victory over him; and as an 
excellent victor thou dwellest now in the heavens, standing in splendor before the 
throne of the Trinity with great boldness.  
Thy divine and radiant memory hath shone forth upon all more brightly than the 
sun, illumining those who ever faithfully and piously celebrate it with beams of 
splendor, O Eutyches; and thereon we also pray that, as one possessed of boldness, 
do thou entreat salvation for us.  
Theotokion: Let us proclaim with the voice of Gabriel: Rejoice, O chosen land! 
Rejoice, golden table! Rejoice, refuge of all! Rejoice, boast of martyrs! Rejoice, O holy 
Theotokos, joy of the angels and might of those who with pure faith call thee blessed!  
Exapostilarion of the holy hieromartyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
As thou wast heir to the thrones and didst share the ways’ of the sacred apostles, 
O divinely wise one, shed light from heaven upon those who with faith celebrate thy 
holy suffering, in that thou art the disciple of the Word, O holy hierarch Eutyches.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Look down upon thine inheritance, O pure one, and preserve it by thine invincible 
intercession. Establish and set aright the scepters of kingdoms, subdue the nations, 
and pour forth peace upon the ends of the earth.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Eutyches, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone III: 
As one who shared the throne of the apostles * and the adornment of holy 
hierarchs, O Eutyches, * thou wast glorified in martyrdom, * shining forth like the 
sun, illumining all, * and dispelling the profound night of ungodliness. * Wherefore, 
we honor thee as a truly divine initiate ** of the mysteries of Christ.  
 
