--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 21st DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
AFTERFEAST OF THE DORMITION OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE THADDEUS,  
& THE HOLY MARTYR VASSA & THOSE WITH HER  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 for the holy apostle, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O blessed Apostle Thaddeus, * having drawn nigh to the uttermost Light, * thou 
didst truly become a secondary luminary * by divine communion therein; * and, 
destroying the night of polytheism, * thou hast led men’s souls to the Almighty. * 
Wherefore, rejoicing and glorifying Christ, * we honor thy radiant memory, ** 
luminous and harmonious.  
O blessed and God-pleasing Thaddeus, * after the divine and radiant resurrection 
of Christ * and His most holy ascension into heaven, * thou didst engage * in the 
preaching of God * for the city of Edessa; * and by thy words and miracles * didst 
confirm in the truth ** Abgar, the local ruler, and all with him.  
O blessed and divinely wise Thaddeus, * by thy divine touch * thou didst impart 
the gift of sight to the blind, * the ability to walk to the lame and health to the infirm, 
* strength to the paralyzed, * and saving understanding to the ignorant; * for thou 
wast full of the gifts of the all-accomplishing Spirit, * O most noetically rich apostle. 
** Wherefore, we hymn thee.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Thou didst endure the suffering * of many torments, O all-praised one; * and 
having approached them with might, * thou wast translated therefrom to rest without 
pain, * to never-waning effulgence, * to radiant joy, to everlasting and divine delight. * 
Wherefore, we bless thee * and celebrate thy holy solemnity today, ** O God-
pleasing sufferer.  
When thou wast cast into the sea * after various and greatly painful torments, * 
God, the Savior of all, saved thee * who by His divine power trampled down * the 
might of the alien one, * O much suffering Vassa. * Hence thou hast enlightened the 
minds of the pious * having wrought signs ** past understanding and comprehension.  
Giving voice in the meadows * of beauteous martyrdom * like a sweetly 
harmonious bird, * thou didst summon thy comely nestlings, * with them escaping 
the snare of deceit, * O divinely wise and right wondrous Vassa. * And with them 
hast thou made thine abode * among the beauties of heaven, O most blessed one, ** 
ever praying for us all.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone II: 
Come ye, let us celebrate the universal dormition of the all-immaculate Theotokos; 
for today the angels celebrate the honored repose of the Mother of God and call us 
mortals to gladness, that we may cry out with never-failing voices: Rejoice, O thou 
who hast been translated from earth and made thy habitation in the mansions of 
heaven! Rejoice, thou who hast brought together the choir of the disciples on clouds 
of light! Rejoice, our hope and salvation; for we, the Christian race, unceasingly bless 
thee!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Come, ye bearers of lamps, * and with sacred hymns and cymbals * let us all honor 
the greatly praised Dormition * of the Theotokos and Mother; * for she hath been 
translated from the earth, * making her abode and dwelling with glory * in the 
immaterial habitations, * beholding the beauty of God, ** and pouring forth grace 
upon all who honor her memory with faith.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
The sacred choir of the apostles * hath gathered together * from the ends of the 
earth * on the dew of divine clouds O Lady, * to bury thy precious, God-pleasing and 
incorrupt body. * Wherefore, the armies of heaven, * invisibly surrounding thy bier, * 
chanted with hymns unto thee: ** Rejoice thou most pure ark of holiness. 
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
All thy dread mysteries are unapproachable, * all are truly ineffable; * for thou who 
art the Mother of God, * hast rendered the heavens beautiful, * enlightened the 
world, * and perfumed all with thy divine memory. * Wherefore, the nations call thee 
blessed * and bless thee: ** Rejoice, O new ark of holiness!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
Today the choirs of virgins mystically surround the bier of the Virgin Mother, and 
the souls of the righteous, surrounding them, glorify the Queen. The virgins offer 
their virginity instead of myrrh; and the righteous offer immaterial hymnody and 
virtue; for it is fitting that the Mother of God, as Queen, be accompanied by radiant 
royal virtues. And with them having led a pure life, let us go forth to the burial of her 
who is the Mother of our God, blessing her together with hymns and spiritual songs.  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III:  
O holy Apostle Thaddeus, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death. (Twice) 
Glory ..., that of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Thaddeus, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls 
Both now ..., that of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
At the command of thy Creator, Who was born of thee, the apostles were 
assembled on clouds to behold thy repose. Whereupon, they buried thee with glory 
and great gladness, hymning the most pure body of thy blessedness, O Mother of 
Christ our God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
The choir of the apostles, scattered over the face of the earth, assembled in Sion to 
send the Theotokos from earth to the Most High, to Whom she had given birth. The 
hosts of heaven made haste on high, receiving the Mother of God who hath 
dominion over things visible and invisible.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia, including its Irmos 
The composition of John, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her dormition. 
O virgin maidens, with Miriam the prophetess raise ye now a hymn of parting! For 
she who alone is Virgin and Mother of God is translated and received into heaven.  
The divine mansions of heaven received thee as an animate heaven, as is meet, O 
most pure one; and thou hast taken thy place as a bride, splendidly adorned, before 
thy King and God, O all-immaculate one. 
  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Canon of the holy apostle, with 4 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: 
 “I hymn the wise and divinely eloquent Thaddeus.” 
The composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
Standing before the throne of the Master, O most wise Thaddeus, bestow 
enlightenment upon me, that I may hymn thy radiant solemnity.  
The immemorial Light within time, the Transcendent One Who manifested 
Himself as being with us, hath left thee as a beam to enlighten the world, O blessed 
one.  
He Who is invincible in might, having girded thee about with power, strengthened 
thee to destroy all the might of the deceiver.  
Theotokion: O Lady, supremely hymned Virgin Theotokos, thou hast been shown 
to be the one who hath ineffably given birth to Him Who hath dominion over all 
creatures.  
Canon of the martyr, with 4 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I offer up thy struggles, O honored Vassa.” 
The composition of Joseph, in the same tone: 
Canon of the Martyr  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Set afire by faith and the fervent desire for the surpassing love of Christ, O all-
praised one, by the presence of an angel thou didst quench the fire and didst 
straightway utterly consume the ignorant people.  
Blessed now is the generation of the righteous, which shone forth from thy womb 
with the splendor of sufferings, destroying the darkness of the opposition of the 
iniquitous by the steadfastness of mind, O most glorious Vassa.  
O mother transcending the transitory laws of nature, who endured an undeserved 
death as she watched those whom she had nurtured on faith and milk as they, in a 
unity surpassing nature, were tortured by various means!  
Theotokion: O most holy Virgin who once gave birth to the hypostatic Life, thou 
hast saved me who have been slain by eating of disobedience. Wherefore, as is meet 
we now bless thee, the ever-blessed one. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Having issued forth from a mortal womb, O pure one, thou didst receive an end 
conforming to nature; but, having given birth unto Him Who is Life, Thou hast been 
translated to the divine and hypostatic Life.  
At the behest of the Almighty, the choir of theologians journeyed from the ends of 
the earth, and multitudes of angels came from on high to Sion, to minister at thy 
burial as was meet, O Lady.  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Enlightening the people with the splendor of divine grace, O glorious one, thou 
wast shown to be a pure light for those in the darkness of evil.  
Going to King Abgar, O wise one, by divinely effectual gestures thou didst bring 
him healing and deliverance.  
Thou didst build churches for the all-accomplishing Spirit, O wise one, and 
destroyed the vile temples of mortals.  
Theotokion: The foreshadowing of the law and the voices of the prophets told of 
thine awesome birthgiving as revealed by God, O Lady.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
O blessed one, pray thou that enlightenment and forgiveness of soul-destroying 
sins be bestowed from heaven upon me who joyfully praise Thine all-glorious 
memory.  
Thy soul, guarded by the fear of the Lord, did not fear the commands which were 
abominable to God, nor divers wounds and tribulations, therefore, thou didst brave 
them manfully.  
With thy three sons, O passion-bearer, thou didst patiently undergo multifarious 
torments; and with them didst weave wreaths of incorruption, glorifying the Trinity. 
  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: Without the pangs of motherhood thou didst conceive the Word of 
the Father, O most holy one; and thou didst give birth to Him in a manner past all 
telling, for our salvation.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV: 
The Church, ever enlightened by thy miracles * hath acquired thee as a most 
radiant star, O Apostle Thaddeus. ** Save those who with faith honor thy memory. 
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Approaching the noetic Sun, thou didst receive mystic rays therefrom, and wast 
like a most radiant star, illumining the fullness of all the earth and destroying the 
darkness of deception, O blessed one. Wherefore, we celebrate thy light-bearing 
memory, praising thee with faith, and together we cry out to thee: O Apostle 
Thaddeus, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who with love 
honor thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
With the dew of the Spirit thou didst quench the fire of torments, O honored one, 
and didst pass over to the divine and immaterial Light; and even after thy death thou 
dost blessedly pour forth drops of healing, dissipating the heat of the passions with 
the power of the Spirit.  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in the melody: 
The most honored choir of the most wise apostles assembled to bury thy most 
pure body with glory, O all-praised Theotokos. With them a multitude of angels 
chanted, praising with honor thy repose, which we celebrate with faith.  
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
A wonder was it to see the animate heaven of the King of all, which surpasseth the 
barren places of the earth. How wondrous are Thy works! Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
If her unapproachable Fruit, through Whom the heavens arose, chose of His own 
will to accept burial as a mortal, how can she, who gaveth birth to Him without 
knowing wedlock, refuse burial?  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
At thy repose, O Mother of God, with trembling and joy the armies of the angels 
covered with their sacred wings thy most spacious body, which had held God.  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Possessed of a lofty intelligence, O Thaddeus, disciple of the King of all, thou 
didst receive divine understanding and spiritual gifts.  
In teaching the divine mysteries, O most noetically rich and blessed one, thou 
didst enlighten the uninstructed to worship the consubstantial Trinity.  
Thou didst engrave the law of God upon men’s hearts, O blessed one, having first 
erased the traces of ignorance and the false worship of graven Images.  
Theotokion: Having given birth to the Creator, thou wast shown to be the Queen 
of all creation. Wherefore, O Theotokos, only Ever-virgin, we glorify thee.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Being of undivided mind, thou didst set forth to do battle with the opponent, and 
didst drown him in the abyss of thy blood.  
The deep, receiving thee who wast condemned to an undeserved death, grew calm 
and saved thee, O passion-bearer Vassa, at the behest of God.  
With thy right laudable sons thou didst inherit the unshakable kingdom, the truly 
heavenly bridal-chamber and the never-waning light, O glorious one.  
Theotokion: Of old, Habbakuk foresaw thee as an unquarried mountain, O Virgin; 
for God appeared through thee and hath saved us.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thine honored dormition; * for thou, O 
Virgin who hast not known wedlock, * hast passed from earth to the 
everlasting mansions; * and to never-ending life, * bestowing salvation unto all 
who hymn thee. 
Let the trumpets of the theologians sound forth today, and let the eloquent 
tongues of men now render praise; let the air resound, shining with boundless light, 
and let the angels hymn the dormition of the most pure Virgin.  
It was fitting for thee, O all-praised Virgin Theotokos, to be the chosen vessel, 
which is wholly marveled at in hymnody at thy departure, wholly consecrated to God, 
divinely pleasing unto all, and truly shown to be such. 
 Canon of the holy apostle  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
Bearing the divine likeness of the Master, O blessed one, thou didst come as a 
divine physician to Abgar, the local king.  
After the divine ascension of the Word, the sacred Thomas sent thee as a preacher 
to those in need, O most wise Thaddeus.  
Abgar, beholding his illness dispelled and his heart healed, was filled with divine 
enlightenment through thy mediation.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth to the incarnate Word Who bore a twofold 
activity, O Maiden who knewest not wedlock, and didst remain an undefiled Virgin.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Held fast with a thirst for the love of Christ, O glorious and divinely blessed 
Agapius, thou didst hate wickedness utterly and didst mightily endure the pangs of 
tortures and bodily death by a spear.  
When thine internal organs were rent apart and the nails torn from thy members, 
O martyr Theognius, thou didst repeatedly acknowledge the God of all with purity 
and perfection. And to Him thou didst ascend in glory, shining with the splendors of 
martyrdom.  
Having entered into the tribunal of the unbelievers with unwavering faith, O most 
wise, faithful and blessed Pistus, thou didst astonish the hearts of the ignorant when 
thy bones were broken and all the members of thy body were severed.  
Theotokion: Thou hast now set aright the fall of Eve, our first mother, having 
given birth unto the Redeemer, Savior and Creator of all, O Mother of God who 
alone art blessed among women. Wherefore we, the faithful, glorify thee.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
For thee Life shone forth, leaving intact the seal of thy virginity, how, therefore, 
hast thy most pure and life-giving body been permitted to be tempted by death?  

--- PAGE 10 ---
As the temple of Life, thou didst attain life everlasting; for, having given birth to 
the hypostatic Life, thou didst pass through death on to life.  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: Thou O Lord, didst place Jonah alone within the sea monster. * Do 
Thou save me, * who am ensnared in the nets of the enemy, * as thou didst 
save him from corruption. 
The enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, which dwelt within thy heart, O Thaddeus, 
made of thee a true luminary for the world, dispersing the darkness of delusion.  
Bearing in thy flesh the saving wounds of Christ as an ornament, O wise 
Thaddeus, thou didst deliver the people from all ugliness and wast taken up into most 
beauteous joy.  
Thou didst reveal to us the morning Sun of righteousness, O glorious Thaddeus, 
showing those mortals who have been illumined thereby to be children of the noetic 
Light.  
Theotokion: For us thou hast given birth to a Babe Who is consubstantial with the 
Father, and Who hath elevated corrupt human nature to its former pristine beauty, O 
pure one.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Thou didst reduce utterly to dust the pedestals of the abominable gods, rooting thy 
soul in the unutterable love of God, O passion-bearer Vassa, and art now a dweller 
with the angels.  
Following Christ, thou didst pass through great struggles, O martyr, and didst 
receive great rewards from Him therefore: immortal fame, a divine dwelling-place, 
and nourishment which is not transitory.  
God, Who is wondrous in thee and is ever glorified in the councils of the saints, 
saved thee by His omnipotent power, O all-praised one, as of old He saved Jonah 
from the depths of the sea.  
Theotokion: The depths of sin and waves of despair beset my mind; but take pity, 
extend thy hand to me, and save me, O Lady who hast given birth to the Savior.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II: 
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Ikos: Guard my thoughts, O my Christ, for I make bold to hymn the bulwark of 
the world, Thy pure Mother. Establish me firmly in the bastion of my words, and 
help me in the midst of difficult thoughts; for Thou fulfillest the entreaties of those 
who cry out and ask with faith. Wherefore, grant unto me a deft tongue and a ready 
mind, for every good deed of enlightenment cometh down from Thee, O Bestower 
of light, Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Honoring the memory of the Mother of God, O youths and virgins, elders and 
princes, kings and judges, chant ye: O Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Let the mountains of heaven sound the trumpet of the Spirit! Let the hills rejoice 
and the divine apostles dance! The Queen passeth over to her Son, reigning with 
Him!  
The most sacred repose of Thy divine and incorrupt Mother hath united the 
celestial ranks of the exalted hosts to rejoice with those on earth, chanting unto Thee: 
Blessed art Thou, O God!  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: In Babylon, the pious youths did not worship the golden image, * but, 
bedewed in the midst of the fiery furnace, * they chanted a hymn, saying: * O 
supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Performing miracles through the invocation of Christ Who manifested Himself in 
the flesh, O all-praised one, thou didst draw to the excellent Faith peoples and cities, 
who cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst bring an end to the decay of ungodliness, O blessed apostle, with the 
divine salt of thy sweet words, and didst heal hearts wounded by the darts of the 
serpent, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Caught up to the heights of vision and filled with the divine Spirit, O Thaddeus, 
thou wast divinely enriched by the saving Word and didst teach men to cry: O God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Having stumbled in my character, and covered with unseemly deeds, 
I flee to thee. Help me, O Lady, providing my lowly soul with models of repentance, 
that I may glorify thee.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Passing unconsumed through the flame of the fire by divine power, O martyr, with 
the fire of thy blood thou didst utterly consume delusion as though it were kindling, 
crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
O Master Who restrained the raging of the lions in the pit, saving Thy Daniel, 
Thou didst show the martyr to be unharmed by the wild beasts; and she chanted unto 
Thee: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Illumined with the radiant beams of the Cross, O glorious Vassa, thou didst pass 
unharmed through the darkness of deception and issued forth into the Light, crying 
aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Thou hast rent asunder the tangled bonds of mine offenses, O Bride 
of God, having given birth unto God, Who taketh away the sin of the world, in a 
manner past all telling, O blessed, pure and ever glorious one.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The principalities, authorities and powers, the angels, archangels, thrones, 
dominions, the cherubim and the dread seraphim, glorify thy memory, O pure Virgin; 
and we, the race of mankind, hymn and supremely exalt it throughout all ages.  
He Who, in a strange manner, made His abode, incarnate, within thy pure womb, 
O Theotokos, receiveth thy most sacred spirit and, as thy Son and One in thy debt, 
hath given it rest by His side. Wherefore, we hymn and supremely exalt thee 
throughout all ages, O Virgin.  
O the wonders of the Ever-virgin and Mother of God, which surpass 
understanding! For, taking up her abode in the grave, she hath shown it to be 
paradise; and standing before it today, rejoicing, we chant: Hymn the Lord, ye works, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Thou wast shown to be like a heaven declaring the glory of God, and the 
enlightenment of the nations O Thaddeus, leading to the divine Faith those who 
fervently cry: Hymn ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Bestowing strength upon the infirm, sight upon the blind, and the ability to walk 
upon the lame through the power of the Spirit, O blessed Thaddeus, thou wast a 
luminary of the city of Edessa, which ever praiseth thee with faith.  
Thaddeus, who by a wealth of miracles brought an unbelieving nation to the Faith 
at the behest of God, and saved those who fled to him from the delusion of idolatry, 
is glorified with faith, as is meet.  
Theotokion: The shadow of the law ceased to exist when thou didst give birth to 
the Bestower of the law Who hath illumined the whole world with grace, O Lady. 
Him do thou ever entreat, that he quickly take pity on me who have become 
vanquished by the law of sin.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
He Who clad Himself in our weakness manifestly strengthened thy weak nature 
and rendered thee more powerful than the fire, the water, the wild beasts and the 
instruments of the torturers, O martyr, wherefore thou didst cry out with faith: Ye 
priests, bless; ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Contending as youths, the godly Theogmus, the sacred Agapius, together with 
Pistus, the honored children, manfully vanquished the opposition of the adversary, 
showing themselves forth in word and deed; and, having received crowns of victory 
from God, they supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Like an exceedingly fruitful olive-tree, like a heavy-laden vine replete with three 
branches, O Vassa, with them thou didst produce the grapes of confession, pouring 
forth the wine of witness which doth gladden the hearts of those who piously cry out: 
Ye people, supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages!  
Standing around the throne of God with the ranks of the incorporeal ones and the 
armies of the martyrs, O all-famed ones, and full of glory, grace and enlightenment, 
ye dispel the darkness of the offenses of us who with faith celebrate your luminous, 
divine and excellent memory, which is full of spiritual gifts. 
 Theotokion: The only Merciful One, the Word of the Father, Who formed the 
heavens with a divine gesture and the earth with His will and having fashioned 
mankind, manifestly took flesh from thee for Himself, that He might restore our 
corrupt nature which had been ruined by the deception of the serpent, O Virgin. 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the repose of 
the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Come ye to Sion, the divine and fertile mountain of the living God, and let us 
behold the Theotokos; for Christ hath translated her, as His Mother, to the Holy of 
Holies of a far better and divine tabernacle.  
Come, ye faithful, let us approach the tomb of the Mother of God and kiss it with 
hearts and lips, touching to it your eyes and faces, and drawing gifts of abundant 
healings from the ever-flowing fountain.  
Accept from us a hymn of parting, O Mother of the living God, and with thy light-
bearing and divine grace overshadow us, granting victory to Orthodox hierarchs over 
heresies, and forgiveness to all Christian people who hymn thee, and salvation to their 
souls.  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Drawing nigh to behold the divine rewards which are everlasting and the uttermost 
desires, O blessed Thaddeus, adorn thyself and dance!  
Like a cedar, like a mighty cypress-tree, wast thou elevated by the virtues, O 
glorious Thaddeus, perfuming the hearts of those who praise thee.  
Joining the apostles and martyrs, and sharing the gladness of the choirs of the 
incorporeal ones, O blessed one, pray thou with them, that those who honor thee 
may be saved.  
Thy memory, illumining the thoughts of the faithful with the rich radiance of 
spiritual gifts, O Thaddeus, impelleth all to praise thee.  
Theotokion: O right-beloved Virgin who hast given birth to the supremely good 
Word, bless thou my soul, which hath been vexed by sins.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Desiring to see what earthly eye hath truly never seen, illumined with immaterial 
radiance, thou didst manfully endure the painful crushing of the members of thy 
body, the onslaughts of wild beasts, the burning of fire, and the raging of the sea, O 
all-praised and all-blessed one.  
Thou didst truly shine forth like a radiant, magnificent and God-bearing moon of 
divine aspect, set among the shining stars of grace with those who issued forth from 
thy womb. And now, O blessed ones, illumine ye the whole world with immaterial 
splendor.  
Having established thoughts of heavenly ascent upon the rock of endurance, O 
blessed ones, ye were truly shown to be unaffected by the trials of various torments; 
and receiving the trophy of victory from Christ, ye have been deemed worthy to reign 
with Him, rejoicing throughout the ages.  
Like a truly chaste dove, like a turtle-dove who loved God, like a swallow on the 
wing with thy godly nestlings, thou hast made thine abode in the heavens, the divine 
and noetic realm, fleeing the winter and the pursuit of the demons, O Vassa, whom 
with love we call blessed.  
Theotokion: Having given birth to the Redeemer and Lover of mankind, O 
wondrous and right loving Lady, grant deliverance from sins to me by thy 
supplications; bless my soul which hath been oppressed by wicked thoughts, O most 
honored one; and show it to be freed from deadly passions, O all- immaculate one.  
Exapostilarion of the holy apostle:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Having been anointed a luminary for Edessa, O all-wise Thaddeus, therein thou 
didst proclaim the divine dispensation of the Word; and having enlightened the local 
ruler Abgar and all with him, thou didst show them to be servants of the most radiant 
Trinity, O apostle and preacher of God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the feast: 
O thy mysteries, O pure Birthgiver of God! For thou hast been shown to be the 
awesome throne of the Most High, greater than the cherubim, whereon He, the 
Author of creation, sat and revealed Himself. And having now passed over to Him, 
do thou protect the world and keep it safe.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Be thou mindful * of those who earnestly beseech thee, * O Virgin Theotokos, * 
and who honor with love ** thy sacred dormition.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
The tomb of the most pure * Theotokos * is a stairway to heaven, * leading up 
those who hymn ** her divine dormition.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
The kingdom of the Most High, * the glory of the elect, * receiveth thee, O Virgin, 
* thou Bride of God, ** who goest to thy Son.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast, in the same melody: 
Chant, all ye choirs of heaven, * for the Virgin Mother * hath most gloriously * 
been translated ** from earth to the heavens.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia, from ODE VII of both canons of the feast, 
including the Irmos of the first. 
Divine desire, opposing the rage and fire of the shameless one, bedewed the fire 
and put his rage to shame, countering the musical instruments with the divinely 
inspired sound of the three-stringed harp of the venerable ones in the midst of the 
flame. Blessed art Thou, O supremely glorious God of us and our fathers!  
Enraged, Moses smashed the divinely wrought tablets which had been inscribed by 
the divine Spirit; but the Master, preserving unharmed her who gaveth birth to Him, 
hath now caused her to dwell in the mansions of heaven. Celebrating with her, let us 
cry out to Christ: O supremely glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
On the cymbals of pure lips, with the music of a radiant heart, on the high-
sounding trumpet of exalted thought, clapping our diligent hands on the renowned 
and chosen day of the repose of the pure Virgin, let us cry aloud: O supremely 
glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The holy children bravely trampled upon the threatening fire, refusing to worship 
created things in place of the Creator, and they sang in joy: ‘Blessed and supremely 
praised art Thou, O Lord God of our Fathers.’ 
Honoring the memory of the Mother of God, O youths and virgins, elders and 
princes, kings and judges, chant ye: O Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Let the mountains of heaven sound the trumpet of the Spirit! Let the hills rejoice 
and the divine apostles dance! The Queen passeth over to her Son, reigning with 
Him!  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III:  
O holy Apostle Thaddeus, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls 
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV: 
The Church, ever enlightened by thy miracles * hath acquired thee as a most 
radiant star, O Apostle Thaddeus. ** Save those who with faith honor thy memory. 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II: 
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
 
NOTE: Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant, in Tone I, the Irmos of ODE IX 
of Canon I, and we continue to do so until the leave-taking of the feast:  
Refrain I: All of us, the generation of men, bless thee, the only Theotokos.  
Irmos I: In thee are the laws of nature overcome, * O pure Virgin, * for 
birthgiving is virginal * and death is betrothed to life. * For after giving birth 
thou didst remain a Virgin, * and after death thou didst remain alive, * O 
Theotokos, do thou ever save thine inheritance.  
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
 
 
 
 
