--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 28th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER MOSES THE BLACK  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs ...”: 
Having wisely abandoned the adornments of the world, Moses of great renown 
subdued the carnal passions by the mighty pangs of abstinence, and having cast down 
the greatly crafty one, he received a crown of victory. Through his prayers, O Lord, 
grant great mercy unto all.  
Thou didst possess exemplary abstinence, all-night standing, a vigilant eye and 
mind which perceived the beauty of God, O blessed Moses. Wherefore, thou hast 
received the grace of healing, that thou mayest cure cruel sufferings. For this cause we 
beg thee, O father: Ask thou great mercy for all.  
Covered by the hand of God, O father Moses, thou didst pass unscathed through 
the wiles, assaults and pursuit of the demons, and, adorned with dispassion, thou hast 
been numbered among all the venerable. Pray thou that great mercy be granted to 
those who honor thee with faith.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
My thoughts are impure, * and my lips are false, * all my works are defiled. * What, 
then, shall I do? * How shall I meet the Judge? * O Virgin Sovereign Lady, * entreat 
the Lord, thy Son and Creator, * that He accept my soul in repentance, * in that He 
alone is compassionate.  
Stavrotheotokion: ‘I cannot bear O my child, to behold Thee, * Who dost grant 
life and health unto all, * hung upon the Tree; * for of old those who were lulled into 
the sleep of death * by the fruit of the transgression * have been awakened * and 
granted divine and salvific life and health by Thee’, * thus said the Virgin weeping, ** 
whom we magnify. 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
A desert dweller, an angel in the flesh and a wonder-worker * wast thou revealed 
to be, O our God-bearing Moses. * Receiving heavenly gifts through fasting, vigils 
and prayers, * thou healest the infirm and the souls of those who with faith have 
recourse unto thee. * Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! * Glory to Him 
Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him Who through thee worketh healings for all!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos; and that of the venerable one, with 4 Troparia, in 
Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
By thy supplications and showers of repentance, O father, wash clean my heart 
which hath been darkened by the sting of sin.  
Having nailed thy flesh to the fear of the Master, O most blessed God-bearer, 
thou didst dry up every passionate thought from thy heart.  
Having hidden the seeds of the Word in the furrows of thy thoughts, O father, 
thou didst produce grain which is laid up in inexhaustible granaries.  
Theotokion: Desiring to become incarnate through thy womb, O pure Virgin 
Mother, the supremely divine Word hath saved all of me in His goodness.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Moved by the Spirit, O wise one, by endurance thou didst nullify the evil acts of 
the demons with spiritual acts.  
Strengthened with godly power, O venerable Moses, like one of the incorporeal 
ones thou didst humble the mighty serpent.  
With the showers of thy tears thou didst extinguish the fiery conflagration of the 
passions, and wast revealed to be a river of spiritual gifts, full to overflowing with the 
Spirit.  
Theotokion: Possessed of thine aid, O pure one, I fear not the assaults of the 
enemy; for, having thee as mine intercessor, I vanquish their hosts.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Made rich with divine radiance, thou didst destroy the darkness of the passions, O 
all-blessed one; and by thy vigilant prayers thou didst cause the vaunted reasoning of 
the flesh to wither away, and hast passed over to the ultimate city on high. O 
venerable father, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III: 
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence when He took flesh in thy 
womb, the one Lord remained God though He had become a man; and even after thy 
birthgiving He preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: “Woe is me, O my Child! How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, desiring to redeem mankind from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
By unceasing entreaties and the endurance of pain, O father, thou didst drive from 
thy soul the demon which loveth carnal activity.  
Directing thy thoughts to things which transcend the mind and speech, O 
venerable one, thou didst endure the burning heat of asceticism as though it were a 
divine dew.  
Unfurling the sail of non-acquisition, thou didst sail easily across the sea of life, O 
father, guided to the calm haven.  
Theotokion: O Bride of God, thou dwelling-place of virginity and habitation of the 
infinite Nature, illumine my darkened soul.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Set afire by the burning ember of dispassion, O blessed one, thou didst utterly 
consume the dry tinder of the passions.  
Thou hast been shown to be a star of abstinence, shining in the heights and 
illumining our souls, O most glorious one.  
Thou didst ascend to the summit of the virtues and attained unto the heavenly isle, 
O right wondrous father Moses.  
Theotokion: We hymn thee who remained a Virgin after birthgiving, O 
Theotokos; for the sake of the world thou hast given birth in the flesh unto God the 
Word.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
With the spiritual radiance which is within thee, enlighten me who am surrounded 
by the night of sin and the darkness of pleasures, O father, and guide me wholly to 
the haven of salvation.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Storing up the sweetness of the flowers of the virtues in the honeycomb of thy 
mind, like an industrious bee, O father, thou didst pour forth the sweetness of 
immortality which dispelleth the bitterness of the demons.  
Exercising thyself in endurance in the desert, thou didst inherit the city on high; 
and enslaving thy flesh through fasting, O wondrous one, thou didst depart to the 
fare which is never exhausted and the mansions of paradise.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, we, the faithful, call thee the noetic sanctuary and 
untouchable mercy-seat, the golden lamp-stand, and the animate table which beareth 
the Bread of life.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Having beaten the Moors * and spat in the faces of the demons, * thou didst shine 
forth noetically like the radiant sun, * directing our lives by the light of thy life ** and 
thy teaching.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Cleansed of the mire of the passions, and shining with spiritual radiance, thou hast 
truly passed over to the immaterial Light, O blessed one, where the choirs of fasters 
dwell throughout the ages.  
Thou didst flee all evil, and, embracing goodly change, thou didst immaterially es-
pouse good desires, O blessed one, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O God!  
By immeasurable pangs of abstinence thou didst cause the pain of sin to dry up. O 
God-bearer. Wherefore, thou hast found delight in good things without pain, blessing 
thy Master.  
Theotokion: Behold the Virgin of whom the great Isaiah prophesied would 
conceive God in her womb and give birth unto Him! To Him do we chant: O God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Enlivened by prayers, raised on high through humility, illumining thy soul with 
righteousness, adorned with love, O father, thou didst make haste to the perfection of 
the virtues, to the manifest heights, crying to the Master: Ye priests, bless; ye people, 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Though black of body, thou didst acquire a soul brighter than the rays of the sun, 
and didst blacken the dark countenances of the demons; and with thy divine likeness 
thou dost illumine the hearts of the faithful who fervently chant: Ye people, exalt 
God supremely throughout the ages!  
Wholly protected by humility, O father, thou didst escape the darts of the noetic 
Moors, and in word and deed wast a model for monks in engaging the spiritual enemy 
in battle, crying aloud with them: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people 
supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: In a manner transcending nature thou didst conceive, and in a 
manner past all telling thou didst give birth to the Fashioner of human nature Who is 
inseparable from the Father, yet became a man, O pure Lady. To Him doth all 
creation sing: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Christ 
throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
Having truly ended thy life in good deeds, thou didst reach the well-spring of good 
things and received thine ultimate desire. Where the voice of those who keep festival 
is heard, and where praising thou hast made thine abode, rejoicing, O right wondrous 
and venerable father Moses.  
The drops of the sweat of thy pangs let fall drops of the sweetness of spiritual 
benefit and dispel the bitterness of our passions. Thy relics pour forth healings upon 
us and cleanse our souls of the mire and defilement of evils. 
 Christ hath crowned thy head with unfading wreaths, O wondrous one, who 
steadfastly vanquished the hordes of the prince of this world; and as befits one of the 
venerable, thou hast been enrolled in the choirs of the saints. With them pray thou, 
that those who honor thee be delivered from temptations.  
Theotokion: Having given birth in the flesh to the Infinite One, Who thus became 
circumscribed, O Bride of God, thou, alone among women, didst abolish the curse of 
the first-formed man, renewing the laws of nature, O undefiled one, which of old 
were violated, and hast thereby unified them with thy most glorious mediation.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
A desert dweller, an angel in the flesh and a wonder-worker * wast thou revealed 
to be, O our God-bearing Moses. * Receiving heavenly gifts through fasting, vigils 
and prayers, * thou healest the infirm and the souls of those who with faith have 
recourse unto thee. * Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! * Glory to Him 
Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him Who through thee worketh healings for all!  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Having beaten the Moors * and spat in the faces of the demons, * thou didst shine 
forth noetically like the radiant sun, * directing our lives by the light of thy life ** and 
thy teaching.  
 
