--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS ADRIAN AND NATALIA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Beholding the most honored suffering * and the valiant feats of the martyrs, * O 
glorious one, * of thine own will thou gavest thyself over * to struggles with manly 
mind, * taking no pity on thy flesh for the sake of divine love. * Wherefore, thou 
didst pass through valorous struggles, * laying low the pride of the adversary, ** O 
patient-hearted Adrian.  
Imprisoned in dungeons, * beaten with thongs of ox-hide, * weighted down with 
irons, * and crushed with stones, * together with a multitude of martyrs, O glorious 
one, * with them thou hast received the blessings of heaven, * having as companion 
thy spouse Natalia * who trusted in God, ** O valiant Adrian.  
The spouse of Adam * caused him to be driven from paradise * through the 
counsel of the serpent; * but Natalia most wisely led Adrian to paradise * with her 
sacred conversations, * spurring him on with her teachings * to endure painful 
sufferings, * being a mediator for him of heavenly rewards ** and everlasting glory.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O holy pair, elect of the Lord! O eminent union blessed of God! O longed-for 
couple, beloved of Christ! Who doth not marvel, hearing of their deeds which 
transcend mortals? How did the female sex stand in a manly manner against the 
arrogant tyrant and strengthen her husband, that he not give in to the wicked, but 
choose to die for the Faith rather than to live? O the divinely woven words of the 
most wise Natalia! O the divine teachings which transcend the heavens and which set 
the glorious Adrian before the very throne of the great King Whom he 
acknowledged! O holy couple, pray to God for us who with love keep your memory, 
that we be delivered from temptations and all tribulations!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: A sword pierced thy heart, * O most pure Lady, * as Symeon 
said, * when thou didst behold Him * Who shone forth from thee ineffably, * 
condemned by the iniquitous * and lifted up upon the Cross, * tasting vinegar and 
gall, His side pierced, * His hands and feet run through with nails; * and, lamenting, 
thou didst exclaim, crying out maternally: * “What is this new mystery, * O my Child 
most sweet?” 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone I:  
The composition of Ephraim of Karyes: 
The zeal of a pious man drew his God-loving wife to splendid teaching; for the 
eminent Adrian was drawn on by the words of Natalia and finished the course of 
suffering. O the ways of the God-loving wife! For she did not bring her husband 
corruption as did Eve to Adam, but mediated never-ending life for him. Praising her 
with her husband, we cry out to Christ: Through Thy holy prayers grant us help!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this StavroTheotokion, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Standing at the foot of the Cross of thy Son and God, * and 
looking upon His long-suffering, O pure Mother, * weeping, thou didst say: “Woe is 
me, O my sweetest Child! * How is it that Thou sufferest these things unjustly, * O 
Word of God, ** that Thou mayest save mankind?”  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
AT MATINS  
 
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and the following canon of the holy martyrs, with 
4 Troparia, in Tone VI: 
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Through the prayers of Thy martyrs, O Christ God, raise me up to the light of 
repentance, who am held fast by the wicked sleep of my deeds in the night of this life, 
that I may glorify Thee.  
Illumined by the east of the noetic Sun and having become children of the day, O 
martyrs, with might ye destroyed all the gloom of the idols.  
Having tasted delight from lips that let drop the sweetness of divine wisdom, thou 
didst truly vomit forth the poison of thy former ignorance, O divinely blessed Adrian.  
Theotokion: Having received thy Creator incarnate of thy seedless womb in a 
manner past understanding, as He Himself desired, O pure one, thou hast truly been 
shown to be the Sovereign Lady of all created beings.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Escaping the bonds of the vanity of idolatry, O martyr, thou wast bound with a 
desire for the love of Christ, and with joy shared the bonds of His spiritual athletes.  
Your legs broken with iron bars, O spiritual athletes of the Lord, with bars of 
patience and valor ye truly broke the bonds of ungodliness.  
Utterly disdaining carnal love, O Natalia, with desire for Christ thou didst enflame 
the soul of thy husband which was kindled with the fire of divine love.  
Theotokion: Every rank of being exalteth the wonder of thy divine birthgiving, O 
pure one; for thou didst in supra-natural manner conceive God in thy womb, and 
having given birth unto Him thou hast remained Ever-virgin.  
Kontakion, in Tone IV:  
Having laid up in thy heart * the divine words of thy divinely wise wife, * O 
Adrian, martyr of Christ, * thou didst earnestly rush to sufferings, ** receiving a 
crown with thy spouse.  
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Thou didst extinguish the pyre of ungodliness with the dew of piety, O spiritual 
athlete, and by the crushing of thy members didst break the might of the idols, 
acquiring thy spouse as an aide against all their cruel array; and with her thou hast 
made thine abode in the kingdom on high, O Adrian, mighty of soul. Entreat Christ, 
that He give mercy to those who honor thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion. in Tone IV: 
Tempest-tossed by the threefold-waves of the passions, * I who lack a conscience 
fervently call upon thee, O most pure one: * Disdain me not, lest I perish, wretch that 
I am, * O thou who hast given birth to the Abyss of mercy; * for I have no other 
hope than thee. * Let me not become a joy unto mine enemies, * nor a byword, for I 
trust in thee. * For whatsoever thou desirest thou canst do, ** in that thou art the 
Mother of the God of all.  
Stavrotheotokion: The Virgin and ewe-lamb, beholding on the Cross the Lamb 
Who was born of her without seed, His side pierced by a spear, was wounded and 
with grief and cried aloud, exclaiming amid her pain: “What is this new mystery? How 
is it that Thou diest Who alone art Lord of life? Wherefore, arise, raising up our fallen 
forefather!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
The martyrs, having acquired the might of Christ and truly trampled down the 
feeble pretense of the tyrants, received crowns of victory from heaven.  
When sores covered the bodies of the saints, myrrh was truly offered to God, 
cleansing away the mighty sores of deception.  
With thy blood thou didst dye a robe of incorruption for thyself, having shed the 
vesture of corruption, O Adrian; and thou dost now stand with glory before Christ.  
Theotokion: Truly the mysteries of thy godly birthgiving are unutterable and 
ineffable for those on earth and in heaven, O Ever-virgin Theotokos.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
The two score and three valorous spiritual athletes, who now pray to Christ, 
loosed the bonds of impiety which was devoid of strength, by the might of the 
Trinity.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Standing like the sun amid brilliant stars, O Adrian, with the light of piety thou 
didst illumine those who struggled with thee; and dispelling the gloom of ungodliness, 
thou dost enlighten the ends of the earth.  
The dew of thy precious words was truly healing for the pangs of thy spouse, who 
tasted of the love of higher things, O divinely wise Natalia, partner of the martyrs.  
Theotokion: O good Sovereign Lady of the world, save those who confess thee to 
be the Theotokos with all their soul; for thee, the true Theotokos, do we have as an 
invincible protection.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Guided in piety by the hand of Christ, ye passed over the deep of ungodliness and 
made haste to the calm haven of the radiance of the Most High, O spiritual athletes 
of Christ.  
Thy victories, which transcended nature, perfume thy struggles like flowers, O 
wise one; for thou wast shown to be a fragrant censer of God, enkindled by the fire 
of torments, O Adrian.  
Adorned with the beauty of faith was thy holy soul, O most honored Natalia, and 
seeking the beauty of Christ, which is truly infinite, thou didst attain thy desire.  
Theotokion: O all-honored Lady, who for the sake of mankind hast given birth 
unto the Lord and Helmsman, still thou the constant and cruel tumult of my pas-
sions, and grant my heart peace.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
The divine commemoration * of the martyrs hath shone forth * radiantly 
illumining all the ends of the earth, * with the gladness of those who cry aloud: ** 
Thou art the joy of the martyrs, O Christ!  
Ikos: The two score and three warrior martyrs, valiantly desiring Christ the King, 
Who was nailed to the tree of the Cross in the flesh, ardently endured cruel pangs and 
dreadful torments, trampling down all the ungodliness of the idols and setting at 
naught the opposition of the iniquitous ones. Wherefore, Adrian and Natalia, that 
comely pair, beholding them, emulated them, and, rejoicing, cried aloud: Thou art the 
joy of the martyrs, O Christ!  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Ye were shown to be invincible pillars of the heavenly Sion, O martyrs, having cast 
down all the foundations of the enemy in the endurance of your suffering. Wherefore, 
we ever piously honor your memory.  
Natalia was given to Adrian by God as a helpmate united with him in soul, 
drawing him forth who was stuck fast in the abyss of deception and urging him to cry 
out: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Hiding the hand of the martyr as a precious treasure, O honored one, guided by 
the hand of the God of our fathers, thou didst not give the wealth of thy chastity over 
to adorn those who attempted to take it.  
Theotokion: The sacred prophets openly proclaimed beforehand the mystery of 
thine honorable birthgiving, O pure one; and we, gazing upon its fulfillment from 
afar, now piously call thee blessed.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Wholly consumed by the fire of torment, O spiritual athletes, with your blood ye 
quenched all the flame of ungodliness, crying aloud: Thee do we supremely exalt O 
Christ, throughout all ages!  
Who will not marvel at the wondrous woman’s love for God? For she disdained 
carnal desire and persuaded her spouse to honor and glorify Christ throughout all 
ages.  
A pillar of piety wast thou for the faithful, O all-blessed Adrian, martyr and 
spiritual athlete, having put to shame the vanities of the godless and desired the 
beauty of Christ.  
Theotokion: Thou didst conceive the Word, the Bestower of light, through light, 
giving birth ineffably to the Transcendent One; for the Spirit of God made His abode 
within thee, O Virgin. Wherefore, we hymn thee, O pure one, throughout the ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Neither the crushing of your members, nor the threat of cruel tortures, nor the 
sword, nor fire, nor the death of your corruptible flesh, were in any wise able to 
separate you from the love of Christ, O glorious martyrs. Wherefore, ye ever rejoice 
with Him throughout the ages.  
Ye were shown to be lamps of divine radiance, brilliant stars, beacons shining 
upon us the light of piety, rays of the Sun of glory, children of the never-waning 
blessedness, O all-honored martyrs of Christ.  
A wellspring full of the waters of the Spirit, a river full of divine gifts, and a cup 
pouring forth streams of suffering, were ye revealed to be, O martyrs, delivering us 
from the tempest of divers temptations.  
Theotokion: Resurrection hath now been given to the dead through thine 
unutterable and ineffable birthgiving, O all-pure Theotokos; for Life, clad in the flesh 
He received from thee, hath shone forth upon all, manifestly destroying the gloom of 
death.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Let the all-wise Adrian, the confirmation of spiritual athletes, and the honorable 
Natalia, be honored with hymns as is meet; and with them the holy company of 
martyrs shineth forth. And celebrating their radiant festival with pious intent, we 
hymn them with divine hymnody.  
Theotokion: The Author of creation and Fashioner of nature, Who in thy womb 
laid low the tyrant serpent who of old in Eden begrudged me deification, hath as God 
destroyed it by His Cross and death, pouring forth upon me incorruption.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
The divine commemoration * of the martyrs hath shone forth * radiantly 
illumining all the ends of the earth, * with the gladness of those who cry aloud: ** 
Thou art the joy of the martyrs, O Christ!  
