--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
AFTERFEAST OF THE DORMITION OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR AGATHONICUS & THOSE WITH HIM  
ON THIS DAY WE ALSO CHANT THE SERVICE OF THE HOLY MARTYR LUPPUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy martyr Agathonicus, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Seeking the primal goodness * and the beauty which passeth understanding, O 
Agathonicus, * rejoicing, thou didst proceed valiantly * to the struggles which lay 
before thee. * Thou didst wrestle with the enemy, * manfully casting him down to the 
ground, * and thereby plait a splendid wreath of victory, * do thou entreat Him Who 
is the Lover of mankind ** on behalf of those who hymn thee.  
Adorned with wisdom, * thou didst pour forth living discourse, * converting the 
senseless, * denouncing the tyrant, * and stilling the tempest of polytheism; * and 
thou didst cause the faithful to remain steadfast * in the grace of God. * Wherefore, 
having endured cruel burning, ** crowned, thou didst hasten to the kingdom on high.  
Adorned with drops of thy blood * shed when thou didst endure suffering, * thou 
didst stand before the Master * as a sacrifice of sweet savor, * a pure victim, an 
acceptable gift, a sacred offering, * a holocaust wholly unblemished. * Wherefore, by 
thy supplications * preserve the fullness of the Church in peace, ** O spiritual athlete 
Agathonicus.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyr Luppus, in the same melody: 
The blessed Luppus * broke up the heavy ice of ungodliness * with the warmth of 
the divine Spirit; * and, beheaded by the sword, * he poureth forth streams of healing 
* and with grace bedeweth souls which are wasting away. * O ye who love the 
martyrs, * let us piously praise him as our excellent intercessor ** and fervent helper.  
Thou didst commit the temples of the pagans * to the watery deep * and didst 
amaze the ungodly who beheld thy miracles * which thou didst work by thy faith, O 
all-blessed one. * Standing in their midst, * thou didst receive a divine shower from 
on high, * when God forever magnified thee, * as a firm and adamant martyr, ** O 
much-suffering spiritual athlete.  
Thine enemies, torturing thee with laceration, * lacerated one another, and, loosing 
arrows at thee, * they wounded themselves, * O spiritual athlete Luppus; * and, 
intending to dismember thee, O blessed one, * blinded, they inflicted their wounds on 
a tree; * for the Lord preserved thee, * for Whose sake thou didst will to suffer, ** O 
intercessor for our souls, converser with the angels.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone IV: 
Aptly wast thou named for a good victory, O much-suffering Agathonicus; for, 
wounded by divine desire, thou didst set at naught the falsehood of idols and the 
tyrant, and most gloriously passed over to the never-ending life. Wherefore, as thou 
hast boldness before God, on the glorious day of thy commemoration pray that our 
souls be saved.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone IV: 
It was fitting that the servants of the Word, who saw Him with their own eyes, see 
also the repose of His Mother in the flesh, inasmuch as it was the final mystery 
concerning her, that they might behold not only the Savior’s ascension from the 
earth, but also witness the translation of her who gaveth Him birth. Wherefore, 
assembled from all parts of the earth by the power of God, they reached Sion and 
bade farewell to her who is more highly exalted than the cherubim as she passed on 
to heaven. And we also, with them, bow down to her as one who prayeth for our 
souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! * She who, without knowing a man, gaveth birth to God 
in the flesh * and remained a virgin * is translated from life. * And, departing this 
transitory life, * she hath passed on to that which ageth not. * Wherefore, the 
disciples and apostles of Christ * make haste on clouds today ** to attend her burial.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness.  
Today let us all be reconciled * for the splendid solemnity, * glorifying with the 
angels * the honored repose of the Mother of our God; * for, having committed her 
holy * and radiant soul * into the hands of her Son, * she is united with Him in 
everlasting life, ** ever praying earnestly in spirit on our behalf.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
O come ye, and let us stand * noetically before honored Gethsemane * and the 
holy abode of the glorious body * of the Mother of our God. * With the apostles let 
us anoint ourselves with fragrance, * and with the angels let us chant; * for in her 
dormition * she alone hath today become the joy of those ** on earth and in heaven.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Named for the treasury of good things, thou didst dedicate thyself as a temple, O 
martyr Agathonicus; and struggling lawfully in torments for the King of all, thou didst 
cast down the power of the cruel enemy, and receiving the honor of victory, thou 
standest crowned before God in the highest. Him do thou entreat without ceasing on 
behalf of those who honor thee, O adornment of the martyrs.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Both now ..., the composition of the Emperor Leo, in Tone VIII: 
Jesus, thy Son and our God, O Theotokos, confirming His two natures, died as a 
man and arose as God; and it was His good pleasure, O Mother of God, that thou die 
also according to the law of nature, lest the unbelieving take His dispensation to be 
but a phantasm. For thou didst pass over to the land of heaven, O celestial Bride, 
taken up from the earth as from the chamber of thy dwelling. The air was sanctified 
by thy passage, as the earth was illumined by thy birthgiving. The apostles send thee 
forth, and the angels bear thee up. Wherefore, having buried thy most pure body and 
chanted funeral hymnody for thee, they gazed in awe and said with fear: “This change 
is from the right hand of the Most High; for He dwelt within thee, and thou shalt not 
be shaken.” O all-hymned Mother, depart not from thy watch over us; for we are thy 
people and the sheep of thy pasture; and we call upon thy name, asking salvation and 
great mercy for thy sake.  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death.  
  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death. (Twice) 
Glory , the Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Both now ..., the Troparion of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Shown on earth to be more spacious than the heavens, in that thou hast given 
birth in the flesh to the Creator of all, thou hast now departed from the earth to the 
heavens. The souls of the righteous, beholding thee, and the choirs of the angels, 
looking on, ever offer thee praise as is meet, as unto a Queen. Wherefore, cease thou 
never to pray for those who hymn thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
We hymn thy dormition, O most pure one, to which Christ our God, Who became 
incarnate from thee, came to receive thy spirit. Wherefore, even though thou hast 
departed, O Theotokos, in thy supplications cease not to visit those who hymn thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, with six Troparia, including its Irmos, the composition of 
Cosmas, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Thy sacred and glorious memory, * supremely adorned with divine 
glory, O Virgin, * hath gathered all the faithful in gladness, * and led by 
Miriam with choirs and timbrels, * hymn thine only-begotten Son, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified.  
Let the immaterial ranks accompany thy divine and immaterial body to Sion. For 
the multitude of the apostles, coming together of a sudden from the ends of the 
earth, stood before thee, O Theotokos; With them we also glorify thine honored 
memory, O pure one.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
The honors of victory over nature hast thou taken, having given birth unto God, 
O pure one; yet, emulating thy Creator and Son, thou didst submit to the laws of 
nature in a supra-natural manner. Wherefore, having died, thou didst arise with thy 
Son unto everlasting life.  
Canon of the holy martyr Agathonicus. 
The composition of Joseph, with 4 Troparia, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
O holy one, as thou art a good emulator of the good God, make my soul blessed, 
which hath become wicked through the passions; and grant me discourse, that I may 
glorify thy memory.  
Thou wast known unto Him Who knoweth all things, O divinely inspired martyr, 
and didst preach His incarnation before the heathen, fearing not the death of the 
body.  
By thy word thou didst raise up the fallen and didst show them to piously share in 
the resurrection and everlasting splendor, O most noetically rich martyr.  
Theotokion: The great miracle of thy birthgiving is seen to surpass all other 
miracles, O pure one; for thou hast given birth unto Christ Who was in the likeness 
of the flesh without change or confusion.  
Canon of the holy martyr Luppus. 
The composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
O warrior of Christ, valiant spiritual athlete, who art ever illumined and standest 
before the divine Light: enlighten with never-waning radiance my soul, which 
hymneth thy splendid and luminous memory.  
Manfully entering upon the struggles of martyrdom, thou didst confess God Who 
had appeared on earth and deified human nature, O most wise one; and thou didst 
destroy the gods of the pagans with the power of the Spirit.  
Filling thy heart with streams of vivifying waters, as with a divine river, thou didst 
dry up deception; and therewith thou hast given faith as drink for the thoughts of 
men, which put forth heavenly fruit.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: Like the dawn Jesus, the enlightenment and God of all, hath shone 
forth magnificently from thy womb, O Sovereign Lady, who knewest not wedlock, 
destroying the night of polytheism and illumining the world with never-waning 
splendors.  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Thou art the creative and almighty Wisdom, * and the Power of God, * 
do Thou establish the Church immovable and unshaken, O Christ; * for Thou 
alone art holy * Who restest in the saints.  
The glorious apostles, seeing thee to be a mortal woman, yet, in a manner 
transcending nature, the Mother of God, O all-immaculate one, with awe touched 
with their hands, thee who art resplendent in glory, perceiving thee to be a habitation 
acceptable to God.  
When God preserved with the glory of His divinity the honor of the animate ark 
wherein the Word becameth flesh, the judgment of retribution overtook the insolent 
one through the severing of his audacious hands.  
Canon of the holy martyr Agathonicus  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 
The vain-minded one hoped to ensnare thee deceitfully with enticements, but his 
vain idea was set at naught when thou, O martyr, didst set thyself firmly upon the 
rock of the true Faith.  
Having navigated the abyss of the wounds and pangs of thy body by the helm of 
Christ, O martyr Agathonicus, thou didst set sail for the noetic havens, rejoicing.  
“Let laceration and rending of the body come upon me this day, for I fear neither 
the sword, the grill, the fire, the wild beasts, nor death!” didst thou cry out, O spiritual 
athlete Agathonicus.  
Theotokion: The Uncircumscribable One, Who formed Himself from thee 
according to our nature, O Lady, took upon Himself our form in the flesh, and is 
known in two essences and wills.  
Canon of the holy martyr Luppus  
Irmos: Likened to a barren woman * the Church from among the nations hath 
given birth, * and the assembly abundant in children, hath grown weak. * Let 
us cry out to our wondrous God: * Holy art Thou, O Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Made firm for thy struggles by the invincible power of the Spirit, O martyr, thou 
didst enter upon them manfully and didst set at naught the arrogance of deception, O 
most blessed Luppus.  
The savage tyrant, perceiving thee to be one who beareth witness to the sufferings 
of Christ, hoped to lead thy mind astray with enticements; but the most wicked one 
was proved mistaken.  
Struck like a harp by the all-accomplishing Spirit, in the presence of the tormenters 
thou didst joyfully give voice to a hymn of divine understanding, delighting those who 
came with faith.  
Theotokion: God, making His abode in the midst of thee, O pure one, as is 
known, did not disturb the seal of thy virginity. He hath made all firm on the 
immovable rock of the Faith.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr Agathonicus, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of the angels ...”: 
Having acquired a good name, O divinely wise one, * thou didst convert wicked 
people to the Faith, * not fearing tortures, O glorious Agathonicus. * Wherefore, thou 
hast become an heir to good things, * and with those who suffered with thee ** hast 
thou received worthy crowns.  
Ikos: Entreat the Good One and Lover of mankind, O all-wise Agathonicus, that 
He transform the wickedness of my heart into good and grant me the words with 
which to hymn worthily the struggles which thou didst undergo for thy faith in Christ 
our God. For like a shepherd, O martyr, thou dost watch over all, driving away the 
wolves; and thou guiding thy flock to the land of truth, crying out with boldness: “We 
have been counted like sheep for the slaughter! Wherefore, let us die, that we may 
receive crowns of incorruption!”  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr Agathonicus, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Drowning the noetic Pharaoh and His armies in the streams of thy blood, O 
glorious one, thou didst pass over to the land where dwell the meek and all the 
martyrs, receiving a crown of incorruption, O right wondrous one. Wherefore, thou 
pourest forth healings upon the faithful and dost ease their sufferings, and drivest 
away evil spirits. O spiritual athlete Agathonicus, entreat Christ God, that He grant 
remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr Luppus, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Luminous in thy suffering, like gold in a crucible, O wise one, thou hast glowed 
with the radiance of healings and dispelled the darkness of the demons by grace. 
Wherefore, we all celebrate thy holy memory, O divinely blessed Luppus, boast of the 
martyrs.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”: 
The choir of the divine apostles assembled to bury thee with sublime honor, O all-
pure Theotokos; and with them the ranks of angels hymned thy repose, crying out 
with sublime praise. Leaping up together with joy, O pure one, we, the faithful, offer 
laudation unto thee with voices of hymnody, and we exclaim: Rejoice, O intercessor 
of those who ever honor thee!  
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The sayings and imagery of the prophets * revealed Thine incarnation 
from the Virgin, O Christ. * The splendor of Thine effulgence * hath gone 
forth unto the enlightenment of the nations * and the abyss gaveth forth its 
voice to Thee with gladness: * Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind.  
Behold, O ye people, and marvel, for the holy and openly manifest mountain of 
God is exalted on high to the mansions of heaven: the earthly heaven becometh a 
celestial and incorrupt habitation.  
Thy death hath become a passage to an everlasting and better life, O pure one, 
translating thee from transitory life to that which is truly divine and eternal, that thou 
mightest behold thy Son and Lord in gladness, O pure one.  
The gates of heaven were raised and the angelic choirs chanted; and Christ 
received the vessel of His Mother’s virginity. The cherubim lifted her up with 
gladness, and the seraphim glorify her, rejoicing.  
Canon of the holy martyr Agathonicus  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
Thou didst enter the tribunal of martyrdom, O wise one, splendidly defending 
thyself with the sword of the divine Faith; and, wrestling with the enemy, thou didst 
mightily vanquish him and set him beneath thy feet, O martyr and spiritual athlete 
Agathonicus.  
By the wisdom of thy words and the divine revelation of sacred acts thou didst 
affright the enemy, who had hoped to conquer the steadfastness of thy mind and lead 
thee into deception, O Agathonicus, martyr of Christ.  
With thy mind aflame with the fire of divine love, O glorious one, thou wast not 
afraid of the fire of thine adversaries, but didst burn like an ember and consume the 
tinder of ungodliness, O sacred martyr Agathonicus.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: He Who traverses the universe upon the backs of the cherubim, O 
pure one, was in a godly manner incarnate from thee as a man, and sat in thine 
embrace as a babe, and though a babe, He saved the first-formed man who of old had 
the acumen of a babe.  
Canon of the holy martyr Luppus  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Transcending the earthly bounds of human weaknesses, O blessed and most 
glorious Luppus, beaten with staves thou didst endure wounds, bearing the saving 
staff of salvation, the Cross of our God.  
Trusting in God, O spiritual athlete Luppus, with divine help thou didst remain 
unshaken like a mountain. Wherefore, elevated to heaven by divine desire, thou didst 
endure the breaking of thy limbs.  
Full of faith, wisdom and grace, thou didst confess the Word of God in the midst 
of the iniquitous, and disdained the arrows loosed at thee, which were stopped by the 
power of Christ from approaching thee.  
Theotokion: Jesus, the abyss of wisdom, descended upon thee like a gentle rain, O 
Virgin Birthgiver of God, finding thee alone to be pure, and thereby drowned the 
cruel torrents of impiety with divine grace.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The divine and ineffable goodness of Thy virtues, * do we confess O 
Christ; * for having shone forth from the pre-eternal glory * as the co-eternal 
and hypostatic Effulgence, * incarnate from the Virgin’s womb, * Thou hast 
shone forth as the Sun * upon those in the darkness and shadows.  
The choir of the apostles assembled, borne as on a cloud to Sion from the ends of 
the earth, to serve thee, the cloud of light through whom God Most High, the Sun of 
righteousness, hath shone forth upon those who are in the darkness and shadows.  
More harmonious than trumpets, the God-pleasing tongues of the theologizing 
men sounded forth to the Theotokos, playing a funeral hymn inspired by the Spirit: 
Rejoice, O incorrupt fountain of God’s life-creating incarnation which saveth all!  
Canon of the holy martyr Agathonicus  
Irmos: Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light * upon us who rise early at 
dawn, * unto the judgments of Thy commandments, * O Master, Lover of 
mankind, * Christ our God.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
As a lawful martyr, O glorious one, thou didst oppose the laws of the tyrant with 
the saving law of Christ our God, the Bestower of the law Who hath dominion over 
all.  
Agathonicus is now blessed as a splendid and most glorious martyr, and he ever 
rejoiceth radiantly with the hosts of heaven.  
Thou didst wish to die rather than live, O glorious one, that thou mayest forever 
acquire the everlasting life which is to come. Wherefore, thou didst bow thy head 
beneath the sword which severed thy neck.  
 
Theotokion: Foreseeing thy wonders through the divine Spirit, Isaiah cried aloud: 
“O pure one, behold! thou shalt receive in thy womb the Infinite One, incarnate!”  
Canon of the holy martyr Luppus  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
Thine enemies vowed to cut off thy members, O wise one, but instead they cut 
themselves, moved by God’s hand, and beheld thee preserved unharmed and 
unwounded.  
Having made the eye of thy soul steadfast upon an unbreakable rock, O martyr, 
thou wast in no wise shaken by the waves of bitter torments, being strengthened by 
the power of God.  
With the sprinkling of thy blood thou didst quench the burning of idolatry, O 
spiritual athlete, and, set aflame by the Holy Spirit, with the fire of thy sufferings thou 
didst utterly consume falsehood.  
Theotokion: With a pure mind let us honor the pure one, the beauty of Jacob; and 
adorned with divine actions, let us piously hymn her as the Mother of our God.  
ODE VI 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The inner fire of the whale * born in the depths of the sea, * was a 
prefiguring of Thy three-day burial, * of which Jonah showed himself to be a 
prophet, * having been delivered before being sent forth unharmed, crying: * I 
will sacrifice to Thee * with a voice of praise, O Lord!  
God, the King of all, giveth thee that which transcendeth nature; for, as He kept 
thee a virgin during thy birthgiving, so did He preserve thy body untouched by 
corruption in the tomb; and He glorified thee with Himself by a divine translation, 
rendering thee honor as a Son to His Mother.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Truly, O Virgin, thine Offspring set thee in the Holy of Holies as the splendid 
candles tick of the immaterial Light, the golden censer of the divine Ember, the jar 
and the staff, the divinely inscribed tablet, the holy ark, the table of the Word of life.  
Canon of the holy martyr Agathonicus  
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
With the weakness of thy flesh thou didst vanquish the myriad-numbered 
multitude of noetic moors, O wise one, and didst unite thyself to tens of thousands of 
sacred servants.  
Manfully didst thou tread the path of martyrdom and restrict the paths of evil, O 
spiritual athlete; and thou hast attained to the spacious habitations of heaven.  
Made luminous like gold in the crucible of cruel sufferings, O Agathonicus, wise 
one of Christ, thou wast shown to be an example placed in the treasuries of God.  
Theotokion: Having given birth unto Christ, thou remainest a virgin as thou wast 
before, O pure one, and dost most gloriously feed with milk Him Who giveth food 
unto all. Wondrous is the miracle and beyond attaining!  
Canon of the holy martyr Luppus  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
Mightily didst thou endure the tortures of the flesh, tormenting the ungodly 
thoughts of the iniquitous and bitterly wounding multitudes of the demons, O right 
wondrous one.  
Thou didst cause the gods of the ungodly to quake, reducing them to dust; and 
thou didst raise thyself up as an animate pillar of piety and a model of courage, O 
divinely inspired one.  
Replete with tortures, thou didst rejoice, O glorious spiritual athlete, and in the 
Spirit didst foresee the crowns and eternal glory of the martyrs which is to come.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth unto Him Whom the Father had begotten 
beginninglessly before time began, O pure one, and with thy breasts thou didst 
nourish the Nourisher; O wonder past understanding and mystery past all telling!  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II: 
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Ikos: Guard my thoughts, O my Christ, for I make bold to hymn the bulwark of 
the world, Thy pure Mother. Establish me firmly in the bastion of my words, and 
help me in the midst of difficult thoughts; for Thou fulfillest the entreaties of those 
who cry out and ask with faith. Wherefore, grant unto me a deft tongue and a ready 
mind, for every good deed of enlightenment cometh down from Thee, O Bestower 
of light, Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Divine desire, opposing the rage and fire * of the shameless one, * 
bedewed the fire and put his rage to shame, * countering the musical 
instruments * with the divinely inspired sound of the three-stringed harp * of 
the venerable ones in the midst of the flame. * Blessed art Thou, O supremely 
glorious God of us and our fathers!  
Enraged, Moses smashed the divinely wrought tablets which had been inscribed by 
the divine Spirit; but the Master, preserving unharmed her who gaveth birth to Him, 
hath now caused her to dwell in the mansions of heaven. Celebrating with her, let us 
cry out to Christ: O supremely glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
On the cymbals of pure lips, with the music of a radiant heart, on the high-
sounding trumpet of exalted thought, clapping our diligent hands on the renowned 
and chosen day of the repose of the pure Virgin, let us cry aloud: O supremely 
glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Gather ye together, O divinely wise people, for the dwelling-place of the glory of 
God is translated from Sion to the habitation of heaven, where is the pure voice of 
those who keep festival, the voice of the unutterable rejoicing of those who cry out to 
Christ in gladness: O supremely glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy martyr Agathonicus  
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither touched 
nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a single mouth * 
Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * ‘O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou.’ 
Thou didst share in the glory of heaven, hastening past all those on earth, having 
loved the Master of heaven and earth with all thy soul, O glorious one. Wherefore, we 
faithfully honor thy holy memory.  
Following the sufferings of Christ Who hath poured forth dispassion upon all the 
faithful, thou didst endure oppression, tribulation, and an undeserved death, O 
martyr, when, rejoicing, thou wast beheaded with the sword.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Thou didst in no wise render honor to the lifeless altars; worshiping the immortal 
God Who manifested Himself as a mortal for our sake and hath slain the strength of 
the deceiver. Wherefore, thou hast obtained true life, O wise martyr.  
Theotokion: God became a man through thee by unification, O pure one, deifying 
humanity and causing to share in the divine essence those who bless thee, O pure 
one, as truly blessed among women.  
Canon of the holy martyr Luppus  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
Made luminous by the beauties of virtuous sufferings, thou dost now stand, 
rejoicing, shining with divine effulgence, before Him Who for our sake endured 
suffering on the Cross.  
Water was most gloriously poured forth upon thee from heaven; and it enlightened 
and strengthened thy soul, commanding it to cry aloud: O supremely hymned Lord 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst stand amid thine enemies like a steadfast pillar, unshakable in mind by 
the machinations of multifarious torments, O glorious spiritual athlete; and with great 
intelligence thou didst set falsehood at naught.  
Theotokion: He alone Who dwelleth in the heavens chose thee alone, the beauty 
of Jacob; and, making His abode within thee, O pure and blessed one, He in no wise 
disturbed the seal of thy virginity.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The flame which bedewed the venerable children, * but utterly 
consumed the ungodly, * did the almighty Angel of God reveal to them; * and 
He rendered the Theotokos a life-creating well-spring * pouring forth 
destruction for death but life for those who chant: * O ye who have been 
delivered, * let us hymn and supremely exalt the only Creator * throughout all 
ages!  
With eloquence did the whole company of theologians follow the divine and 
sacred ark in Sion, crying out: “Whither goest thou now, O tabernacle of the living 
God? Cease thou never to look upon those who chant with faith: Let us who have 
been delivered hymn the one Creator and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!”  
Thou departest, O all-immaculate one, with hands upraised-the hands wherewith 
thou didst bear God in the flesh-and with maternal boldness thou didst say to Him to 
Whom thou hadst given birth: “Preserve those whom Thou hast given unto me 
forever, who cry out: Let us who have been delivered hymn the one Creator and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!”  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Canon of the holy martyr Agathonicus  
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Dragged from place to place, O spiritual athlete, thou didst hallow the earth with 
thy steps; and, bowing thy neck beneath the severing sword, thou wast parted from 
the flesh and united unto God.  
Aflame with desire for God, thou didst overcome all manner of beatings and 
tortures of the flesh; and having finished thy good race, thou didst join the myriads 
on high.  
The strength of the incorporeal foe was cast down, and the martyrs of Christ 
vanquished him in weakness of their flesh, strengthened by the omnipotent might of 
the Master.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mary, who art ever blessed, thee do we call the tabernacle 
and the table, the divine ark, the jar which held the Manna of life, and the holy 
mountain.  
Canon of the holy martyr Luppus  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
After many torments, O blessed one, thou didst bow thy head to God, beheaded 
by the sword; and with faith thou didst sever the heads of thine iniquitous enemies 
amid their terror.  
Thou didst give thyself over to voluntary slaughter as an unblemished lamb, 
emulating the Lamb of God Who taketh away the sins of the world, Who neither 
cried out nor complained.  
Thy shrine hath become the healing of all manner of infirmities and the 
unexpected cure of souls; for it hath been made rich with grace from God, O all-
famed Luppus.  
Theotokion: All creation blesseth thy birth giving, O Virgin, with the blessing of 
Him Who hath crowned us and removed the curse. O thou who alone art exceedingly 
blessed and most glorious, who hast brought grace upon our race!  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In thee, O pure Virgin, have the laws of nature * been overcome: * for 
thy birthgiving remaineth virginal * and thy life is betrothed unto death; * and 
remaining a Virgin after giving birth * and alive after dying, O Theotokos, * 
thou dost ever save thine inheritance.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
The angelic hosts were amazed, seeing their Master in Sion, bearing in His arms a 
woman’s soul; for as befitteth a Son, He exclaimed to her in a most pure manner: 
Come, O pure one, and be glorified with thy Son and God!  
The choir of angels buried thy body, which had received God, gazing upon it with 
fear, and exclaiming with a loud voice: O Theotokos who ascendest to thy Son in the 
heavenly mansions, thou ever savest thine inheritance!  
Canon of the holy martyr Agathonicus  
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of all 
descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom He was 
incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as the pure 
Mother of God.  
O wise Agathonicus, as one crowned thou now standest radiantly before the 
Trinity, amid the holy choirs of the sacred apostles, in the mansions of the spiritual 
athletes, in the folds of the venerable, honored with the prophets, rejoicing with 
them.  
In that thy love was wondrous, thy faith firm, thy hope in God good, thy life 
luminous, and thy death full of grace, O martyr and spiritual athlete, He hath made 
thee to share in immortal glory.  
As is meet, O wise Agathonicus, we praise thee as a lamb of Christ, a sacred 
immolation, the beauty of spiritual athletes, a well-spring of miracles, the comely 
adornment of the Church, O divinely wise one.  
Thine all-holy memory which sanctifieth the world hath now come upon us, O all-
glorious martyr; and thereon we pray to receive thine aide, honoring thee with love, O 
Agathonicus, as a good favorite of the Word.  
Theotokion: Possessed of a sin-loving character, a prodigal life, a sinful soul and a 
heart defiled, prodigal that I am, I fall down before thee, O Lady. Help me and grant 
me correction before death cuts me off.  
Canon of the holy martyr Luppus  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Even in the flesh thou wast able, O most glorious one, to trample down the 
ancient serpent by divine power, and thou wast crowned with a crown of victory. 
Wherefore, rejoicing with the martyrs, thou dwellest now in the heavens.  
Thou wast shown to be a star of great brilliance, shining forth like the the sun 
upon those who sit in the darkness of perdition, O martyr. And enlightened thereby, 
they share now in the never-waning light by faith, O right glorious one.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Today thy memory hath shone forth more brightly than the sun, illumining the 
whole earth, driving clouds away from all souls and dispelling the gloom of the 
passions. And with supplications we celebrate it.  
Sion on high, the city of the elect, beareth thy spirit, rejoicing; the Church of the 
first-formed hath been rendered luminous; and we, the faithful, honor thee, asking 
that, by thy supplications, we be saved, O divinely wise and all-blessed Luppus.  
Theotokion: With rays of the light which is within thee, O Bride of God, enlighten 
my soul; raise it up, for it lieth in the pit of destruction, and set at naught those who 
ever trouble my heart and impel me toward the passions.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyr Agathonicus: 
 Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the Sanctuary ...”: 
As the namesake of good things and of victory, O martyr Agathonicus, entreat 
God, Who loveth compassion, that I may have a share of everlasting good things with 
those who with faith hymn thy radiant and right laudable memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the feast: 
O ye apostles, come ye together to bury the body of the one Bride of God and 
Mother of the Lord! Rejoice now, O Garden of Gethsemane, and chant funeral 
hymns to her who hath flown up to the heavens and joineth chorus with the angels in 
never-ending glory!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Escorting thy precious body, * which had received God, * the divine apostles * 
cried out with hymns: ** “Whither goest thou now, O Lady?”  
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, * Thou and the ark of Thy holiness. 
Come, O ye mortals, * let us form a choir, * crying out hymns of parting * at the 
repose ** of the Theotokos today!  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
The earth is blessed * by thy burial, O Virgin; * and the air is sanctified * by the 
strange ascent, ** when thou diest according to the law of nature.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody 
O all ye mortals, * with the incorporeal ones * let us diligently make haste * to bury 
her who gaveth birth ** unto the Maker of creation.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia from ODE VIII of both canons of the feast, 
including the Irmos.  
The flame which bedewed the venerable children, but utterly consumed the 
ungodly, did the almighty Angel of God reveal to them; and He rendered the 
Theotokos a life-creating well-spring pouring forth destruction for death but life for 
those who chant: O ye who have been delivered, let us hymn and supremely exalt the 
only Creator throughout all ages!  
With discourses the whole multitude of theologians accompanied the sacred coffin 
of the Theotokos in Sion, exclaiming: Whither goest thou, O tabernacle of the living 
God? Cease not to regard those who chant with faith: O ye who have been delivered, 
let us hymn and supremely exalt the only Creator throughout all ages!  
Thou goest forth, O all-immaculate one, lifting up thine hands, the hands 
wherewith thou didst bear God in the flesh; and as a Mother didst boldly say to Him 
Who was born of thee: Preserve Thou forever those whom Thou hast given to me, 
and who cry out to Thee: O ye who have been delivered, let us hymn and supremely 
exalt the only Creator throughout all ages!  
The Offspring of the Theotokos saved the holy children in the furnace. He who 
was then prefigured hath since been born on earth, and he gathers all creation to sing: 
O all ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages. 
The principalities, authorities and powers, the angels, archangels, thrones, 
dominions, the cherubim and the dread seraphim, glorify thy memory, O pure Virgin; 
and we, the race of mankind, hymn and supremely exalt it throughout all ages.  
He Who, in a strange manner, made His abode, incarnate, within thy pure womb, 
O Theotokos, receiveth thy most sacred spirit and, as thy Son and One in thy debt, 
hath given it rest by His side. Wherefore, we hymn and supremely exalt thee 
throughout all ages, O Virgin.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
In giving birth thou didst preserve thy virginity, * and in thy dormition thou didst 
not forsake the world, O Theotokos. * Thou hast been translated unto life, * since 
thou art the Mother of Life. ** And by thine intercessions thou dost deliver our souls 
from death. 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Kontakion of the holy martyr Agathonicus, in Tone I:  
Having acquired a good name, O divinely wise one, * thou didst convert wicked 
people to the Faith, * not fearing tortures, O glorious Agathonicus. * Wherefore, thou 
hast become an heir to good things, * and with those who suffered with thee ** hast 
thou received worthy crowns.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone II: 
The tomb and mortality could not hold the Theotokos, * who is untiring in her 
supplications * and our certain hope in her intercessions. * For, as the Mother of Life, 
she hath passed over to the Life ** Who dwelt within her ever-virgin womb.  
 
NOTE: Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant, in Tone I, the Irmos of ODE IX 
of Canon I, and we continue to do so until the leave-taking of the feast:  
Refrain I: All of us, the generation of men, bless thee, the only Theotokos.  
Irmos I: In thee are the laws of nature overcome, * O pure Virgin, * for 
birthgiving is virginal * and death is betrothed to life. * For after giving birth 
thou didst remain a Virgin, * and after death thou didst remain alive, * O 
Theotokos, do thou ever save thine inheritance.  
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
  
 
 
 
