--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 25th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE RETURN OF THE RELICS  
OF THE HOLY APOSTLE BATHOLOMEW  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE TITUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the apostle Bartholomew, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Earnestly let us bless the glorious Bartholomew, * the never-setting star * of the 
Sun of great splendor, * the animate heaven * which proclaimeth the saving glory of 
God, * the divine preacher, * the beacon of the nations, * the river which poureth 
forth a stream of understanding ** watering the hearts of the faithful.  
Thy paths were revealed in the sea, O apostle, * and shown to be beyond the 
understanding of men; * for, cast into the sea in a casket, * thou didst make thy way 
to the West, * O all-famed Bartholomew, * right glorious martyrs following thee from 
the East * on either side, * rendering homage to thee, ** at the behest of the Master 
of all.  
With thy wondrous ascents thou didst purify the water, * and didst arrive at the 
island of Lipari, * pouring forth myrrh, O glorious one, * healing incurable diseases; * 
thou didst become for the faithful in that place * a savior and refuge, * a deliverer and 
intercessor * before the King and Savior of all, ** O Apostle Bartholomew.  
And 3 Stichera of the apostle Titus, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Proclaiming the one Godhead * in three Hypostases, * thou didst roil the sea of 
polytheism, * and those drowning in the abyss of ungodliness * didst thou guide to 
the calm haven, * O blessed one. * Wherefore, thou hast received heavenly 
recompense, * entreating Him Who is the Lover of mankind, ** on behalf of those 
who hymn thee.  
Having illumined thy mind * with divine radiance, * thou didst travel with the sun 
like a ray thereof, * with Paul illumining the darkened, * O godly Titus; * and with 
him thou didst deliver the world * from the deepest night. * Wherefore, we call thee 
blessed, as a God-pleasing hierarch, ** a divine apostle and fervent intercessor.  
Hailing from Crete and returning thereto, * thou didst establish the true Faith 
therein * as an unshakable foundation, * edifying the faithful therewith * by the divine 
power of heaven, * O blessed Titus, * first hierarch of thy homeland, * companion of 
Paul ** and consolation of the faithful.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone I: 
Forsaking earthly things, thou didst follow after Christ; and having been marked 
by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, thou wast sent by Him to the nations who were 
perishing, to turn the people to the light of the knowledge of God, O Apostle 
Bartholomew. And having completed the divine feats of thy suffering and undergone 
divers tortures, thou didst surrender thy soul to Christ, Whom do thou entreat, O all-
blessed one, that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone I: 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Tree of the Cross. O Jesus, she 
that kneweth not wedlock said weeping: “O sweet Child, why hast Thou abandoned 
me who alone gave birth to Thee, O unapproachable Light of the beginningless 
Father? Hasten Thou, and glorify Thyself, that those who glorify Thy divine 
sufferings may receive divine glory!” 
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostles * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins * 
unto our souls. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, and two for the holy apostles, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy apostle Bartholomew, the acrostic whereof is: 
 “With hymns I honor my good intercessor.” 
The composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
The Rock of life hath shown thee to be a most precious rock, upon which He hath 
founded His Church, O Bartholomew, apostle of the Lord. Wherefore, we honor 
thee and call thee blessed.  
In a manner transcending mind and thought thou didst learn sublime things, 
discovering the hypostatic Wisdom; and, making the ends of the earth wise with 
divine teachings, showing the wisdom of the Greeks to be foolish.  
Though thy lifeless body was enclosed in a coffin, thou didst traverse the sea, 
obedient to the commands of God, O apostle; and like the sun, passed from the East 
to the West, illumining it.  
Theotokion: He Who is full hath emptied Himself; the Pre-eternal One hath come 
under time, born of the divine Virgin Maiden. Him didst thou proclaim in two 
natures but a single hypostasis, O divinely blessed one.  
Canon of the holy apostle Titus, the acrostic whereof is: “Most wisely do I hymn 
Titus, the disciple of Paul” The composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
The grace of the Spirit, enriching thee with every gift, O most glorious Titus, sent 
thee forth to preach the incarnation of the Word unto the ends of the earth.  
Receiving the radiance of divine grace, O blessed and most wise one, thou didst 
shine forth like the sun upon souls in darkness, illumining them, striping them of 
their ignorance, and delivering them from slavery to falsehood.  
The most wise Paul, full of the gifts of the Spirit, laid his hands on thee, O most 
wondrous Titus, ordaining thee as a minister and disciple of God and a preacher of 
the Faith.  
Theotokion: Delivering the ends of the earth from deception, the Lord shone 
forth from thy womb, O Bride of God. Him do thou ever beseech, that He save 
those who honor thee with faith, O Virgin.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the holy apostle Bartholomew  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Those held fast by deception, and madly enshrouded in the gloom of ungodliness 
to their detriment, have found thee to be a mighty consolation, a light and deliverance 
from evils, O most wise Bartholomew.  
Thou wast the mouth of God the Word, O glorious Apostle Bartholomew, and 
hast delivered all from the mouth of the wicked wolf, bringing them to thy Master 
through the font of baptism.  
Having burned up the bitter tinder of falsehood with thy fiery tongue, O most 
wise one, thou hast restored hardened hearts and made them receptive to heavenly 
understanding.  
Theotokion: God the Word Who, in a manner past all telling, was well-pleased to 
be born of thee in the flesh, O pure Virgin Mother, chose the glorious Bartholomew 
as His disciple and close servant.  
Canon of the holy apostle Titus  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Not by wisdom dost thou render attentive those who are foolish, O blessed one; 
rather by teaching the understanding of the Truth dost thou drive away the blindness 
of the souls of those who have recourse unto thee.  
With the scythe of God thou didst clear the inheritance of the nations, the furrow 
choked with the thorns of ungodliness, sowing therein the seed of understanding.  
Preaching the one Godhead in three Hypostases, O blessed one, thou didst drive 
away the gloom of polytheism, leading the ends of the earth to divine understanding.  
Theotokion: He Who was born of thee in the flesh hath rendered thee holier than 
the angels and more exalted than all creation; wherefore, we honor thee as the 
Sovereign Lady of all.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle Titus, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Revealed as a companion of Paul, * O ever-memorable Apostle Titus, narrator of 
sacred mysteries, * with him thou didst preach to us the words of divine grace. * 
Wherefore, we cry out to thee: ** Cease thou never to pray for us all!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle Bartholomew, in Tone III: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine ...”: 
O Apostle Bartholomew, thou hast been revealed to be a treasure of the Church 
which cannot be stolen, an unshakable pillar of piety; and setting thy path in the sea, 
thou pourest forth an abyss of divine healings. O right glorious one, entreat Christ 
God, that He grant us great mercy.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle Titus, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Like a star with the sun, thou didst travel with Paul, O most glorious Titus; mani-
festly illumining the earth and enlightening the darkness. Settling in the island of 
Crete, O blessed one, in death thou didst leave thy pangs and discourses behind for 
all, like never-fading beams of light, O divinely wise one; and, illumined thereby, we 
piously honor and cry out to thee together: Entreat Christ God, that He grant 
remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
As the all-immaculate Bride of the Creator, * Mother of the Redeemer, who 
knewest not a man, * and as the receptacle of the Comforter O all-hymned one, * 
hasten thou to deliver me, * the vile abode of iniquity and noetic plaything of the 
demons, * from their evil machinations; * and make me the bright dwelling-place of 
the virtues, * O thou incorrupt light-bearing one. * Drive away the clouds of the pas-
sions and grant that, * by thy supplications, * I may receive a portion on high ** and 
share in the never-waning light.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy apostle Bartholomew  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
The sayings of the prophets have received their fulfillment; for the divinely 
eloquent disciple hath gone as a light to preserve the nations, illumining all the ends 
of the world.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Illumined with divine light, O glorious one, thou wast shown to be a secondary 
light by divine communion, ministering from the beginning to Him Who abased 
Himself to assume flesh for our sake.  
Deliver thy flock from the tempest of sin, from misfortunes and tribulations at the 
hands of the adversary, O glorious one, ever guiding us to the havens of salvation 
with grace.  
Theotokion: In that thou hast given birth ineffably to the ineffably great wealth of 
tender compassion, O pure one, with divine gifts enrich us who have become paupers 
through sin.  
Canon of the holy apostle Titus  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Drawing from inexhaustible treasuries, O all-wise and glorious one, thou didst fill 
hungry minds with a true wealth of understanding, bringing life to dead hearts, and 
driving away the darkness of ignorance.  
The net of Paul ensnared thee by the grace of providence, O Titus, and in time 
thou didst diligently draw many nations forth from the depths of deception into piety 
with the hook of thy discourse.  
Following the glorious and godly Paul like a lamb, O divinely eloquent one, thou 
didst drive away the wolves of evil. Thou hast cast the temples of the idols to the 
ground and made mortals temples of God.  
Theotokion: The holy Theotokos is called blessed, in that she is the undefiled 
tabernacle, the portal of the Light, the altar and golden jar, the unquarried mountain 
densely wooded, for she contained within herself the Creator.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy apostle Bartholomew  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Acquiring beautiful feet through thy preaching, thou didst proclaim the glad tidings 
unto all, O blessed one, announcing peace to the world, and banishing the ancient 
enmity by divine teachings, O apostle of the Savior. 
  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thy discourse was healing for those who had received the deadly venom of the 
serpent, O Bartholomew; and, in accordance with the prophecy, the ground of the 
impious fell at the proclamation of thy most wise doctrines.  
Traversing the unfathomable depths borne aloft on the crests of the waves of the 
sea, with the divine martyrs, O Apostle Bartholomew, thou didst arrive at the island 
of Lipari, pouring forth abundant life upon a man many days dead.  
Theotokion: Rejoicing, I truly glorify thee, the most pure Mother of God, and I 
cry out to thee like the angel, O blessed and joyous one, awesome report and saying, 
thou strange receptacle of the Master of creation.  
Canon of the holy apostle Titus  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
Like an excellent physician and as a minister of grace, thou didst bind up the fetid 
and evil wounds of the gentiles’ souls, O blessed one, with the sweet salt of thy divine 
discourses.  
Meekly submitting to the precepts of Paul, O most wise and most honored herald 
of God, with him thou didst traverse the world, proclaiming words of understanding.  
Teaching the Word Who is equally active and co-enthroned with the Father, O 
divinely eloquent one, as one wise thou didst subdue the vain-minded, causing them 
to cast aside all the delusion of idolatry.  
Theotokion: Adorned with divine acts, with pure mind let us honor the pure one, 
the beauty of Jacob, and with piety let us hymn her as the Mother of our God.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy apostle Bartholomew  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
In thy radiant teachings, O apostle, thou wast a ray of the Sun Who shone forth in 
the flesh upon the world, driving away the night of the darkness of polytheism.  
Thou didst explain to the people the salvation wrought by God Who, in His 
surpassing goodness, manifested Himself in the likeness of the flesh, O Bartholomew, 
preacher and apostle to the nations.  
Thou didst have thy path in the sea and make thy way through the waters, O 
blessed apostle; and thy steps were perceived aforetime through the Spirit, as David 
foretold.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: Thou wast a temple of glory and wast shown to be the portal of the 
Light, the mountain densely wooded, O divinely joyous Virgin Mother, who art 
hymned by prophetic signs.  
Canon of the holy apostle Titus  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Paul, the never-setting sun of the world, emitteth thee like a ray of splendor, O 
blessed one, illumining the hearts of those who sit in the darkness of ignorance.  
Full of life-giving waters, O blessed one, with the streams of thy divine teachings 
thou dost wash away the torrents of ignorance, watering the assemblies of the 
nations.  
Theotokion: Generations of generations hymn thee, O all-hymned one; for, in a 
manner past all telling, thou hast given birth to the all-hymned Word of God, Whom 
the ranks of angels and mankind glorify.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle Bartholomew, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
Thou hast appeared to the Church as a great sun, * O Bartholomew, apostle of the 
Lord, * illumining with the radiance of doctrines * and with awesome wonders ** 
those who hymn thee. 
 Ikos: Having passed over the earth like a sun of great radiance, illumining it with 
the rays of thy discourses, thou didst set, dying a martyr’s death; and with the 
splendor which issueth forth from thy tomb thou dost dispel the darkness of the 
passions. Wherefore, those consumed with envy, driving thee like the sun toward the 
West, O passion-bearer, set thee afloat on the sea; and a wonder most great was 
beheld in thee, who in awesome manner sailed the depths of the sea in a wondrous 
voyage, O Bartholomew, apostle of the Lord.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy apostle Bartholomew  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Mankind, rendered foolish through wickedness, O most glorious one, didst thou 
heal with the sweet salt of thy words; and thou didst give them the faith to chant: O 
supremely hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Like the loftiest heaven, with an exalted voice as a divine apostle thou dost noetic 
ally proclaim the glory of God, to Whom we cry: O supremely hymned Lord God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having woven a robe of divine grace, O blessed one, thou hast clothed those who 
have been cruelly stripped bare through the malice of the serpent, and hast given 
them the faith to chant; O supremely hymned Lord God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
Theotokion: Made rich, O pure Birthgiver of God, we, thy servants, ever cry out 
with faith to thee, our intercessor and insuperable rampart: Rejoice, O bridge leading 
to God from the earth, O blessed one!  
Canon of the holy apostle Titus  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
Teaching men to hymn the one Godhead and to worship the one Dominion, Titus 
converted from the madness of polytheism those who piously exclaim: O God of our 
fathers Blessed art Thou!  
Instructed by thee, O disciple and narrator of ineffable mysteries, those dead in 
soul who worshipped inanimate matter came to acknowledge God, the Bestower of 
life, Who was put to death for our sake.  
As a servant of the Truth, thou wast shown to be a dispeller of falsehood, O 
glorious one; and as a disciple of Paul, thou didst endure persecutions and 
tribulations, chanting with him: O God of our fathers Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Adorned with the virtues, thou hast taken thy place at the right hand 
of the King of all Who became incarnate from thy blood, O thou who knewest not 
wedlock, earnestly praying that we be delivered from all need.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy apostle Bartholomew  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Irrigated by divine streams, thou didst issue forth, like a river from Eden, to water 
the world with thy teachings, drying up the waters of falsehood by grace, and crying 
out: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
The Word, having taught thee heavenly discourse as a divine theologian, loosed 
thee like a heavenly arrow upon the world, wounding the assemblies of the enemy, O 
glorious one, and saving those who with faith hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Thou wast shown to be like a mountain issuing forth divine sweetness, O right 
laudable one; and after thy death thou didst set thy path in the sea, sailing under 
divine power, undrowned by its depths, O valiant spiritual athlete, but being borne up 
thereby.  
Theotokion: Circumventing the laws of nature, thou hast given birth yet remained 
Ever-virgin; for thou didst bear the Word Who, in His surpassing goodness, became a 
man. To Him do we all cry aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt 
Him throughout the ages!  
Canon of the holy apostle Titus  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
With the sprinkling of thy blood thou didst quench the alien fire of delusion; 
driving out sickness and vanquishing demons, by thine entreaty to God, O Apostle 
Titus. Wherefore, we praise thee as a divine favorite of Christ, the King of all.  
Wholly consecrated to God and adorned with divine graces, O all-wise Titus, thou 
didst explain unto all the word of salvation which hath delivered us who with true 
faith bless and supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages.  
As a most pure receptacle of the Light thou hast illumined the world with divine 
radiance, O right wondrous Titus; and thou hast cast into darkness the opposition of 
the iniquitous foe, hymning and exalting the Lord throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: The sword which of old warded me off now giveth way to me, O 
Virgin, for thou hast given birth to the Word clad in the flesh and understood to be in 
two natures. Before Him do the ranks of angels tremble, and mortals glorify Him 
forever.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy apostle Bartholomew  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Today the choir of the apostles doth celebrate the feast of thy memory: the 
martyrs and the ranks of all the righteous rejoice. And we, the faithful, honor thee 
with hymns and cry aloud: O disciple of Christ, deliver us from all grief!  
Receiving thy blessed end on a cross, O glorious one, thou didst emulate the 
sufferings of thy Teacher, sharing in His radiance and divine glory, and ever standing 
before Him with the angels, deemed worthy of ineffable light.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
The most radiant and right harmonious day of thy memory hath dawned, 
illumining all, O wise Bartholomew, eye-witness of Christ; and thereon we entreat 
thee: Remember us all, delivering us by thy supplications from all adversity and every 
evil circumstance.  
Theotokion: Mortify our carnal thoughts, O pure Birthgiver of God, quell the 
tempest of our passions, still our turmoil, and with divine thoughts make steadfast the 
hearts of those who honor thee with faith, O our pure unashamed advocate.  
Canon of the holy apostle Titus  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Bearing all thy love and hope to the Redeemer, O apostle, Paul drew thee along as 
his companion, preaching the sacred Gospel to the nations with thee. Wherefore, we 
honor thee with him.  
Thou drivest away the ailments of the faithful and expellest demons by divine 
grace. And the great city of Crete hath acquired thee as its divine primate and a 
luminary of heavenly radiance, O divinely wise and right laudable Titus.  
Thy memory hath shone forth upon us like the sun, and, adorned most splendidly 
with the radiance of the Spirit, it dispelleth the clouds from our souls. O all-blessed 
and right laudable Titus, preserve us who celebrate it with faith.  
Theotokion: By thy mediation, O pure and all-immaculate one, loose thou the 
bonds of my transgressions and destroy the darkness of my soul. O Ever-virgin Lady, 
still the tempest of my passions; crush those who make war upon me in vain, and 
save me.  
Exapostilarion of the holy apostles:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”: 
O ye faithful, let us all glorify Bartholomew and Titus, the receptacles of the Light, 
the immutable rays of the never-waning day; the brilliant flashes of lightning.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
With thy mighty protection, O pure one, preserve all of us, thy servants, unharmed 
by the assault of the enemy; for thee alone do we have as our refuge amid perils.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
 AT LITURGY  
 At the beatitudes, 4 from ODE III of the holy apostle Bartholomew, and 4 
from ODE VI of the holy apostle Titus: 
Those held fast by deception, and madly enshrouded in the gloom of ungodliness 
to their detriment, have found thee to be a mighty consolation, a light and deliverance 
from evils, O most wise Bartholomew. (Twice) 
Thou wast the mouth of God the Word, O glorious Apostle Bartholomew, and 
hast delivered all from the mouth of the wicked wolf, bringing them to thy Master 
through the font of baptism.  
Having burned up the bitter tinder of falsehood with thy fiery tongue, O most 
wise one, thou hast restored hardened hearts and made them receptive to heavenly 
understanding.  
Paul, the never-setting sun of the world, emitteth thee like a ray of splendor, O 
blessed one, illumining the hearts of those who sit in the darkness of ignorance. 
(Twice) 
Full of life-giving waters, O blessed one, with the streams of thy divine teachings 
thou dost wash away the torrents of ignorance, watering the assemblies of the 
nations.  
Theotokion: Generations of generations hymn thee, O all-hymned one; for, in a 
manner past all telling, thou hast given birth to the all-hymned Word of God, Whom 
the ranks of angels and mankind glorify.  
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostles * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins * 
unto our souls. 
Kontakion of the holy apostle Titus, in Tone II:  
Revealed as a companion of Paul, * O ever-memorable Apostle Titus, narrator of 
sacred mysteries, * with him thou didst preach to us the words of divine grace. * 
Wherefore, we cry out to thee: ** Cease thou never to pray for us all!  
Kontakion of the holy apostle Bartholomew, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast appeared to the Church as a great sun, * O Bartholomew, apostle of the 
Lord, * illumining with the radiance of doctrines * and with awesome wonders ** 
those who hymn thee. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
EPISTLE TO TITUS, §300 (TIT. 1: 1-4, 2: 15-3: 3, 12-13, 15)  
Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of 
God’s elect, and the acknowledging of the Truth which is after godliness, in hope of 
eternal life, which God, Who cannot lie, promised before the world began, but hath 
in due times manifested His word through preaching, which is committed unto me 
according to the commandment of God, our Savior; to Titus, mine own son after the 
common Faith: Grace, mercy and peace, from God, the Father, and the Lord Jesus 
Christ, our Savior. These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let 
no man despise thee. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to 
obey magistrates, to be ready to every good work, to speak evil of no man, to be no 
brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto all men. For we ourselves also were 
once foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice 
and envy, hateful, and hating one another. When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or 
Tychicus, be diligent to come unto me at Nicopolis; for I have determined there to 
winter. Bring Zenas, the lawyer, and Apollos on their journey diligently, that nothing 
be wanting unto them. All that are with me greet thee. Greet them that love us in the 
faith. Grace be with you all. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of the saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW §11 (5:14-19)  
The Lord said to His disciples: Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on 
a hill cannot be hid; Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a 
candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine 
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come 
to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot 
or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever 
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he 
shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach 
them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
