--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 30th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST  
AFTERFEAST OF THE BEHEADING OF THE FORERUNNER  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR HOLY FATHERS ALEXANDER, JOHN AND PAUL THE 
NEW, PATRIARCHS OF CONSTANTINOPLE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy forerunner, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
O thou who art the divine mediator between the old and the new testaments, * the 
prophet and forerunner, * an angel in the flesh, * the denouncer of lawlessness, * the 
offspring of the womb of a barren woman, * a fire-breathing mouth: * thou didst 
upbraid Herod, who committed iniquity. * And, unable to endure thy denunciation, * 
he commanded that thy head be cut off; * and it was brought in on a platter * like 
food of abstinence, * divine delight, ** continually denouncing the adulterer.  
Incited by her iniquitous mother, * the iniquitous daughter * asked for thy most 
glorious head * which is cherished by the angels; * for she was unable to endure thy 
denunciation. * Wherefore, bearing it on a platter, * and dancing as she carried it, * 
she turned the joy of those at the banquet into lamentation. * Yet thou dost 
continually denounce * the abomination of fornication, * O blessed one. * Entreat 
Christ, ** that our souls be saved.  
Rendered foolish by drunkenness, * Herod was carried away * by adultery and 
voices entwined in song, * and in fulfillment of his unrighteous oath * he caused the 
murder * of thee, the righteous prophet, O glorious one. * But thy death manifestly 
announced immortality * to those who had died before; * for thou didst become for 
those in Hades a preacher and herald, * proclaiming the saving advent * of Christ our 
God. * Him do thou entreat, ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy hierarchs, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
O all-blessed Alexander, * thou wast a shepherd of the Church * and a champion 
of Orthodoxy, * having wisely cast down the heresy of Arius, * thou didst pray with 
supplications, O most wise one, * that his soul be cast, in its wickedness, * into vile 
places O glorious one. ** Wherefore, together we honor thee.  
O honorable John, * thou didst disdain the corruption of the flesh, * and in thine 
abstinence and faith, * thy vigilance and confession, * thou wast found to be an 
earthly angel and a heavenly man. * Entreat Christ, * that He grant unto our souls ** 
great mercy.  
O wise one, thou didst truly submit * to the divine teachings of Paul, * and didst 
hasten to the heights of the virtues * as to the third heaven, O glorious one, * and 
didst hear the ineffable and divine words of the Spirit. * O blessed Paul, * thou 
immovable foundation of the Orthodox, ** by thy supplications render the Savior 
merciful to us.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Again Herodias rageth insanely, again is she vexed. O what deceitful dancing, what 
a feast of deception! The Baptist is beheaded, and Herod is troubled. Through the 
supplications of Thy forerunner, O Lord, grant peace to our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gave Thee birth * cried aloud: * “What 
is this strange mystery which I behold, O my Son? * How is it that Thou diest, 
suspended in the flesh on the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Herod celebrated an unseemly birthday and an utterly shameless feast; for 
captivated by lust for a woman and excited by a woman’s wantonness, he had the 
head of the forerunner cut off; but he did not cut out the tongue of the prophet, who 
denounced his foolishness. Shedding innocent blood, he wished to conceal his 
iniquitous sin; but he could in no wise stop the voice which calleth all to repentance. 
And though he made merry amid murder, we lovingly celebrate the blessed slaying of 
John the Baptist; for he preceded Life into Hades, to proclaim Christ our God, the 
Orient from on high, the only greatly Merciful One, unto those who sat in darkness 
and the shadow of death.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs * are nailed by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
Troparion of the forerunner, in Tone II: 
The memory of the just is celebrated with hymns of praise * but the Lord’s 
testimony is enough for thee, O Forerunner, * for thou wast shown to be more 
wonderful than the Prophets * since thou wast granted to baptize in the running 
waters Him Whom thou didst proclaim. * Then having endured great suffering for 
the Truth, * Thou didst rejoice to bring, even to those in Hades * the good tidings 
that God had appeared in the flesh * taking away the sin of the world ** and granting 
us great mercy. 
Glory ..., Troparion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Troparion of the holy forerunner, in Tone II: 
The memory of the just is celebrated with hymns of praise * but the Lord’s 
testimony is enough for thee, O Forerunner, * for thou wast shown to be more 
wonderful than the Prophets * since thou wast granted to baptize in the running 
waters Him Whom thou didst proclaim. * Then having endured great suffering for 
the Truth, * Thou didst rejoice to bring, even to those in Hades * the good tidings 
that God had appeared in the flesh * taking away the sin of the world ** and granting 
us great mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., that of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and two 
canons for the saints, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy forerunner, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Let us hymn the sacred forerunner, the prophet who appeared from the womb of 
a barren woman unto Him Who ineffably is borne in the Virgin’s womb.  
Having transcended the boundaries of nature, thou didst preserve the laws of 
righteousness, denouncing an iniquitous union, undaunted by the king’s cruelty.  
Nurtured by the law as with milk, thou didst oppose the vile adultery, sealing the 
legislation of lawful union like a seal of the law.  
Theotokion: The ranks of angels and mortals praise thee unceasingly, O Mother 
unwedded; for thou didst bear the Creator in thine arms as a babe.  
Canon of the holy hierarchs, in Tone VIII 
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
Today the thrice radiant splendor of the fathers hath shone forth in their all-
glorious memory. Delighting therein with faith, let us join chorus.  
O holy hierarch Alexander, with the boldness of piety thou didst destroy the 
assertions of the heretics, preaching the Trinity.  
Using thy tongue as a pen for divine writing, O father John, the grace of the Spirit 
hath explained the Faith.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: Let us chant unto the Lord Who was well-pleased to take flesh of the 
Virgin without seed, for our salvation and deliverance.  
ODE III  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
As mediator standing between the old and the new covenant of the Gospel 
preaching, thou didst denounce the iniquitous union of the tyrant, and, rejoicing, 
didst accept a glorious death.  
Instructed beforehand by her iniquitous mother, the girl said unto Herod, who was 
befuddled with drunkenness: “Give me the head of John on a platter, that I may 
present to my mother the gift she desireth!”  
The shameless tyrant, unable to endure the reproof of thy God-bearing tongue, O 
glorious prophet, gave thy precious martyr’s head to the girl as a reward for her 
dancing.  
Theotokion: Having made thy bodily abode within the Virgin, O Lord, Thou didst 
appear unto mankind, in that it was fitting that they behold Thee. Her didst Thou 
show to be the true Theotokos and the help of the faithful, O thou only Lover of 
mankind.  
Canon of the holy hierarchs  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
With excellence thou didst shepherd the flock of thy Master, O Alexander; 
wherefore, He glorifieth thee eternally as a holy hierarch.  
With thy tongue thou didst pour forth the waters of salvation and doctrines of 
piety for thy flock, O blessed John.  
O all-blessed Paul, thou wast manifestly the radiant vessel of the election of Christ 
and His image in calling and life.  
Theotokion: All of us Christians have thee as our refuge and bulwark, and we 
glorify thee without ceasing, O thou who knewest not wedlock.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone VIII: 
Crucified by the love of Christ and having taken His yoke upon yourself, * ye 
showed yourselves to be emulators of His life * and became partakers of His divine 
glory, * O divinely wise Alexander, wondrous John and glorious Paul. * Wherefore, 
standing before His throne, ** ye earnestly make supplication for our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy forerunner, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having shone forth by the judgment of God from a barren woman, and loosed 
the bonds on the tongue of thy father, thou didst show forth the Sun Who illumineth 
thee as the morning-star, and to the people in the wilderness didst proclaim the 
Creator, the Lamb Who taketh away the sins of the world. Wherefore, thou didst 
denounce the king with zeal, O ever-memorable and all-praised John, and Thine all-
glorious head was cut off. Pray thou to Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins 
unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
The thrice-radiant lamp of our fathers, Alexander, John and the glorious Paul, hath 
shone forth for divine understanding, ever illumining the congregations of the faithful 
and destroying all the impiety of the ungodly and putting them to shame by their 
teaching of wisdom.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O all-immaculate Virgin * who hast given birth to the transcendent God: * do 
thou unceasingly entreat Him with the incorporeal ones, * that He grant forgiveness 
of transgressions * and correction of life before the end, * to us who, as is meet, 
hymn thee with faith and love, ** O thou who alone art all-hymned.  
Stavrotheotokion: O most immaculate Virgin Mother of God, a sword passed 
through thy most holy soul when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of His 
own will. Cease not to beseech Him, O blessed one, that He grant us forgiveness of 
our transgressions.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
He who was unable to endure the censure of boldness and the forthrightness of 
piety, who incurred the retribution of the law, who was depraved by vile pleasures, 
having bound him who is enrolled immaterially in the heavenly choirs before the end, 
placed him under guard.  
The wretched voluptuary, sick with spiritually harmful drunkenness and the 
burning of fornication, having been bound by the dancing of a young woman’s feet, 
becameth the murderer of the prophet; for he conceived drunkenness, the mother of 
fornication, and begat grievous iniquity.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Of a truth, in thee the divine voice did not prove false; for thou art the greatest 
among the prophets, in that thou wast deemed worthy to prophesy from thy mother’s 
womb, as a fetus not fully formed, and seeing God the Word Whom thou hadst 
prophesied, thou didst baptize Him in the body.  
Theotokion: Thou art the boast of the faithful, O thou who knewest not wedlock; 
thou art the intercessor and refuge of Christians, their bulwark and haven. For thou 
bearest entreaties to thy Son, O all-immaculate one, and savest from misfortunes 
those who with faith and love know thee to be the pure Theotokos.  
Canon of the holy hierarchs 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
With the torrent of thy tongue thou didst hurl the betrayer of Christ, like Judas, 
into a place of fetor, O blessed Alexander.  
Like a fruitful olive-tree standing in the house of God, O John, thou therein didst 
bring forth those who believe on Him, like ripened fruit.  
With wings of humility thou didst elude the snares of the enemy; wherefore, 
exalted, O venerable Paul, thou hast become a citizen of heaven.  
Theotokion: Let us hymn the Virgin who remained a virgin after birthgiving, in 
that she gave birth to Christ God, Who hath delivered the world from deception.  
ODE V  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Inspired by the enmity of her mother, the yet more savage offspring of a savage 
lioness demanded as the price of her foul demonic dancing the head of the 
forerunner and herald, which the wild beasts themselves reverenced in the wilderness.  
O Thine ineffable and unapproachable judgments, O Lover of mankind! For the 
vile young woman won with her dancing him who, while yet in his mother’s womb, 
was a receptacle of the Holy Spirit, and who grew in chastity and purity.  
When he who with love and ardor preferred his intercourse with iniquity, he 
permitted the murder of the prophet to be added to his birthday drinking and with 
love of pleasure mingled a cup full of the holy blood of the prophet.  
Theotokion: Possessing maternal boldness before thy Son, O most pure one, 
disdain not thought of kinship with us, we pray, for thee alone do Christians set 
before the Master as a merciful cleansing.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Canon of the holy hierarchs 
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Adorning the cathedra of Metrophanes, O Alexander, even before thine elevation 
thou didst shine forth in hierarchal teaching.  
Though thou didst live in humility, O father, thou didst show thyself to be 
wondrous in Nicaea by thy divinely eloquent teachings.  
The grace of thy words make firm the Church, which hath acknowledged thee to 
be a pillar of Orthodoxy, O John.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, we hymn thee who remained a virgin even after giving 
birth; for the sake of the world thou hast given birth unto God the Word in the flesh.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Bringing tribulation upon thyself for the commandments of the law, O blessed 
one, with reproofs thou didst chastise the one who was committing iniquity; for thou 
wast not a reed shaken by the winds of the enemy.  
Thy head, dripping with the blood of thy slaughter, was offered as a prize for a 
lustful display, but continued to denounce Herod as one who committed incest, even 
after thine end.  
Clad in camels’ hair while in the wilderness, thou didst live as splendidly as a king 
therein; and bearing royal adornment therein, thou didst gain dominion over the 
passions.  
Theotokion: May we be delivered from grievous transgressions through thy 
supplications, O pure Birthgiver of God, and may we receive divine radiance from the 
Son of God Who was ineffably incarnate from thee, O most pure one.  
Canon of the holy hierarchs 
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Manfully defending the Church of Christ, O glorious father, with the arrows of thy 
prayers thou didst shoot down Arius, the betrayer of Christ.  
As a branch of the vine of life, O glorious and all-blessed John, thou didst cause 
fruit to grow forth for thy Master.  
Piously thou didst cause to flee from the imperial city him who iniquitously cast 
out the veneration of icons, O most honored Paul.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: O thou who alone hast given birth in the flesh to God the Word, 
deliver our souls from the snares of the enemy, we pray.  
Kontakion of the forerunner, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
Working iniquity, Herod gave thy precious head * to a woman, O forerunner. * 
We, venerating it, are filled with gladness; * but Herodias weepeth and lamenteth, ** 
with Herod and the dancer.  
Ikos: Let us prepare ourselves, O brethren, for a divine banquet; for, lo! the God-
bearing head of the forerunner is set before us in church like pure food, pouring forth 
blood, emitting surpassing healings, and using fasting as a remedy to cure those sick 
with the drunkenness of sin. Let no one, then, confine himself to corruptible food 
and thus be deprived now of the divine food of the forerunner. The world is filled 
with gladness, but Herodias weepeth and lamenteth, with Herod and the dancer.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Armed with lustful desire and grievous drunkenness, striking against the Baptizer 
of Christ, the immovable tower of abstinence and indestructible city of chastity, the 
iniquitous Herod was shattered.  
Her mind beguiled by the persuasions of her mother, she who was the pupil of the 
devil was neither afraid nor ashamed, nor in any way loath to bear thy precious head 
shamelessly on a platter.  
Sent forth like an angel, thou didst shine forth like a beacon; as a prophet thou 
didst preach Christ Who appeared as the Lamb of God; and as a martyr thou wast 
beheaded, proclaiming Him to the dead in Hades.  
Theotokion: Delivered from the ancient fall and condemnation by thy birth giving, 
O Virgin Mother, we ever glorify thee as the manifest cause of our liberation, with thy 
Son Who gaveth Himself as deliverance for us.  
Canon of the holy hierarchs 
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Thou wast truly shown to be an initiate of the all-divine Trinity, O most noetically 
rich Alexander, and didst worship the incorrupt One with purity of heart, chanting: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Christ hath shown thee to be a treasury of doctrines, O John, and a well-spring of 
miracles, pouring forth a wealth of divine knowledge upon those who cry out: O God 
of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thine angelic life, like that of the divine Paul whose namesake thou wast, hath 
glorified thee throughout all the earth, O divinely wise one, in the breadth of the 
outpouring of the wisdom of thy heart and in thine ineffable understanding.  
Theotokion: O Thou Who didst become incarnate of the Virgin’s womb, Thou 
hast appeared for our salvation. Wherefore, acknowledging Thy Mother as the 
Theotokos, we cry out in thanksgiving: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Going before Thy nativity and divine suffering, in the nethermost parts of the 
earth John, as the voice of the Word, becometh, through the sword, the prophet and 
herald of Thy coming there, crying: O ye dead, as Life-bestower, O ye blind, as the 
Giver of light, O ye captives, as your Redeemer! Supremely exalt Christ throughout all 
ages. 
He who from a barren woman preceded the Offspring of the Virgin hath now, 
through the cutting off of his head, become the precursor of the voluntary crucifixion 
of the Creator of all, crying to those in Hades: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
When thy body was deprived of thy head, O forerunner, thy masterly soul was 
parted from thy flesh; but the divinity of Emmanuel was never separated from his 
flesh, and not a bone of God the Master was broken. Wherefore, we supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, bearer of the Lord, by thy merciful supplication 
cleanse thou the wounds and sores of my soul, and raise me up who am fallen. Save, 
O save me, the prodigal, O all-immaculate one! For thou art mine intercessor and 
help, who alone art pure and blessed throughout all ages.  
Canon of the holy hierarchs 
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the mystery of the 
Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning bush: * praise ye and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Slaying the wicked Arius by thine earnest supplications, O divinely wise Alexander, 
thou didst banish him to a vile place, like another Judas, since he had apostatized in a 
similar manner.  
The mindless Arius, the enemy of God, who as a traitor rent asunder the robe of 
Christ, fell headlong, and now, like another Judas, lieth in the torment of hell, O 
thrice-blessed Alexander.  
Through abstinence and unsurpassed vigils thou wast shown to be as one of the 
incorporeal beings, and in thy constant teachings thou didst become a rich well-spring 
of paradise throughout all ages, O John.  
Theotokion: How can a human choir hymn thine awesome birth giving, O 
Theotokos? For thou remainest a virgin, even though thou truly hast given birth in a 
manner past all telling, and thy mysteries transcend cause, O Birthgiver of God.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the forerunner  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
The evil horde and the devil, its commander, were afraid of thy divinely eloquent 
tongue which proclaimed Christ, O prophet, and through the agency of a wanton 
young woman prevailed upon Herod to cut off thy head; but we magnify thee as the 
baptizer of Christ.  
The valley of humble nature hath been exalted, and the hill of deadly pride hath 
been laid low; for the voice of the Light crying in the wilderness hath cried out in the 
dwellings of Hades: “Lift up, ye gates, for the King of all shall enter herein.”  
Human passions tremble, and the demons flee in fear from the overshadowing of 
the grace given thee by God. But deliver thy flock, which ever magnifieth thee with 
faith, O forerunner of the Lord, from temptation by both.  
Theotokion: Draw Thy bow, and prosper and reign, O Son of the Mother of God, 
subduing the Moslems who wage war against us and granting victory to our 
Orthodox hierarchs over all heresies, through the entreaties of her who gaveth birth 
to Thee, O Word of God.  
Canon of the holy hierarchs 
Irmos: With never ceasing praises we magnify thee, * the Mother of God Most 
High, * who art higher than the most pure hosts, * and who beyond 
comprehension knew not wedlock, * yet hath truly given birth to God.  
O Metrophanes, as thy holy and lawful disciple and a hierarch meek and chaste, 
Alexander submitted to thy life-bearing words and is now fittingly called blessed.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
O divinely blessed and most noetically rich father John, thou wast an excellent 
initiate of ineffable mysteries, and wast made a teacher of ineffable things. Wherefore, 
O father, thou didst preach the divine Trinity.  
O father Paul, as is meet we honor thee as a guileless and holy pastor, blameless, 
pure and undefiled, chaste and glorious, setting forth the word of truth aright.  
O divinely blessed Trinity of wondrous fathers, now deified with immortal divinity 
in the heavens, cease ye never to pray to Him Whom ye piously served on earth, on 
behalf of your flock.  
Theotokion: O holy, all-immaculate vessel of sweet fragrance, entreat Christ to 
Whom thou hast given birth, that He grant victory to our hierarchs over all heresy 
and deliverance from the yoke of oppression to thy people; for thee do we 
unceasingly magnify.  
Exapostilarion of the holy forerunner: 
The vile Herod was in nowise able to cut off the reproofs of thy tongue, O 
baptizer of the Savior, and therefore deceitfully cut off the head of thee, the 
husbandman of purity.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Having destroyed the curse on the world by thy divine birthgiving, O pure 
Maiden, through thy supplications, deliver from all misfortunes the flock which 
entreateth thee with faith.  
On the Aposticha, Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
O forerunner of the Savior, thou didst reprove the king, that he not commit 
iniquity. But the disporting of an iniquitous woman caused Herod to cut off thy head. 
Wherefore, from the rising of the sun, even unto the west, thy name is praised. As 
thou hast boldness before the Lord, earnestly entreat Him, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: The ewe-lamb, as she beheld the Lamb * stretched out of His 
own will upon the Tree of the Cross, * cried out maternally, * in pain with her 
weeping: * O my Son, what is this strange sight? * O Longsuffering One, how is it 
that Thou art slain, * Who, as Lord, bestoweth life upon all, * granting resurrection to 
mortals? ** I glorify Thy great condescension, O my God!  
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy forerunner, in Tone II: 
The memory of the just is celebrated with hymns of praise * but the Lord’s 
testimony is enough for thee, O Forerunner, * for thou wast shown to be more 
wonderful than the Prophets * since thou wast granted to baptize in the running 
waters Him Whom thou didst proclaim. * Then having endured great suffering for 
the Truth, * Thou didst rejoice to bring, even to those in Hades * the good tidings 
that God had appeared in the flesh * taking away the sin of the world ** and granting 
us great mercy. 
Troparion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone VIII: 
Crucified by the love of Christ and having taken His yoke upon yourself, * ye 
showed yourselves to be emulators of His life * and became partakers of His divine 
glory, * O divinely wise Alexander, wondrous John and glorious Paul. * Wherefore, 
standing before His throne, ** ye earnestly make supplication for our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy forerunner, in Tone IV:  
Working iniquity, Herod gave thy precious head * to a woman, O forerunner. * 
We, venerating it, are filled with gladness; * but Herodias weepeth and lamenteth, ** 
with Herod and the dancer.  
 
 
