--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 30th DAY OF THE MONTH OF AUGUST 
COMMEMORATION OF THE TRANSLATION OF THE RELICS OF THE HOLY & 
RIGHT-BELIEVING GREAT PRINCE ALEXANDER NEVSKY  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the righteous one, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Issuing forth from a pious root * as an offshoot of holy anointing, * thou didst 
offer thyself as the fruit of holiness and righteousness, * most peacefully perfuming * 
those who lovingly honor thee with all their souls. * With the angels, O blessed one, * 
entreat Christ on their behalf, ** that He grant them peace and great mercy. (Twice)  
Emulating the zeal of Moses and Paul, * thou didst elect to suffer * for the people 
of God; * wherefore, going forth to the ungodly barbarians, * thou didst return 
unharmed, * bearing peace for thy homeland. * And abiding now with the saints, ** 
ask thou of the Lord, a peaceful life for thy posterity.  
Most splendidly adorned * with piety and faith, as a devout ruler, * most excellent 
and all-famed, * thou wast a champion of the most pure Trinity; * and, illumined 
thereby, * thou hast shone forth upon the world * the light of miracles, ** and hast 
been shown to be an advocate for our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O pious Prince Alexander, having loved Christ from childhood, thou didst become 
a divinely named sovereign, splendidly adorned with holiness and righteousness; and 
by almsgiving and purity thou didst become the spacious abode of the Holy Spirit. To 
Him do thou pray unceasingly, that thy homeland be preserved unvanquished by the 
heathen, and that the children of Russia be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
No one who hath recourse to thee, O most pure Virgin Theotokos, departed from 
thee ashamed; for he asketh grace and receiveth a gift for his profitable petition.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
By the progress of grace * Alexander was shown to be * the dwelling-place of the 
Holy Spirit; * wherefore, assembling now, ** let us chant hymns unto him.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Rejoice, a boast of the kings of Russia, * preservation of warriors, * vanquishing of 
the barbarians, * helper of orphans and widows, ** thou confirmation of our native 
land!  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Accept now, O blessed one, * the hymnody of thy people, * and ask of Christ 
remission of sins * for those who pray to thee, ** that we may ever call thee blessed.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art thou, O divinely wise Great Prince Alexander, for thou didst inherit 
blessedness, for the sake of which thou didst reject this life, seeking it diligently; and 
thou didst provide for the poor, as a feeder of orphans and liberator of those held 
captive. Wherefore, thou hast entered into the joy of thy Lord which groweth not old. 
Standing before Him with the angels, pray thou that an abundance of compassions 
and the remission of sins be granted to those who hymn thee with faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Those in heaven hymn thee, O joyous Mother unwedded, and we glorify thine 
inscrutable birthgiving. O Theotokos, pray that our souls be saved.  
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
Recognize thy brethren, O right-believing Prince Alexander, * thou Russian 
Joseph who reigned not in Egypt, * but now in the heavens; and accept their 
entreaties, * increasing the harvests of thy people through the fertility of thy land, * 
and protecting the cities of thy dominion * by thy supplications. ** And together with 
our Orthodox hierarchs do battle against all heresies.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the righteous one, in Tone VI:  
Thy life was in accordance with thy name, O right-believing Prince Alexander; for 
having helped thy nation with thy courage and goodly governing on earth, thou dost 
now help thy people by thy supplications in heaven. Wherefore, we honor thee and in 
thee our God Who is glorified in His saints. (Twice)  
As a bold steward and a valiant warrior, governing rightly on thy throne with thy 
scepter, and defending thy people with thy sword in battle, thou hast been deemed 
worthy of a twofold honor from the Ruler on high, the Lord of Sabaoth. (Twice)  
Greater love hath no man than he who layeth down his life for his friends. With 
such love didst thou love thy people, bravely setting out to defend them against the 
weapons of the adversary, as God protected thy head on the day of battle. (Twice) 
Emulating Moses, David and the other leaders of the people of God, thou didst 
bravely wage war on behalf of thy people; wherefore, with them thou dost celebrate 
thy triumph in heaven, as a victor, praying to the Lord for those who do battle. 
(Twice) 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Be glad, O land of Estonia! O land of Russia, and thou, O Baltic Sea, clap your 
hands! O River Neva, spread forth thy streams! For, lo! thy prince and master, who 
hath liberated thee from the Swedish yoke, doth celebrate his triumph in the City of 
God. Him do the river’s streams make glad.  
Both now ..., Dogmaticon, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Rejoice, O Jerusalem, and all ye that love her hold in her a general assembly. 
Rejoice greatly with her, all that mourn over her, that ye may suck, and be satisfied 
with the breast of her consolation, that ye may milk out, and delight yourselves with 
the influx of her glory. For thus saith the Lord: “Behold, I turn toward them as a river 
of peace, and as a torrent bringing upon them in a flood the glory of the gentiles. 
Their children shall be borne upon the shoulders, and comforted on the knees. As if 

--- PAGE 4 ---
his mother should comfort one, so will I also comfort you. And ye shall see, and your 
heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall thrive like grass; and the hand of the Lord 
shall be known to those who fear Him, and He shall threaten the disobedient.” Thus 
saith the Lord Who delivereth thee, the God of Israel.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (Is. 61: 10-62: 5)  
Let my soul rejoice in the Lord; for He hath clothed me with the robe of salvation, 
and the garment of joy: He hath put a crown on me as on a bridegroom, and adorned 
me with ornaments as a bride. And as the earth putting forth her flowers, and as a 
garden its seed, so shall the Lord, even the Lord, cause righteousness to spring forth, 
and exultation before all nations. For Zion’s sake I will not hold my peace, and for 
Jerusalem’s sake I will not rest, until her righteousness go forth as light, and My 
salvation burn as a torch. And the gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and kings thy 
glory: and one shall call thee by a new name, which the Lord shall name. And thou 
shalt be a crown of beau ty in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of 
thy God. And thou shalt no more be called Forsaken; and thy land shall not more be 
called Desert: for thou shalt be called My Pleasure, and the land Inhabited: for the 
Lord hath taken pleasure in thee, and thy land shall be inhabited. And as a young man 
liveth with a virgin, so shall thy sons dwell in thee: and it shall come to pass that as a 
bridegroom will rejoice over a bride, so will the Lord rejoice over thee.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (Is. 60: 1-14)  
Be radiant, be radiant, O Jerusalem, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord 
is risen upon thee. Behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and there shall be gross 
darkness on the nations: but the Lord shall appear upon thee, and His glory shall be 
seen upon thee. And kings shall walk in thy light, and nations in thy brightness. Lift 
up thine eyes round about, and behold thy children gathered: all thy sons have come 
from afar, and thy daughters shall be borne on men’s shoulders. Then shalt thou see, 
and fear, and be amazed in thine heart; for the wealth of the sea shall come round to 
thee, and of nations and peoples; and herds of camels shall come to thee, and the 
camels of Madiam and Grepha shall cover thee: all from Saba shall come bearing 
gold, and shall bring frankincense, and they shall publish the salvation of the Lord. 
And all the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered, and the rams of Nabreoth shall come; 
and acceptable sacrifices shall be offered on My altar, and My house of prayer shall be 
glorified. Who are these that fly as clouds, and as doves with young ones to Me? The 
isles have waited for Me, and the ships of Tharsis among the first, to bring thy 
children from afar, and their silver and their gold with them, and that for the sake of 
the holy name of the Lord, and because the Holy One of Israel is glorified. And 
strangers shall build thy walls, and their kings shall wait upon thee: for by reason of 
My wrath I smote thee, and by reason of mercy I loved thee. And thy gates shall be 
opened continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; to bring in to thee the power 

--- PAGE 5 ---
of the gentiles, and their kings as captives. For the nations and the kings which will 
not serve thee shall perish; and those nations shall be made utterly desolate. And the 
glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, with the cypress, and pine, and cedar together, 
to glorify my holy place. And the sons of those who afflicted thee, and of those who 
provoked thee, shall come to thee in fear; and thou shalt be called Sion, the city of the 
Holy One of Israel. Because thou hast become desolate and hated, and there was no 
helper, therefore I will make thee a perpetual gladness, a joy of many generations. 
And thou shalt suck the milk of the gentiles, and shalt eat the wealth of kings: and 
shalt know that I am the Lord Who saveth and delivereth thee, the Holy One of 
Israel.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Let the new Israel rejoice in Him who created it, and let the children of Russia 
rejoice in their prince, the right-believing Alexander Nevsky. For lo! the King of kings 
hath crowned him with a royal diadem.  
Even though thou didst exercise dominion over us, O right-believing Prince 
Alexander, yet do we call thee a servant of God. While exercising dominion over us, 
thou didst confess thine own Lord. Him didst thou serve, and from Him hast thou 
heard the words: “O blessed servant, good and faithful, enter into the joy of thy 
Lord!”  
Deluded were the Pharisees, who said: “Have any of the rulers believed on Him?” 
For, behold! the right-believing Prince Alexander Nevsky hath believed on Jesus 
crucified, and hath pleased Him with piety, and received eternal salvation.  
Truly thou wast a faithful and wise steward, O Alexander, whom the Lord set over 
His servants, the Russian people. Blessed art thou, for when the Lord came to thee at 
the hour of thy demise, He found thee doing good works, and He hath set thee over 
thine inheritence in heaven.  
Glory ..., in Tone I:  
Be glad today, O peoples of Russia! Join chorus, ye princes and authorities! For, lo! 
the right-believing Prince Alexander Nevsky, who shared both your flesh and your 
authority, joineth chorus with the angels in heaven, and summoneth all his kinfolk-his 
fellow rulers and those under their governance-to a spiritual festival. And he prayeth 
to the Lord for all.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Behold, the prophecy of Isaiah hath been fulfilled, * for a Virgin hath given birth, 
* and after giving birth hath remained a Virgin as before. * For it was God who was 
born from her; * therefore He began nature anew. * O Mother of God, disdain not 
the supplications of thy servants, * which are offered unto thee in thy temple; * since 
thou didst bear the Compassionate one in thine embrace, ** have pity on thy 
servants, and beseech Him that our souls be saved. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the righteous one, in Tone VI: 
Thee who confessed the name of Jesus before men doth Jesus confess before His 
Father in heaven; and we on earth hymn thee, O right-believing Alexander, as one 
who prayeth for our souls.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
With thy heart thou didst believe in righteousness, and with thy mouth thou didst 
make confession before tyrants unto thy salvation; wherefore, as thou art a true 
confessor and heir, pray thou for the salvation of our souls.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
As an emulator of the martyrs, thou wast not afraid to suffer, for as a valiant 
warrior of Jesus Christ thou wast a martyr in volition. Wherefore, with the martyrs 
thou hast been crowned by Jesus, the Judge of the contest.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Come, all ye ranks of Russia! Praise ye the good leader of all your ranks! Ye rulers, 
praise ye the wise steward! Ye soldiers, praise the all-brave warrior! Ye lovers of 
Orthodoxy, praise the steadfast confessor, the martyr in volition! Subject yourselves 
to your guide, and submit yourselves; and beholding his end, emulate his faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
O new wonder greater than all the wonders of old! * For who hath ever known a 
mother to give birth without having known a man, * and to bear on her arm Him 
Who sustaineth all creation? * Yet it was the will of God to be born. * O most pure 
one, who carried Him as an infant in thine embrace * and before Whom thou hast a 
mother’s boldness: * cease not to pray on behalf of those who honor thee, ** that He 
have compassion and save our souls. 
At the blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV:  
Recognize thy brethren, O right-believing Prince Alexander, * thou Russian 
Joseph who reigned not in Egypt, * but now in the heavens; and accept their 
entreaties, * increasing the harvests of thy people through the fertility of thy land, * 
and protecting the cities of thy dominion * by thy supplications. ** And together with 
our Orthodox hierarchs do battle against all heresies. (Twice)  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...,” (Once)  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
Recognize thy brethren, O right-believing Prince Alexander, * thou Russian 
Joseph who reigned not in Egypt, * but now in the heavens; and accept their 
entreaties, * increasing the harvests of thy people through the fertility of thy land, * 
and protecting the cities of thy dominion * by thy supplications. ** And together with 
our Orthodox hierarchs do battle against all heresies. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Let the new Israel be glad today in Him Who created her, and let the children of 
Russia rejoice in their prince, the right-believing Alexander Nevsky. For, lo! the King 
of kings hath crowned him with a royal diadem. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Stretching forth thy most pure hands, O Virgin Mother, protect those who set 
their hope on thee, and who cry unto thy Son: Grant Thy mercies unto us all, O 
Christ!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
Let us all cry out to the favorite of Christ, praying earnestly: Bring an end to the 
warfare of our passions, and dispel the phantasms of the demons, O blessed one; and 
entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Beyond understanding and unapproachable is the dread mystery of God wrought 
in thee, O divinely joyous Sovereign Lady; for having conceived the Infinite One, 
thou didst give birth to Him, clad in the flesh taken from thy most pure blood. Him 
do thou ever entreat as thy Son, O pure one, that our souls be saved.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O right-believing Prince 
Alexander, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ our 
God on our behalf.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Shout with jubilation unto the Lord all the earth; chant ye unto His name, 
give glory in praise of Him.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  

--- PAGE 8 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
O blessed one, the Holy Spirit appointed thee to tend thy homeland on the 
pastures of salvation, and Christ hath manifestly shown thee to be a luminary. 
Wherefore, dance and rejoice with boldness, receiving a double wreath from the 
Bestower of crowns. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Joseph marveled, beholding that which transcends nature, * and pondering thy 
seedless conception, O Theotokos, * he thought of the dew upon the fleece, * the 
bush unconsumed by the fire, * and the rod of Aaron which buddeth forth. * And 
bearing witness, thy betrothed and guardian * cried aloud to the priests saying: ** A 
Virgin giveth birth, and remaineth a Virgin even after birthgiving!  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I have raised up one * chosen out of My people.  
Verse: Wherefore, God, Thy God, hath anointed thee.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN §36 (10:9-16)  
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: I am the door: by me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 
know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Come, all ye people, let us offer praise to the blessed one, crying out thus: Rejoice, 
O most radiant pillar illumining us with the splendors of miracles! Rejoice, O dew-
laden cloud extinguishing the flame of the passions and bedewing the minds of the 
faithful, O godly Alexander!  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclisis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and that of the righteous one, with 8 Troparia, in Tone VIII: 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
O Christ God, grant me intelligence and understanding, that I may hymn the most 
glorious wonder-worker with fitting praises, that, rejoicing, I may hymn his memory.  
O most radiant luminary of the Russian land, shining forth with miracles like 
another sun: be thou mindful of all of us who keep thy memory, O blessed 
Alexander.  
O divinely wise Alexander, even though the divinely illumined land of Russia 
produced thee in latter days, yet wast thou deemed worthy of the honor of the 
ancients, receiving the gift of miracles, as is meet.  
Theotokion: In a manner transcending the laws of nature, O Virgin, thou hast 
given birth to God, the Bestower of the law, Who became a man. Him do thou 
beseech, in that He is good, O all-immaculate one, that He overlook our iniquities.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Thou wast shown to be a beacon of light, O all-blessed Alexander, ever dispelling 
the profound darkness of infirmities with the brilliant rays of thy miracles, O most 
wise one.  
Rejoicing, thou standest before the throne of grace today with all the angels, 
spreading a wealth of healing upon the world. Save us all by thy supplications, O 
blessed one!  
Assembling, let us fittingly praise the pious and crowned Alexander, as the 
generous bestower of miracles, who entreateth the Lord on behalf of us all.  
Theotokion: Truly the Lord reigneth in the kingdom which will never fall. 
Through thee, O Mother of God, hath He clothed Himself in holy flesh as in 
beauteous splendor, as saith the psalmist; and therein hath He accepted death and 
destroyed its kingdom.  
Sessional Hymn of the righteous one, in Tone VIII:  
Thou hast been revealed to be a star of surpassing brilliance because of thy 
splendid life, in that thou hast become a vessel of the Holy Spirit. Wherefore, after 
many years in the grave, thy holy relics were found to be incorrupt, and from them 
thou pourest forth rivers of miraculous healings upon those who cry out with faith: 
Rejoice, O right-believing Great Prince Alexander! (Twice)  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Thee do we have, O Sovereign Lady, * as our only hope and refuge. * we have 
acquired Thee as an indestructible rampart * against all enemies and perils. ** Now 
and forever, forsake us not.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Shining with beams of the grace of the threefold Sun, illumine with splendor those 
who celebrate thy feast, and deliver us from the demonic darkness of the passions, O 
most glorious Alexander.  
O ye kings and princes, priests and nobles, elders and youths, ye people of every 
age: leap up with splendor, and magnify the memory of the blessed one in hymns!  
As the beloved son of the Light, thou hast now passed over to divine light, and 
with joy now joinest chorus with the angels’ choirs.  
Theotokion: I have thee as my helper, and am not put to shame, O most pure 
Mother of God. I have thee as mine intercessor, and I fear not mine enemies.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Thou hast been revealed to be a radiant and constant star, the liberator of captives, 
the enricher of the poor, the physician of the sick, the ally of kings and the 
confirmation of the Russian land.  
The most glorious Alexander hath been shown to be a wonder-worker in the 
Russian land, shining like a most radiant beacon amid the whole world, and illumining 
all who languish amid the darkness of the passions.  
Thy right wondrous and most glorious memory hath shone forth in the land of 
Russia, O blessed one, and bringeth gladness to the assemblies of the faithful.  
The gates of Eden have been opened for thee, O blessed one, and ineffable and 
thrice-radiant light hath shone forth in the unshakable kingdom of heaven; and, 
rejoicing, thou hast received the gladness of the righteous.  
Theotokion: Thou hast delivered mankind from mortality and corruption, for thou 
hast given birth without seed to God Who is by nature the Bestower of life, for the 
benefit of those who praise thee with faith.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Thou didst bud forth as a branch from an honored root, O most glorious one, and 
didst live piously on earth; and thou wast shown to be a pure habitation of the Spirit, 
sanctifying those who have recourse to thee with faith, O blessed one.  
Today the holy land of Russia hath been filled with gladness on the appointed day 
of the feast of the most glorious and blessed wonderworker Alexander; for he ever 
preserveth his homeland unharmed.  
With hymns let us bless Alexander, glorifying him as the helper of orphans and 
widows, our invincible ally amid misfortunes; for he delivereth from tribulations and 
sorrows those who celebrate his memory with gladness.  
Theotokion: As the most holy temple, O Theotokos, thou hast given birth to the 
inexhaustible Well-spring, O all-immaculate Lady.  
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
As thy kinsmen Boris and Gleb appeared to thee, * bringing thee help from heaven 
* when thou didst battle against Velgar the Swede and his warriors, * so now, O 
blessed Alexander, come to the aid of thy kinfolk, ** and contend thou against those 
who wage war against us.  
Ikos: As an eagle gathereth its young under its wings, so did Alexander gather his 
people, who had been scattered of old by the assaults of the enemy; and he now 
assembleth us for a spiritual festival. Wherefore, come ye, let us rejoice in the Lord, 
and glorify our glorious kinsman and master; and let us cry aloud: Rejoice, O glory of 
Russia, might of its scepter, bravery of its warriors, strength of its weaponry! Be thou 
mindful of thy flock, which the Lord appointed thee to oversee, and contend thou 
against those who wage war against us.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Today the Church of Christ, celebrating the festival of Alexander, truly poureth 
forth grace upon those who have assembled, who pray earnestly and hymn him with 
love.  
In all the lands of Russia the word hath gone forth that a most glorious wonder-
worker hath appeared therein, pouring forth an abundance of healings upon all who 
hymn him fervently.  
Thou didst blossom like a flower in thy miracles, O blessed one, and bestowest 
healings upon those who have recourse to thy protection, O wise and right wondrous 
one.  
Theotokion: God Who became incarnate of thy virginal womb hath appeared for 
our salvation. Wherefore, knowing thee to be His Mother, O Theotokos, we cry out 
to Him in an Orthodox manner: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
God hath shown thee forth to the lands of Russia as glorious in miracles, O 
Alexander, and hath adorned thee with heavenly gifts. Him do thou beseech, that He 
have mercy on us all.  
Like the dawn, like the radiant day hath thy festival appeared, enlightening our 
hearts and all who praise thee with faith, O most glorious Alexander.  
The day of festivity, the feast of gladness hath dawned! Let us make haste, O ye 
faithful, purifying our souls and bodies! For, lo! the godly Alexander summoneth us!  
Theotokion: Of old, O Virgin Mother, thy birthgiving was prefigured in images; 
for as the furnace did not consume the youths, so did the divine Fire leave thy womb 
un-burnt, O pure one.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: With never ceasing praises we magnify thee, * the Mother of God Most 
High, * who art higher than the most pure hosts, * and who beyond 
comprehension knew not wedlock, * yet hath truly given birth to God.  
With splendor we celebrate today thy holy repose. Fill thou with joy and gladness 
those who praise thee, O Alexander of great renown.  
Thou hast been found to be the great shield and might of the Russian land, O 
Alexander, and the boast of Orthodox Christians. And now we entreat thee: preserve 
thy homeland from alien nations.  
Shining forth with rays of never-fading light upon those in darkness, O glorious 
one, guide us who hymn thee to the enlightenment of gladness.  
O blessed Alexander, how can we hymn thee fittingly? For there is no tongue 
which can describe thy divers healings, and the many gifts and miracles which thou 
bestowest upon thy posterity.  
Theotokion: Christ, the Sun of righteousness, hast thou shone forth like the dawn 
upon the darkened and lost, O Virgin, for thou didst bear Him in thine arms, O pure 
one.  
Exapostilarion of the righteous one, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Thine all-great fame spread even to the lands of the Swedes, O Alexander, and the 
adversary was frightened even by the mention of thy manly name alone. And now, O 
blessed one, do thou invisibly terrify our enemies, who array themselves against thy 
Christ-loving army.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
With unceasing hymns we bless thee, * O Virgin Theotokos, * in that thou hast 
given birth to One of the Trinity, * and didst bear in thy divine embrace the Word ** 
Who is immutably and unchangeably transcendent.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the righteous one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! He who hath dominion on earth departeth the world, the 
ruler of Russia setteth aside his scepter, he sheddeth his robe of royal purple and is 
covered with a burial shroud; the crowned princely head removeth its princely 
diadem; he leaveth on earth his transitory kingdom for that which is eternal in heaven, 
where he is crowned with a royal diadem. (Twice)  
O how many enemies thou didst vanquish, O most valiant warrior of Jesus Christ: 
those visible with the sword and piety, and those invisible with prayer, the flesh by 
abstinence, the world by renunciation of the world; and thus thou hast ascended to 
heaven as a most glorious victor.  
Thou hast taught us by thy most wise deeds, that no one can take anything from 
this world, into which we have brought nothing. Wherefore, having forsaken 
transitory things, thou didst desire heavenly things, which thou hast inherited. And we 
pray that we also may not be deprived thereof.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Thou didst fight the good fight, didst win the race and keep the faith, O right 
faithful Prince Alexander; wherefore, a crown of righteousness hath been kept for 
thee, wherewith the true Bestower of rewards hath crowned thee. Him do thou 
entreat, O most blessed one, that the children of Russia, the flock entrusted to thy 
care, be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the righteous one.  
Thou wast shown to be a beacon of light, O most blessed Alexander, ever 
dispelling the profound darkness of infirmities with the brilliant rays of thy miracles, 
O most wise one. (Twice) 
Rejoicing, thou standest before the throne of grace today with all the angels, 
spreading a wealth of healing upon the world. Save us all by thy supplications, O 
blessed one!  
Assembling, let us fittingly praise the pious and crowned Alexander, as the 
generous bestower of miracles, who entreateth the Lord on behalf of us all.  
Thou didst bud forth as a branch from an all-honored root, O most glorious one, 
and didst live piously on earth; and thou wast shown to be a pure habitation of the 
Spirit, sanctifying those who have recourse to thee with faith, O blessed one.  
Today the holy land of Russia hath been filled with gladness on the appointed day 
of the feast of the most glorious and blessed wonderworker Alexander; for he ever 
preserveth his homeland unharmed.  
With hymns let us bless Alexander, glorifying him as the helper of orphans and 
widows, our invincible ally amid misfortunes; for he delivereth from tribulations and 
sorrows those who celebrate his memory with gladness.  
Theotokion: As the most holy temple, O Theotokos, thou hast given birth to the 
inexhaustible Well-spring, O all-immaculate Lady.  
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
Recognize thy brethren, O right-believing Prince Alexander, * thou Russian 
Joseph who reigned not in Egypt, * but now in the heavens; and accept their 
entreaties, * increasing the harvests of thy people through the fertility of thy land, * 
and protecting the cities of thy dominion * by thy supplications. ** And together with 
our Orthodox hierarchs do battle against all heresies.  
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
As thy kinsmen Boris and Gleb appeared to thee, * bringing thee help from heaven 
* when thou didst battle against Velgar the Swede and his warriors, * so now, O 
blessed Alexander, come to the aid of thy kinfolk, ** and contend thou against those 
who wage war against us.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  

--- PAGE 15 ---
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, §213 (5: 22-6: 2)  
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 43 (MT. 11: 27-30)  
The Lord said to His disciples: All things are delivered unto Me of My Father: and 
no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save 
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye that 
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn 
of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For 
My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
