--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR MAMAS, COMMEMORATION OF 
OUR VENERABLE FATHER JOHN THE FASTER, PATRIARCH OF 
CONSTANTINOPLE 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Shedding thy blood, O blessed one, * thou didst present thyself to Christ, * the 
Bestower of life, * Who shed His blood for thy sake, * and Who hath made thee a 
sharer in His glory * and a participant in His kingdom, * in that thou didst prevail 
over the deceiver * and utterly reduce ** his cruel snares to ashes.  
Thou wast a pillar of piety * set firmly upon the rock of faith, * unshaken by 
temptations or misfortunes, * O blessed one, * for the great tempest and tumult * and 
the waves which buffeted thee * could not cast down thine unbreakable strength; * 
for thou didst desire to be adorned ** with the crown of martyrdom.  
Following the life-bearing steps * of our incarnate God * Who, by His suffering on 
the Cross, * cast down the tyrant, O spiritual athlete, * rejoicing, thou didst enter the 
arena of martyrdom, * and, lacerated with wounds, * with thy flesh, O martyr, * thou 
didst wound him who boasted that he would destroy the sea, ** casting him down to 
the ground.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in the same melody: 
O most honored father John, * withdrawing from the tumultuous confusion of the 
world, * thou didst hasten to the serenity of Christ, * O most venerable one; * and 
thou wast manifestly enriched in truth * with the most rich effulgence * of vision and 
divine activity, * and, made splendid by thy godly life, ** imparted them to the 
faithful.  
O most honored father John, * honorably adorned with vestments * like another 
Aaron, * thou dost now behold the Holy of holies * beyond the second veil. * O the 
ineffable brilliance of thy mind, * which passeth understanding, * O divine 
adornment of hierarchs, ** with whom thou hast now joined in fellowship! 
O all-wise father John, * becoming godly * in the simplicity of thy character, * 
standing now before God, * and united with Him * through a higher unity, * thou art 
deified at His continual behest, * and filled with His light, ** O divine and most 
sacred adornment of hierarchs.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone II:  
At the table of God thou wast set like a newly planted olive-tree, the child of those 
who walk the path of the Lord. For the sake of thy martyrdom the Lord hath blessed 
thee, and beholding now the good things of the heavenly Sion, thou dost ever delight 
with thy parents in divine joy. O right laudable Mamas, by thine entreaties make us 
also partakers thereof.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb * willingly 
led as a man to the slaughter, * she said, weeping: * “Dost Thou now hasten to leave 
me childless * who gave Thee birth O Christ,? * What is this that Thou hast done, O 
Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine extreme goodness, * which 
is beyond understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of mankind!”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
Come together, O ye faithful, and let us celebrate the memory of the martyr 
Mamas, for he hath been shown to be a new Abel; for as Abel, being a shepherd of 
sheep, brought a lamb as a sacrifice and was the first to receive the crown of 
martyrdom, so did the glorious spiritual athlete, who presided over feeding flocks, 
bring himself to Christ as a right acceptable sacrifice through martyrdom. And as he 
hath boldness before the Lord, he asketh peace for the world and great mercy for our 
souls. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Beholding Christ crucified, * Who is the Lover of mankind, * His side pierced by 
the spear, * the most pure one wept, crying aloud: * “What is this, O my Son? * How 
have the thankless people rewarded Thee * for the good things Thou didst do for 
them? * And dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, O most Beloved? ** I marvel, O 
Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion!”  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Mamas O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch John our father, ** entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia;  
And two for the saints, with 8 Troparia. 
ODE I 
Canon of the holy martyr, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Traversing the heavens as an excellent martyr, filled with thrice-radiant effulgence, 
O glorious one, grant divine illumination unto those who on earth honor the precious 
and radiant day of thy repose.  
The Word, foreknowing the nobility and perfection of thy mind in all things, filled 
thee with understanding from thine earliest infancy and adorned thee in manifold 
ways with the sweetness of good works, O all-praised martyr and spiritual athlete 
Mamas.  
Thy parents, braving danger for the inviolate Faith in the time of persecution by 
falsehood, were cast into prison; and there, at the command of God, they brought 
thee forth, who broke the bonds of polytheism.  
Theotokion: In generations of generations most glorious things are spoken of thee 
who, having contained God the Word within thy womb, remained pure, O Mary 
Theotokos. Wherefore, we all honor thee, our intercessor before God.  
Canon of the holy hierarch, the composition of Germanus, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Unto Him Who overthrew the tyranny of Pharaoh in the sea * and led 
Israel over dry land, * let us chant unto Christ our God, * for He hath been 
glorified throughout the ages. 
Let us chant unto Christ, Who shone forth in the world the wise hierarch who is 
resplendent with the precepts of the kingdom, for He hath been glorified throughout 
the ages.  
O ye faithful, let us honor the great hierarch John, Who shone forth in the world 
with the light of piety, dispelling the gloom of impiety.  
As thou standest with the angels before the unapproachable King, O all-blessed 
John, thou preacher of sacred things, pray that cleansing be granted to those who 
celebrate thy memory.  
Theotokion: In that thou didst conceive the pre-eternal and beginningless Word of 
the Father and hast given birth to Him in the flesh in a manner past all telling, O all-
hymned one, pray thou earnestly, that we be delivered from misfortunes.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE III 
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Upon the pinnacle of His Church Christ hath placed the spiritual athlete Mamas 
like a radiant star, illumining the whole world with the splendors of his sufferings and 
most glorious miracles.  
Ascending the mountain of true knowledge, and illumined with purity of mind 
through visions, O blessed one, by the commands of God thou didst elevate the 
nature of dumb beasts to rational hymnody.  
Thou wast a youth comely in beauty, and revealed to be unapproachable to those 
who sought iniquitously to seize thee, and thou didst bring thyself to the Lord of all, 
Who Himself willingly underwent suffering.  
Theotokion: He Who stretched out the sky and sustaineth its whole vault by His 
divine nature was held in the flesh in thine embrace, O most pure one, and hath 
revealed thee to be the confirmation of all the faithful.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Thou Who established the heavens by Thy word * and founded the 
earth upon the multitude of waters, * establish me unto the hymning of * Thy 
glorification O Lord.  
By abstinence and steadfast prayer, O God-bearing father, thou didst ascend to the 
lofty city of the virtues, where thou dost now partake of a torrent of sweetness.  
As thou hast boldness before God, O venerable and wise hierarch John, pray that 
those who celebrate thy memory with faith may be saved.  
As a teacher of the dogmas of piety and a true speaker of wise words, thou hast 
been crowned for thy victory over heresies, O venerable one.  
Theotokion: O pure Birthgiver of God, we all hymn thee as the heaven and throne 
of God, in that Jesus Christ, the Truth, revealed Himself through thee.  
Sessional Hymn of the martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
As the precious offspring of piety, by the power of the Spirit thou wast shown to 
be the destroyer of impiety, O Mamas; for denouncing the delusion of idolatry in the 
arena thou didst right boldly proclaim that it is the Trinity which is to be hymned. 
Wherefore, cast to the wild beasts, O spiritual athlete, thou didst slay the beast, the 
serpent who is the author of evil. For this cause we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ 
God, that He grant remission of offenses unto those who honor thy holy memory 
with love.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”:  
Thou wast revealed to be a divine vessel of abstinence and a fount of piety which 
cannot be taken away, O blessed and venerable father John, illumining thy life with 
dispassion and enriching those in need with alms. Entreat Christ God, that He grant 
us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only most pure Virgin Mother, 
* who hast surpassed the angels in purity. * With the divine waters of thy 
supplications cleanse me, * who more than all others am dust and defiled * by carnal 
transgressions, O pure one, ** and grant me great mercy. 
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV 
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
With wisdom and lacking all fear, thou didst of thine own will commit thyself to 
struggles; for thou didst have Christ helping thee with divine power, making thy 
weakness strong and showing thee forth as a witness to His sufferings, and a partaker 
of the splendor on high.  
The most rational wild beast became tame, given thee by God as a companion, for 
with divine love thou didst subdue the irrational passions and wast revealed to be 
adorned with a most wise intelligence, vanquishing the irrationality of the enemy.  
Before the tyrants’ tribunal thou didst stand O blessed one, most manifestly pro-
claiming the incarnation of the Word, casting down the savagery of ungodliness and 
teaching all to chant with confidence: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!   
Theotokion: By the supra-natural offspring of thy birthgiving, O all-immaculate 
Birthgiver of God, the pangs of sin were loosed, the nature of mortals was released 
from the curse, the heavens were opened for thy sake to those below, and mankind 
joineth chorus with the angels.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Mystically foreseeing Thee * incarnate of the Virgin, O Word, * the 
prophet cried aloud: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
In hymns let us all praise the wise hierarch, saying: O God-bearing John, pray thou 
earnestly to the Lord, that we be saved.  
Having thee as a planter of the dogmas of piety and a wise hierarch, O divinely 
blessed John, we praise thee with hymns and songs.  
O glorious primate and sustainer, hierarch of the Lord, with songs and hymns we, 
the faithful, celebrate thy sacred memory.  
Theotokion: O unwedded Bride, pure and undefiled Mother of Christ God, entreat 
Him without ceasing, that He save the souls of those who hymn thee.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Lacerated, the glorious Mamas in nowise paid heed to his body, setting aside the 
grossness of corruption to be torn asunder and the garments of his skin to be rent 
apart; receiving instead the vesture of incorruption.  
Grateful praises didst thou chant to thy Creator when thy side was pierced with a 
spear, O all-blessed one, and thou didst hear a voice from heaven, strengthening thy 
mind for that which is more exalted, easing the pain of thy sufferings.  
As thou lay in prison a most beautiful dove appeared to thee in a most glorious 
vision, O all-blessed and much-suffering spiritual athlete, bearing thee the food of 
incorruption; for thou hast truly passed beyond the bounds of corruption.  
Theotokion: Thou wast the mediatress of the divine incarnation and of ineffable 
deliverance, having given birth to Him Who was begotten of the Father before the 
sun shone forth; for through thee the nature of those on earth hath been joined to 
God and set upon the throne of glory.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
As a pastor thou wast anointed with the oil of piety, O divinely wise one; 
wherefore, we all praise thee as a hierarch, O venerable one.  
As an emulator of the apostles in pangs and vigils, O divinely wise and glorious 
one, thou didst intercede for the people of the Church.  
Thou didst emulate the zeal of Elijah and Moses the God-seer, O father manifest 
in sanctity, and didst put to shame the teachers of heresy.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: Come ye, and with the angel let us all honor as Queen the blessed one 
who gave birth to the King of all.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Burning with zeal for God, O most sacred and valiant spiritual athlete, bedewed 
with divine rain from heaven thou didst in nowise take heed of the burning flame.  
He Who in manifest light transformed the furnace into dew for the three youths 
rescued thee, O all-blessed and divinely wise one, from the flame, and most gloriously 
showed thee to be mightier than fire.  
Undergoing tremendous struggles, thou didst show thyself to be a most supreme, 
and wondrous spiritual athlete, a martyr tried and tested. Wherefore, the Judge of the 
contest deemed thee worthy of greater rewards.  
 
Theotokion: Through thy divine birthgiving, O most pure one, we have come to 
share in the divine nature; and, praising thee with the ranks of the angels, we have 
inherited heavenly rest in Christ.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: As Thou didst deliver the prophet from the depths * of the abyss, O 
Christ God, * so deliver me also from my sins, * O Lover of mankind, * and 
guide my life, I pray Thee.  
With thy divine dogmas and wise instructions thou didst adorn the glory of the 
Church, O blessed John, and didst cause heresies to vanish.  
With the beauty of thy dogmas thou didst illumine all creation like a lamp of piety, 
O divinely wise teacher, and with the word of God thou hast cast heresies into 
darkness.  
Arming thyself with thy tongue and discourse instead of a sword, O venerable one, 
thou didst cut down all false doctrines and clearly explain the Trinity to all.  
Theotokion: O Christ God Who wast born of the Virgin and dost enlighten the 
world, deliver me from my transgressions, in that Thou lovest mankind, and direct 
my life, I pray Thee.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
With the staff given thee by God, O holy one, * thou didst shepherd thy people in 
life-bearing pastures; * and having crushed the invisible and untamed wild beasts 
beneath the feet of those who hymn thee. * thou art manifest as a fervent intercessor 
for all ** who find themselves amid misfortunes, O Mamas.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Ikos: Throughout all the world we hymn thee as a most glorious martyr who hast 
joined chorus with the angels in the heavens, O Mamas, thou who before wast 
revealed to be suckled by a deer in the wilderness, and now, as a good shepherd, dost 
shepherd the rich people of the Lord with a staff of power, guiding them to a place of 
verdure, where the sweetness of paradise is truly to be found. For this cause thou 
didst forsake the world, that all may have thee as a fervent intercessor, O Mamas.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The aspect of the furnace was full of the coolness which thou didst need; for, shut 
up within it for many days, O Mamas, thou wast not consumed, but cried aloud to the 
Creator: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
In the midst of the flame, O martyr, thou didst have angels as companions, 
dancing with thee and sharing in ineffable hymnody; and with them thou didst cry 
aloud to the Master of all: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Issuing forth from the furnace, thou wast truly like a never-fading rose, like a most 
comely bridegroom departing from a bridal chamber, consuming the mindless, but 
illumining those who beheld thee, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Lo! the prophecy of the divinely eloquent one hath now been 
fulfilled! For thou didst contain God the Word in thy womb, O Virgin, and hast given 
birth to the Bestower of life: To Him do we all cry aloud: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Thou who in the beginning founded the earth * and by Thy word 
made the heavens firm, * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * O Lord God 
of our Fathers. 
O Thou who hast shown forth the pious and wise hierarch as a beacon on the 
earth: Blessed art Thou throughout the ages, O Lord God of our Fathers. 
O Thou Who hast shown the great John to be a true shepherd for Thy flock: 
Blessed art Thou throughout the ages, O Lord God of our Fathers. 
Having put down the uprisings of the flesh, O father, thou didst cry out to Christ: 
Blessed art Thou throughout the ages, O Lord God of our Fathers.!  
Theotokion: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin for our sake and hast delivered 
the world from the enemy: Blessed art Thou throughout the ages, O Lord God of our 
Fathers. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Like Daniel thou didst shut the mouths of the wild beasts with a divine invocation 
of the Master, O glorious one; thou didst slay a serpent, didst put the ungodly to 
shame, and livest in gladness as a victor, chanting in the heavens: Ye priests bless; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Stony of heart, the all-iniquitous ones who worshiped stones cast stones at thee, O 
blessed martyr, as thou didst lift the sacred eyes of thy soul to the un-hewn and 
unshakable Stone; and thou didst fervently chant: Ye priests bless; ye people 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
The Judge of the contest, extending the crown of victory from on high to thee as 
victor when thou hadst passed through thy good contest, O most noetically rich 
martyr, called thee to hasten to Him, running the honorable and sweet course, and 
chanting fervently: Ye priests bless; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  
Theotokion: Supra-naturally didst thou conceive Him Who was begotten of the 
Father without mother, yet remaining a virgin even after giving birth, O pure one; for 
in thee hath the divine Union renewed nature and restored the boundaries of 
existence. Wherefore, in an Orthodox manner, we hymn thee throughout the ages as 
the Theotokos who truly gave birth unto God.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the mystery of the 
Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning bush: * praise ye and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Emulating Moses, O thrice blessed hierarch, thou didst ascend the mountain to 
the darkness, receiving the noetic law of grace; wherefore, we hymn Christ 
throughout all ages.  
Shepherding thy people, O hierarch, thou didst drive away the falsehood of Egypt, 
and, avoiding the passions of Babylon, thou didst attain the heavenly Sion as thy 
dwelling-place throughout all ages.  
Anointed with myrrh, discourse and works of piety, O most sacred one manifest in 
sanctity, thou didst perform the sacred and divine services; wherefore, thou dost 
hymn the Trinity in one Essence throughout all ages.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: The Lord Who dwelt in the Virgin’s womb and, for her sake, restored 
the old Adam in an awesome and indescribable manner, hymn ye and supremely exalt 
throughout all ages!  
ODE IX 
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Thou didst lay down thy life for thy Redeemer and ardently hastened to Him, 
splendidly adorned with the beauties of thy sacred struggles and wondrous contests, 
O all-praised warrior, thou beacon of the whole world and ornament of the Church.  
Thou hast joined the angels, having acquired an angelic life on earth, and with 
them dost joyously chant sacred hymnody to the supremely praised Trinity, O 
Mamas, deified by divine communion and enriched with unsurpassed glory.  
As thou hast boldness before God, O all-blessed martyr, be thou mindful of those 
who joyously celebrate this thy divine festival and praise with a pure faith, thine 
honorable and sacred suffering; do thou save us from tempest, misfortune and trials.  
Theotokion: Who hath ever heard that among those on earth there was a mother 
who knew not a man yet gave birth to a child, and that the Child to which she gave 
birth supra-naturally was the beginningless God Who is consubstantial with the 
beginningless Father? O awesome mystery! O the divine fellowship whereby we have 
been united to God!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire of 
the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the salvation 
of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we magnify thee. 
Having shown us the words of everlasting life by dispassion and faith, hope and 
love, O wise John, pray thou, that our souls be saved.  
We all praise thee as a hierarch who shepherded the people of the honored Church 
with the staff of the Holy Spirit and drove away heresies hateful to God.  
O father John of great renown, in psalms and hymns we honor thee continually as 
a hierarch and beacon of the Church, and we venerate the shrine of thy relics.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O ever-living wellspring of incorruption! Rejoice, O most 
radiant cloud of the noetic Sun! Rejoice, O chariot of the full Godhead! Rejoice, thou 
ark of sanctification!  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Exapostilarion of the holy martyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “To the disciples ...”: 
Living in the mountains, thou wast nourished with the milk of a doe, O martyr 
Mamas; and thou didst appear in the stadium, contending most diligently; and, having 
received the crown of victory, thou didst depart unto the Lord.  
Theotokion: The most false and wicked enemy, who of old envied the divine and 
blessed life in paradise, caused me to be driven from Eden; but he hath been slain by 
thy birthgiving, O Virgin.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Mamas O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in the same tone: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch John our father, ** entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
With the staff given thee by God, O holy one, * thou didst shepherd thy people in 
life-bearing pastures; * and having crushed the invisible and untamed wild beasts 
beneath the feet of those who hymn thee. * thou art manifest as a fervent intercessor 
for all ** who find themselves amid misfortunes, O Mamas.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken unto my prayer, when I make supplications unto Thee.  
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS, § 99 (ROM. 8:28-39)  
Brethren: We know that all things work together for good to those who love God, 
to them who are the called according to his purpose. For whom he did foreknow, he 
also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the 
firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also 
called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he 
also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be 
against us? He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall 
he not with him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of 
God’s elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that 
died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also 
maketh intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall 
tribulation or, distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As 
it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for 
the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that 
loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor 
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Nor height, nor 
depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, 
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like 
a cedar in Lebanon shall he be planted.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God 
they shall blossom forth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 50 (JN. 15: 1-7)  
The Lord said to His disciples: I am the true vine, and my Father is the 
husbandman. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every 
branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Now ye are 
clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Abide in me, and I in you. As 
the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, 
except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I 
in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. If a 
man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather 
them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. If ye abide in me, and my 
words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
