--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 6th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE MIRACLE PERFORMED BY THE ARCHANGEL 
MICHAEL AT COLOSSAE, WHICH IS ALSO KNOWN AS CHONAE.  
COMMEMORATION OF THE MARTYR EUDOXIUS AND THOSE WITH HIM.  
AT VESPERS  
“At Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy archangel, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
O Michael, supreme commander, * shown forth as a most radiant intercessor 
before the three-Sunned Godhead, * thou dost cry out, rejoicing with the heavenly 
hosts: * Holy art Thou, O Father! * Holy art Thou, O co-beginningless Son! * Holy 
art Thou also, O Holy Spirit! * One glory, * one Kingdom and nature, ** one 
Godhead and power!   (Twice)  
Thine aspect is fiery, * and thy beauty wondrous, * O Michael, first among angels, 
* for in thine immaterial nature * thou dost traverse the ends of the earth, * fulfilling 
the commandments of the Creator of all, * known in the power of thy might, * 
making thy church a wellspring of healings, ** revered in thy holy name.  
 (Twice)  
O Thou Who, as it is written, * doth make Thine angels spirits * and Thy ministers 
a flame of fire: * amid the ranks of Thine archangels, O Lord, * Thou hast shown 
forth as preeminent * Michael, the supreme commander, * who doth obey Thy 
commands, O Word, * and with fear doth utter ** the thrice-holy hymn unto Thy 
glory. (Twice) 
Glory ..., in Tone VI, the composition of the Byzantine: 
Rejoice with us, all ye angelic legions, for the great supreme commander, your 
superior and our intercessor, appearing most wondrously this day in his honored 
temple, doth sanctify it. Wherefore, chanting as is meet, let us cry aloud to him: Cover 
us with the shelter of thy wings, O Michael, thou greatest of the archangels!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Rejoice with us, all ye choirs of virgins, for our intercessor, mediator, protection 
and great refuge doth today on her divine and honored feast comfort the sorrowful. 
Wherefore, hymning her at length as is meet, let us cry aloud: Protect us with thy 
divine intercession, O most pure Lady Theotokos!  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII:  
O supreme commander, as general, champion and chief of the angels, from all 
want and grief, from afflictions and grievous sins do thou free those who hymn and 
beseech thee with faith, O glorious one, for thou art manifestly immaterial, beholding 
the Immaterial One, illumined with the unapproachable light of the Master’s glory. 
For in His love for mankind He took flesh from the Virgin for our sake, wishing to 
save the human race.  
Troparion of the holy archangel, in Tone IV: 
O supreme commander of the heavenly hosts, * we entreat thee unworthy though 
we be, * that by thy prayers, thou wilt encompass us * with the protection of the 
wings of thine immaterial glory * preserving us who fall down before thee and 
earnestly cry aloud: * deliver us from all misfortunes, ** for thou art the supreme 
commander of the hosts on high. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT COMPLINE  
Canon to the holy martyr Eudoxius, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
O ye who desire to proclaim the glories of the martyrs, come, let us all praise 
Eudoxius, great among martyrs, holding festival with cymbals as did David.  
Throughout the whole world went the impious command not to worship the 
living God, but idols. But thou, O martyr, didst worship thy God, the God of heaven.  
Glory ...O martyr Eudoxius, thou glory of the pious, true to thy name, amidst the 
unjust judges that wounded thee didst thou confess Christ God Who is beginningless.  
Both now ..., O Mother who did not know not a husband, the ranks of angels and 
mortals unceasingly praise thee, for thou didst bear their Creator in thine arms as a 
babe.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Like a lamb wast thou led to the slaughter, O martyr Eudoxius, neither protesting, 
nor crying out, O all-blessed one, emulating the life of Christ thy Teacher. Wherefore, 
thou hast received unending glory.  
To those who served idols thou didst cry out, O martyr: My God liveth forever, 
but your gods are the works of the hands of men; falling, they cannot rise up, for they 
are inanimate, graven images!  
Glory ...The arts of the enemy hast thou cast down, establishing thy mind upon 
the rock of the Church of Christ. Wherefore, thou didst cry aloud: This corruptible 
life do I leave for life everlasting!  
Both now ..., God the Word, co-enthroned and everlasting with the Father, 
wishing to restore the first of our race, took Adam’s hypostasis from thee, O pure 
one, finding thee to be the most holy of all women, O Mother of God.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Thou didst denounce the deception of those who sought to force thee to 
renounce everlasting life and to love a life of vanity.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Wounded, thou didst rejoice in the Word Who was slain in the flesh for our sake, 
and thou didst cry aloud to thy tormentors: My sufferings are undeserved!  
Glory ..., The gods whom ye serve have mouths, yet cannot speak! thou didst 
exclaim, O Eudoxius. Let those who fashion them be like unto them!  
Both now ..., As Thou art sinless, O Unknowable One, grant us purification, and 
bring calm to the world, O God, through the prayers of her who gaveth birth to 
Thee.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
Thou art my strength! Thou didst cry out, O Eudoxius. O Christ God Who 
suffered in the flesh, make me steadfast, for, lo! I suffer in torment.  
Thou art a treasury of entreaties, O Christ God! Disdain me not! didst thou cry 
amid the tortures, O Eudoxius, stout of heart.  
Glory ..., Fearing neither the sword nor the fire, Eudoxius cried out to the 
tormentor: Behold, I have the mighty strength of the God I serve!  
Both now ..., Heal thou the weakness of my passions, O pure one, making me 
worthy of thy visitation, and by thine entreaties grant me health.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Neither the sword, nor fire shall separate me from the love of Christ; and I hold 
your threats to be like the prating of children! didst thou cry out with faith to those 
who sought to compel thee to sacrifice.  
I fear that fire which doth torment and which cannot be quenched, and I desire 
that life which cannot be taken away! didst thou cry out to the tormentor, O 
Eudoxius. Behold, O thou who dost wound my body, I shall not serve thine idols!  
Glory ..., The gods whom thou dost worship are gold and silver. They have 
mouths, but speak not; ears have they, yet hear not; legs they have, but cannot walk. 
But my God is the Creator of all! didst thou exclaim.  
Both now ..., By thy prayers may we be delivered from grievous transgressions, O 
pure Birthgiver of God, and may we acquire the radiance of the Son of God Who was 
ineffably incarnate from thee, O most holy one.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having amassed heavenly riches, thou didst scatter them, offering them to the 
poor; and thy bread didst thou give unto the hungry. Wherefore, having acquired 
incorruptible life, thou didst shine forth in thy confession of Christ. Therefore, taking 

--- PAGE 5 ---
courage and suffering under the law, thou hast received from God a crown for thy 
labors, O passion-bearer Eudoxius. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of 
sins unto those who with love honor thy sacred memory.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Thou didst sail across an abyss of wounds and attain unto the harbor of life, O 
Eudoxius; and, receiving a crown of patience, with the angels thou dost unceasingly 
cry: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  
To a place of rest hath Christ brought thee out who passed through fire and water, 
O blessed one; and rejoicing therein with the angels, O wise martyr, thou dost chant 
unceasingly a hymn to the Trinity: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people su-
premely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Glory ..., Thou didst destroy the noetic serpent with the help of the King of 
heaven, O glorious one; and receiving a crown of victory and patience, unceasingly 
dost thou cry aloud with the immaterial ones: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Both now ..., The thrice-radiant Godhead which shineth forth in a single ray with 
one nature in three hypostases: the beginningless Father, the Word of one essence 
with the Father, and the consubstantial Spirit Who reigneth with them, ye children 
bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt throughout all ages!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Emulating the patience of the three youths, O most wise Eudoxius, thou didst not 
bend thy knee to the false image, but didst cry aloud with fervent faith: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Acquiring the invincible aid of grace, O martyr Eudoxius, thou didst firmly cast 
down the legions of the enemy, and having vanquished them thou didst cry aloud: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Glory ..., Aflame with the love of divine desire, O martyr Eudoxius, thou didst 
openly abominate transitory attachments, and, receiving thy reward, thou didst cry 
out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!    

--- PAGE 6 ---
Both now ..., Our supremely good God, wishing to restore him that had fallen 
through deception, hath become incarnate and born of the Virgin, deifying mankind.  
ODE IX 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
The armies of the angels were struck with awe, and the assemblies of mortals were 
amazed that while possessing a corruptible and transitory nature thou didst reveal the 
demons to be wretched and weak; and with faith didst cry aloud: I shall serve the 
Trinity! Holy art Thou, O my Glory! 
Blessed art thou, O martyr Eudoxius, and glorified for all generations, for in no 
wise sparing thy flesh, thou didst endure torments for Christ’s sake and didst not bow 
down to graven images. Wherefore, the ranks of angels, clothed in the raiment of 
incorruption, have crowned thee.  
Glory ..., By thy prayers unto God, O martyr Eudoxius, do thou rescue from every 
attack of the enemy those who with faith keep the memory of thy sufferings, that he 
may not boast over us; for, as a martyr, thou art able to do this, having received a 
reward for thy sufferings from the Most High.  
Both now ..., O Virgin Mother of God, thou hast been revealed to be her who 
hath given birth in the flesh unto God the Word, to Whom the Father, in that He is 
good, gave utterance from His own heart before all the ages, and Who is now known 
to be higher than all bodies, even though He hath clothed Himself in a body.  
Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
For thy virtues thou didst receive from the Savior grace befitting thy name, O 
martyr Eudoxius, and right boldly didst exchange thy life for the glory of martyrdom, 
and joining chorus with the angels in the heavens thou hast now been glorified as is 
meet.  
For the severing of thy neck for the sake of thy faith thou didst crown thy head 
with a heavenly crown, O most blessed Eudoxius. Wherefore, cease not in thy prayers 
to Christ, that He remember us who keep thy memory, O glorious martyr.  
Spurning wealth and this transitory life, O Eudoxius, like Moses thou didst reckon 
the bearing of Christ’s burden a divine boast greater than the glory of the world, O 
glorious one, approaching tortures and trials even to the shedding of thy blood.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone I:  
Tempest-tossed on the abyss of transgressions, * fleeing to the calm haven * of thy 
most pure supplication, * I cry out to thee, O Theotokos: ** Save me, O most 
immaculate one, extending thy mighty right hand unto thy servant!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Stavrotheotokion: Standing at the foot of the Cross * of thy Son and God, * and 
looking upon His long-suffering, * O pure Mother, * weeping, thou didst say: * “Woe 
is me, O my sweetest Child! * How is it that Thou sufferest these things unjustly, * O 
Word of God, ** that Thou mayest save mankind?”  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without the martyria, and this canon of the holy 
archangel, with 6 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the first of the bodiless 
intelligences,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O supreme commander of the armies of heaven, ever illumined with divine 
splendors, enlighten my mind, that I may hymn thee, O thou who art the 
confirmation of those who have recourse unto thee.  
The beginningless Mind showed thee, O most glorious supreme commander, to be 
the general of the supra-ordinary ranks, a light unto those who are in darkness and a 
divine adornment of His Church.  
Surpassing the heavenly intelligences in spirit, O most eminent Michael, thou wast 
given to them below as a wall of defense, confirmation, a weapon which slayeth and 
destroyeth the enemy.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Virgin, thou splendor of the angels and aid of 
mortals, help me who sail the sea and ever venture into the tempest of sin and danger.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
With divine might dost thou encircle all the earth, O all-praised chief among the 
angels, rescuing us who call upon thy divine name, from the cruel enemy.  
O supreme commander of God, of aspect most divine, thou hast been a divine 
herald, an undaunted intercessor for the faithful, a guide to those who are astray and 
an instructor. 
Thou wast a most pure mirror of the splendor of God, radiantly reflecting the 
manifestation of the honored Spirit, O right wondrous Michael, first among the 
angels.  
 
Theotokion: He that by His own will wrought the immaterial intelligences made 
His abode within thy divine womb as was His desire, O all-immaculate one. The Un-
seeable is seen in the flesh.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Having become, as is meet, the leader of the ranks of heaven and minister of the 
glory of God, by the command of thy Creator, thou art a saving mediator, watching 
over mortals with thine immaterial glory. Wherefore, we all praise thee as is due, 

--- PAGE 9 ---
chanting the hymns of thy divine feast today, O supreme commander Michael. 
Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who lovingly hymn thy 
divine wonders.  
Glory ..., another Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “The choir of angels ...”: 
The choir of angels, having the divine Michael as its supreme commander, doth 
offer with him unceasing hymnody unto the Holy Trinity, for the Creator of all by 
His word brought the fiery ranks into being, out of non-existence.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Being Thyself the supreme Intelligence, by Thy will Thou didst create the divine 
intelligences and in their midst didst set Michael as a leader illumined with all-blessed 
fellowship and radiant with the noetic ordinances of God.  
O Michael most glorious, thou dost give utterance unto a holy hymn with the 
thrones, principalities, powers, authorities and sacred dominions, saving us who hymn 
thee.  
We magnify the Creator and Lord of all Who, in His tender compassion hath given 
us the luminous supreme commander Michael as a safeguard most great, an 
unassailable rampart and tower.  
Theotokion: Of old the teacher of sacred truths noetically described the mystery of 
thy birthgiving, O Virgin, beholding thee most clearly in the Spirit as a mountain 
overshadowed, from whence our holy God hath come forth incarnate.  
ODE V  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
O incorporeal Michael, supreme commander of the angels, thou didst appear lead-
ing Israel of old at the command of Him Who hath come forth out of Jacob and hath 
appeared unto all in the coarseness of a body.  
Ever deified by immaterial splendors by partaking of the divine, and wondrously 
amazed, thou dost bestow enlightening radiance upon us, O thou who art first among 
the angels.  
Thy divine temple is adorned with grace, for, entering therein, thou didst show it 
forth to be an abyss of healings and a destroyer of passions, O Michael, first among 
the angels.  
Theotokion: God hath shown thee to be more exalted than the noetic angels, 
having made His abode within thy womb, O pure and all-immaculate one. Him do 
thou ever beseech, that He take pity on those who hymn thee.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
The multitude of the faithful rejoiceth, praising thee, O Michael, and it doth glorify 
the all-holy Word Who in His goodness hath united mortals and angels.  
Thou didst save the armies of Israel, revealing thyself and transmitting the 
commands of God, O supreme commander; casting down enemies and utterly 
destroying them.  
Seized with fear and reverence, Joshua, son of Nun, bowed down when he beheld, 
thee, O chief of the angels, asking thine honored and holy name.  
Theotokion: Blessed are the people who ever bless thee, O blessed one, who hast 
given birth unto the blessed God, Who, in His tender compassion, hath deified 
mortal mankind by an ineffable union.  
Kontakion of the holy archangel, in Tone II:  
O chief commander of God, minister of divine glory, * captain of the angels and 
instructor of all mankind: * beg thou great mercy and that which is profitable for us, * 
for thou art the supreme commander ** of the bodiless hosts.  
Ikos: In Thy Scriptures, O immortal Lover of mankind, Thou didst say that a 
multitude of angels rejoiceth in heaven over one man that repenteth. Wherefore, O 
Sinless One, Who alone knowest the hearts of men, amid our transgressions we ever 
make bold to beseech Thee to have compassion and to send down compunction 
upon us, unworthy though we be, granting us forgiveness, O Master, in that Thou art 
compassionate; for the supreme commander of the bodiless hosts doth entreat Thee 
on behalf of us all.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
Beholding, Daniel saw thee, O blessed Gabriel of lightning-bright visage, standing 
together with Michael, the supreme commander, who commanded thee to cause him 
to understand the vision which he had seen by the banks of the Ulai.  
With faith let us shout the praises of the radiant Michael and Gabriel, chiefs 
among the angels that behold God, our good comforters, intercessors and protectors.  
Being comely, most splendid and of godly aspect, in a manner surpassing 
understanding art thou the chief of the immaterial spirits, O most radiant Michael; 
with them, therefore, pray thou on our behalf.  
 
Theotokion:  Beholding the truly ever-existent Word of the great Mind making 
His abode within thee in a strange and ineffable manner, O Virgin, the archangel 
Gabriel cried aloud: Rejoice, O blessed throne of the Most High!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
O Michael, thou hast been shown to be a commander of the noetic and 
incorporeal hosts, a saving intercessor for all mankind, a divine servant of God, 
chanting unceasingly: All ye works, bless and hymn the Lord!  
O archangels Gabriel and Michael, two beacons most radiant, enlightening 
creation with the splendor of the thrice-radiant Godhead: dispel ye the gloom of the 
wicked.  
O archangels, as good helmsmen to the harbor of the divine will bring ye safely the 
ship of my soul which hath encountered a tempest of sins and is in distress.  
 
Theotokion: Standing before thee, the archangel, as divine adorner of the bride, 
greeted thee: Rejoice, unwedded Bride of God, thou glory of the angels, salvation and 
defense of mankind!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Behold, O archangel, the resplendent magnificence of thy divine temple which 
putteth forth lightning flashes of miracles through thy radiant presence, ever 
dispelling the darkness of infirmities with divine grace.  
As a comely and beauteous pair ye minister unto those who are on earth at the 
behest of the Master, O archangels, rescuing them from evil circumstances and 
sending down divine illumination upon all through the Spirit of God.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Today the incorporeal and divine intelligences rejoice with us, beholding their 
great and splendid supreme commander hymned by all; and with us they lovingly 
keep festival, magnifying the Bestower of life.  
O archangels, divine and radiant pair, Michael most honorable and Gabriel 
supremely glorious; interceding before the honored Trinity, deliver us who praise you 
from torment and the cause of transgression.  
Theotokion: Joyously we offer thee the cry of the divine Gabriel, exclaiming: 
Rejoice, most pure paradise which hath within thee the Tree of life, thou most 
glorious palace of the Word! Rejoice, O all-immaculate Virgin!  
Exapostilarion of the holy archangel:  
As of old thou didst subdue the raging flow and thundering of the river, O 
glorious supreme commander, so now destroy the pride of the heathen and the raging 
of the demons, that we may fittingly honor thee as is meet.  
Theotokion: The ranks of the bodiless hosts honor thy birthgiving, for thou alone 
hast filled mortals with joy. Wherefore, we, the faithful, glorify thee the all-
immaculate one, singing the praises of thy glory in hymns, for thou hast shone forth 
light upon those who are in darkness, like the dawn which shineth forth in the 
morning.  
On the Praises, these Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Keeping festival in the world like angels, * let us give voice unto a hymn to God * 
Who sitteth upon the throne of glory: * Holy art Thou, O heavenly Father! * Holy art 
Thou, O equally everlasting Son! ** Holy art Thou also, O all-holy Spirit! (Twice) 
O Michael, supreme commander, * who dost thyself behold ineffable things, * 
who in boldness art pre-eminent among the many inhabitants of heaven, * standing 
before the dread throne in glory: * by thy prayers save us who find ourselves amid 
want, ** misfortune and temptations, we beseech thee!  
Truly thou art first among the incorporeal angels, * a minister of the divine 
effulgence of God, * an initiate of the mysteries of God * who dost thyself behold 
Him. * O Michael, supreme commander, save us who each year piously honor thee ** 
and hymn the Trinity with faith!  
Glory ..., in Tone I:  
Michael, the commander of the host on high, pre-eminent among the divine ranks, 
hath summoned us today to his festival. He is ever with us, preserving all from every 
evil circumstance wrought by the devil. Come ye, therefore, O ye who love the feasts 
of the Church and who love Christ, and, taking up the flowers of the virtues, with 
pure thoughts and an upright conscience let us honor the assembly of the archangels, 
for, ever standing before God and chanting the thrice-holy hymn, they pray that our 
souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
‘A sword hath pierced me, O my Son,’ * said the Virgin upon seeing Christ hung 
upon the Tree, * ‘my heart hath been rent O Lord, * as Simeon once foretold to me. * 
But arise, I pray Thee, O immortal One, ** and glorify Thy Mother and handmaiden.’ 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, and Glory ..., in Tone V: 
Where thy grace doth shine forth, O archangel, thence is the power of the devil 
driven away, for the fallen morning star cannot endure the sight of thy light. 
Wherefore, we entreat thee: by thy mediation quench thou the fiery darts which he 
launcheth against us, and deliver us from his snares, O right lauded Michael, supreme 
commander!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing her Lamb hastening to the slaughter * the Ewe-
lamb eagerly followed Him crying aloud: * ‘Whence goest Thou, O my sweetest 
Child? * O most beloved Jesus, * sinless Lord, rich in mercy, * O longsuffering 
Christ, * why dost Thou so swiftly and so fearlessly proceed? * Speak to me Thy 
handmaiden, * O my well-beloved Son: * pass not by me, Thy Mother, without a 
word, * O all-compassionate God, ** who grantest the world great mercy.’ 

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: four each from Odes III and VI of the canon of 
the holy archangel.  
With divine might dost thou encircle all the earth, O all-praised chief among the 
angels, rescuing us that call upon thy divine name from the cruel enemy. (Twice)  
O supreme commander of God, of aspect most divine, thou hast been a divine 
herald, an undaunted intercessor for the faithful, a guide to those who are astray and 
an instructor. 
Thou wast a most pure mirror of the splendor of God, radiantly reflecting the 
manifestation of the honored Spirit, O right wondrous Michael, first among the 
angels.  
The multitude of the faithful rejoiceth, praising thee, O Michael, and it doth glorify 
the most holy Word Who in His goodness hath united men and angels.  
Thou didst save the armies of Israel, revealing thyself and transmitting the 
commands of God, O supreme commander; and thou didst cast down the enemy and 
didst utterly destroy them.  
Seized with fear and reverence, Joshua, son of Nun, bowed down when he beheld, 
thee, O chief of the angels, asking thine honored and holy name.  
Theotokion: Blessed are the people that ever bless thee, O blessed one, who hast 
given birth unto the blessed God, Who, in His tender compassion, hath deified 
mortal man by an ineffable union.  
Troparion of the holy archangel, in Tone IV: 
O supreme commander of the heavenly hosts, * we entreat thee unworthy though 
we be, * that by thy prayers, thou wilt encompass us * with the protection of the 
wings of thine immaterial glory * preserving us who fall down before thee and 
earnestly cry aloud: * deliver us from all misfortunes, ** for thou art the supreme 
commander of the hosts on high. 
Kontakion of the holy archangel, in Tone II:  
O chief commander of God, minister of divine glory, * captain of the angels and 
instructor of all mankind: * beg thou great mercy and that which is profitable for us, * 
for thou art the supreme commander ** of the bodiless hosts.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His ministers a 
flame of fire.  
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been magnified 
exceedingly.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE HEBREWS (2:2-10) 
For if the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and 
disobedience received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect 
so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was 
confirmed unto us by them that heard him; God also bearing them witness, both with 
signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according 
to his own will? For unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the world to come, 
whereof we speak, but one in a certain place testified, saying; What is man, that thou 
art mindful of him? or the Son of Man, that thou visitest him? Thou madest him a 
little lower than the angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and didst set 
him over the works of thy hands: thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet. 
For in that he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under 
him. But now we see not yet all things put under him. But we see Jesus, who was 
made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and 
honor; that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man. For it became 
him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto 
glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings.  
Alleluia, in Tone V: Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him, all ye His hosts.  
Verse: For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were 
created.  
 
READING FROM THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (1O:16-21) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: He that heareth you heareth me; and he that 
despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me. 
And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto 
us through thy name. And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from 
heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over 
all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. 
Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather 
rejoice, because your names are written in heaven. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, 
and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these 
things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so, 
Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight.  
 
Communion Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of 
fire.  
 
