--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 8th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER  
THE NATIVITY OF OUR MOST HOLY SOVEREIGN LADY, THE THEOTOKOS AND 
EVER-VIRGIN MARY  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the feast, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Joachim and Anna hold festival, * having given birth to the only Theotokos, * the 
beginning of our salvation; * and with them we also celebrate today, * blessing the 
pure Virgin ** who sprang forth from the root of Jesse.  
Today the Theotokos hath sprung forth * from Anna as a flower, a divinely 
wrought garden, * the salvation of mankind; * and in His beneficence the Creator of 
all, * Who was born of her in a manner past understanding, ** washeth away all the 
defilement of Adam, in that He is good.  
Who is sufficiently worthy * to hymn the Virgin * who ineffably became a babe 
through Anna? * Ye mountains and hills, therefore, let sweetness fall today; * for the 
pure Theotokos, the life and cleansing of all, ** is nourished on milk.  
She who before was as a barren land * giveth birth to fertile ground, * and, having 
given forth a holy fruit from her fruitless womb, * she nurtureth her with milk. * O 
awesome wonder! The nurturer of our Life, ** who received the Bread of heaven in 
her womb is nourished with milk at her mother’s breasts!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV:  
O most holy and pure Virgin, the multitude of angels in heaven, and we, the race 
of mankind on earth, bless thy most honored nativity, for thou hast become the 
Mother of Christ God, the Creator of all. We pray thee: cease not to beseech Him on 
behalf of us who after God, have set our hope on thee, O most hymned Theotokos 
who knewest not wedlock.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Rejoice, O Joachim and Anna! * Rejoice, for the Virgin, * the Mediatress of joy 
and salvation * is born unto us ** from a barren woman!  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and Incline thine ear.  
Thou alone hast been shown to be * the salvation of mortals, * having given birth 
to the Word * in a manner transcending discourse and nature. ** Wherefore, we call 
thee blessed.  
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.  
Put away all grief, * O Adam and Eve; * for the Mother of Joy * springeth forth 
today most gloriously ** from a barren woman.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
The temple of God, * the only Theotokos, * doth issue forth * from a barren 
woman who hath not given birth; ** and Adam rejoiceth, crying aloud.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Thy nativity, O Virgin Theotokos, * hath proclaimed joy to all the world; * for 
from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, * Who, having 
annulled the curse, hath given His blessing, ** and having abolished death, hath 
granted us life everlasting.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the feast, the composition of Sergius the 
Patriarch, in Tone VI:  
Today God, Who resteth on noetic thrones, hath prepared for Himself a holy 
throne on earth. He Who hath established the heavens by His wisdom hath in His 
loving-kindness created an animate heaven. For the God of wonders, the Hope of the 
hopeless, hath caused His Mother to spring forth as a Life-bearing plant from a 
barren root. Glory be to Thee, O Lord!  
This is the day of the Lord! Rejoice, O ye people! For lo! the bridal-chamber of the 
Light and the book of the Word of life hath issued forth from the womb, and the 
portal which faceth toward the east, having been born, awaiteth the entry of the great 
High Priest. She alone hath led the one Christ into the world, for the salvation of our 
souls.  
Even though, by the will of God, famous barren women have produced offspring, 
yet in divine majesty hath Mary outshone all who have been born; for, having been 
most gloriously born of a barren mother, she supra-naturally gave birth in the flesh to 
the God of all, from a womb which knew not seed. She alone is the gate of the only-
begotten Son of God; and He, passing through it, hath kept it closed, and, arranging 
all things wisely in accordance with His knowledge, hath wrought salvation for all 
mankind. (Twice)  
The composition of Stephen of Jerusalem, in Tone VI:  
Today the gateway of the barren woman hath been opened, and the divine Virgin 
portal cometh forth! Today grace beginneth to bear fruit, revealing to the world the 
Mother of God, through whom those on earth are united to those in heaven, for the 
salvation of our souls. (Twice)  
Today is the pronouncement of universal joy! Today the winds have blown which 
herald salvation, and our nature is released from barrenness! For the barren woman is 
shown to be the mother of her who remaineth virgin even after giving birth to the 
Creator, from whom God taketh upon Himself that which is alien to Him by nature, 
and Christ, the Redeemer of our souls, the Lover of mankind, doth accomplish 
salvation for the lost by means of flesh.  
Today barren Anna giveth birth to the divine Maiden who was chosen beforehand 
out of all generations to be the dwelling-place of Christ our God, the King and 
Creator of all, in fulfillment of the divine dispensation. Thereby, O ye mortals, we 
have been fashioned anew and restored from corruption to endless life.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Today God, Who resteth on noetic thrones, hath prepared for Himself a holy 
throne on earth. He Who hath established the heavens by His wisdom hath in His 
loving-kindness created an animate heaven. For the God of wonders, the Hope of the 
hopeless, hath caused His Mother to spring forth as a Life-bearing plant from a 
barren root. Glory be to Thee, O Lord!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM GENESIS  
Jacob went forth from the well of the oath, and departed into Haran. And he came 
to a certain place, and slept there, for the sun had gone down; and he took one of the 
stones of the place, and put it at his head, and lay down to sleep in that place, and 
dreamed: and behold a ladder fixed on the earth, whose top reached to heaven, and 
the angels of God ascended and descended on it. And the Lord stood upon it, and 
said: “I am the God of thy father Abraham, and the God of Isaac. Fear not; the land 
on which thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And thy seed (Shall be like 
the sand of the earth; and it shall spread abroad to the sea, and the south, and the 
north, and the east; and in thee and in thy seed shall all tribes of the earth be blessed. 
And behold I am with thee to preserve thee continually in all the way wherein thou 
shalt go; and I will bring thee back to this land; for I will not desert thee, until I have 
done all that I have said to thee.” And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said: “The 
Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.” And he was afraid, and said: “How fearful is 
this place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!”  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF EZEKIEL  
Thus saith the Lord: “It shall come to pass from the eighth day and onward, that 
the priests shall offer your wholeburnt-offerings on the altar, and your peace-
offerings; and I will accept you,” saith the Lord. Then He brought me back by the 
way of the outer gate of the sanctuary that faceth eastward; and it was shut. And the 
Lord said to me: “This gate shall be shut; it shall not be opened, and no one shall pass 
through it; for the Lord God of Israel shall enter by it, and it shall be shut. For the 
Prince, He shall sit in it, to eat bread before the Lord; He shall go in by the way of the 
porch of the gate, and shall go forth by the way of the same.” And He brought me in 
by the way of the gate that faceth northward, in front of the house: and I looked, and, 
behold! the house was full of the glory of the Lord.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
Wisdom hath built a house for herself and set up seven pillars. She hath killed her 
beasts; she hath mingled her wine in a bowl and prepared her table. She hath sent 
forth her servants, calling with a loud proclamation to the feast, saying: “Whoso is 
foolish, let him turn aside to me.” And to those who want understanding, she saith: 
“Come” eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you. Leave folly, 

--- PAGE 5 ---
that ye may reign forever; and seek wisdom, and improve understanding by 
knowledge.” He that reproveth evil men shall get dishonor to himself; and he that 
rebuketh an ungodly man shall disgrace himself. Rebuke not evil men, lest they 
should hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. Give an opportunity to a 
wise man, and he will be wiser: instruct a just man, and he will receive more 
instruction. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the counsel of the 
law is the character of a sound mind. For in this way thou shalt live long, and years of 
thy life shall be added to thee.  
At Litiya, these Stichera, the composition of Stephen of Jerusalem, in Tone I:  
Today is the beginning of our salvation, O ye people! For, lo! the Virgin Mother, 
who was foretold from generations of old as the receptacle of God, cometh forth to 
be born from a barren woman. The flower of Jesse and the rod of his root have 
sprung forth. Let Adam our forefather rejoice, and let Eve revel in jubilation! For, 
behold! She who was fashioned from the rib of Adam manifestly blesseth her 
daughter and descendant, saying: “Deliverance hath been born within me, for which 
cause I have been freed of the bonds of Hades!” Let David rejoice, striking his harp, 
and let him bless God: for, lo! the Virgin issueth forth from the womb of the barren 
woman, unto the salvation of our souls!  
In Tone II: Come, all ye who love virginity, ye zealots of purity! Come, and with 
love take up the praise of the Virgin: the well-spring of Life which floweth from the 
hardened stone, the bush which grew from the barren ground, unconsumed by the 
immaterial Fire, which purifieth and illumineth our souls.  
The composition of Anatolius the Patriarch:  
What is this noise of revelers? Joachim and Anna keep festival mystically, saying: 
“Rejoice with us today, O Adam and Eve!” For by their transgression paradise was 
shut, but a right glorious fruit hath now been granted unto us: Mary, the divine 
Maiden, the fruit which openeth wide its gates unto all.  
The Queen of all who hath been foretold, the habitation of God, the divine 
dwelling place of the eternal Essence, hath come forth today from the barren womb 
of the glorious Anna, and by her, shameless Hades hath been trampled underfoot, 
and Eve, the mother of our race, hath been led into everlasting life. To her do we cry 
out, as is meet: Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Sergius, in Tone VIII: 
On the most excellent day of our feast let us strike the spiritual harp; for the 
Mother of Life is born today from the seed of David, dispelling darkness: the renewal 
of Adam, the restoration of Eve, the Well-spring of incorruption, our release from 
corruption. Because of her we have been deified and delivered from death. And we, 
the faithful, cry out to her with Gabriel: Rejoice, thou who art full of grace, the Lord 
is with thee, granting us great mercy for thy sake!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, by Germanus, in Tone IV: 
The joy of the whole world hath shone forth upon us from the righteous Joachim 
and Anna: the most laudable Virgin who, because of her surpassing purity, hath 
become the animate temple of God and is known as the one true Theotokos. 
Through her prayers, O Christ God, send down peace upon the world and great 
mercy upon our souls.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
In accordance with the angel’s prophecy, thou didst issue forth from the righteous 
Joachim and Anna, as a most pure fruit, heaven and the throne of God, a receptacle 
of purity, heralding forth joy to all the world, O Virgin, mediatress of our life, 
removal of the curse, bestowal of blessing. Wherefore, on the feast of thy nativity, O 
divinely called Virgin, ask peace for the world and great mercy for our souls.  
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.  
Today let the barren and childless Anna clap her hands with splendor, let those on 
earth bear lamps, let kings leap for joy, let hierarchs be glad in blessing, and let all the 
world keep festival; for, behold, the Queen, the immaculate Bride of the Father, hath 
sprung forth from the root of Jesse. No longer will women bear children in grief, for 
Joy hath blossomed forth and Life shall live amongst mortals in the world. No longer 
will the offerings of Joachim be rejected, for the lamentation of Anna hath been 
changed to joy, and she saith: “Rejoice with me, all ye chosen Israel, for, lo! the Lord 
hath given me the animate palace of His divine glory, for our common gladness and 
joy, and the salvation of our souls!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Sergius, in Tone VIII:  
Come, all ye faithful, let us make haste to the Virgin, for lo! she is born who was 
foreseen before the womb as the Mother of our God, the vessel of virginity, the rod 
of Aaron which sprang forth from the root of Jesse, the proclamation of the 
prophets, the offspring of the righteous Joachim and Anna! She is born, and with her 
the world hath been restored! She is born, and the Church adorneth herself in her 
majesty! She is the holy temple and receptacle of the Godhead, the vessel of virginity, 
the bridal chamber of the King, wherein was wrought the most glorious and perfect 
mystery of the ineffable union of the natures which have come together in Christ! 
And worshipping Him, we hymn the nativity of the all-immaculate Virgin.  
At the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Thy nativity, O Virgin Theotokos, * hath proclaimed joy to all the world; * for 
from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, * Who, having 
annulled the curse, hath given His blessing, ** and having abolished death, hath 
granted us life everlasting. (Thrice)  

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Thy nativity, O Virgin Theotokos, * hath proclaimed joy to all the world; * for 
from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, * Who, having 
annulled the curse, hath given His blessing, ** and having abolished death, hath 
granted us life everlasting. (Thrice) 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Cry aloud, O David! What hath God sworn unto thee? “That which He hath 
sworn unto me,” saith he, “hath already been fulfilled! He hath given me of the fruit 
of my loins the Virgin, from whom Christ the Creator is to be born: the new Adam, 
the King Who sitteth on my throne! And He Whose kingdom is invisible reigneth 
today! A barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, the nurturer of our Life!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Today is Mary, the divine Maiden, born for us from the root of Jesse and the loins 
of David. All things rejoice with joy and are renewed. Rejoice together, O heaven and 
earth! Praise her, ye people of our native land! Joachim maketh merry, and Anna 
keepeth festival, crying aloud: A barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, the 
nurturer of our Life!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O most holy Virgin, we 
honor thy holy parents, and we glorify thy most glorious nativity.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Remember, O Lord, David and all his meekness.  
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded ...”:  
Let heaven rejoice, and let the earth be glad! For the divine heaven, the Bride of 
God, hath been born on earth according to His promise. The barren woman giveth 
suck to Mary as a babe, and Joachim rejoiceth in her birth, saying: “Unto me hath 
been born the staff from whence Christ shall spring forth as a flower, from the root 
of David! Truly most glorious is this wonder!”  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Be thou renewed, O Adam! Rejoice, O Eve! Make merry, O David! Be of good 
cheer, O Anna, for the Mother of thy Creator is born most gloriously! All the earth 
joineth chorus, renewed, and rejoicing, clad in the vesture of gladness. Let every 
tongue now cry out to thee, O Mary, in chorus: Blessed is the house of David, for it 
nurtureth her who nourisheth our Life!  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation 
and generation.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear. 
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 4 (LK. 1: 39-49, 56)  
And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city 
of Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came 
to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her 
womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit: and she spake out with a loud 
voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 
And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo, as 
soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my 
womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of 
those things which were told her from the Lord. And Mary said, My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath re-
garded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all 
generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; 
and holy is His name. And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to 
her own house.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
This is the day of the Lord! Rejoice, O ye people! For, lo! the bridal-chamber of 
the Light and the book of the Word of life hath issued forth from the womb, and the 
portal which faceth toward the east, having been born, awaiteth the entry of the great 
High Priest. She alone leadeth the one Christ into the world, for the salvation of our 
souls.  
Two canons of the feast, with a total of 12 Troparia, each Irmos being chanted twice  
ODE I  
Canon I of the feast, the composition of John of Damascus, in Tone II:  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Come ye faithful and rejoicing with divine spirit, let us honor with hymns the 
Ever-virgin Maiden who today hath issued forth from a barren woman for the 
salvation of mankind.  
Rejoice, O pure one, Mother and handmaid of Christ God, mediatress of our 
primal blessedness! All of us, the race of mankind, glorify thee with hymns, as is meet.  
Today the bridge of life is born, through which mortals have attained restoration 
after their fall into Hades, glorifying Christ, the Bestower of life, with hymns.  
Canon II of the feast, the composition of Andrew of Crete, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: To Him who crushed the enemy with His arm * and led Israel 
through the Red Sea, * to our Redeemer and our God let us sing, * for 
He hath been glorified. 
Let all creation join chorus, and let David be glad, for from his tribe and seed hath 
come forth the rod which beareth the Lord, the Creator of all, as a flower.  
She who is holy among the saints is placed in the holy sanctuary as a babe, to be 
fed by the hands of angels. Let us all, therefore, faithfully keep festival together on 
her nativity.  
Anna was barren and unable to give birth, yet she was not childless in God’s eyes; 
for, lo! she hath become known by all generations as the mother of the pure Virgin, 
from whom the Creator of nature hath sprung forth in the guise of a servant.  
With hymns we all honor thee, the innocent ewe-lamb who hast been born of 
Anna and who through thy womb brought Christ the Lamb into our nature.  
Triadicon: I glorify the three Beginningless Ones, I hymn the three Holy Ones, I 
proclaim the three equally Everlasting Ones to be of a single Essence; for the one 
God is glorified in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.  
Theotokion: Who hath seen a Babe fed with milk Whom a father hath now sown? 
Or where hath there been seen a Mother who is a Virgin? Truly past understanding 
are both of these things, O pure Birthgiver of God.  
Katavasia: Inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross upon the waters, * 
Moses marked a straight line before him with his staff * and divided the Red 
Sea, * opening a path for Israel who went over dry-shod. * Then he marked a 
second line across the waters * and united them in one, * overwhelming the 
chariots of Pharaoh. * Therefore let us sing to Christ our God, * for He hath 
been glorified. 
ODE III 
Canon I  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Having lived blamelessly for God, ye gave birth unto the salvation of all, O 
divinely wise parents of her who hath given birth to our Creator and God.  
From a barren woman did the Lord, Who poureth forth life upon all, cause the 
Virgin to come forth, in whom He was pleased to make His abode, preserving her 
incorrupt even after giving birth.  
Let us hymn Mary today as the Theotokos, the fruit of Anna, the intercessor and 
helper of all, who gaveth birth to the life-bearing Cluster.  
Canon II  
Irmos: My heart is established in the Lord, * my horn is exalted in my God, * 
my mouth is enlarged against mine enemies, * and I rejoice in Thy salvation. 
Blessed is thy womb, O chaste Anna, for thou didst pour forth the fruit of 
virginity, who gaveth birth without seed to Jesus the Redeemer the Nurturer of 
creation.  
O Ever-virgin, all creation calleth thee blessed who hast been born today of Anna 
as the rod sprung forth from the root of Jesse, who put forth Christ as a most pure 
Bloom.  
Showing thee to be more exalted than all creation, O pure Theotokos, thy Son 
magnifieth thy birth from Anna, gladdening all today.  
Triadicon: We worship Thee, O Father, beginningless in essence, we hymn Thy 
timeless Son, and we honor Thy Spirit Who is equally everlasting: as God three in 
Hypostases but one in Essence.  
Theotokion: O pure Birthgiver of God, who hast given birth unto the Bestower of 
light, the Author of man’s life, thou hast been revealed to be the treasure of our life 
and the portal of the unapproachable Light.  
Katavasia: The rod of Aaron is an image of this mystery, * for when it budded 
it showed who should be priest. * So in the Church, that once was barren, * the 
wood of the Cross hath now budded forth, * filling her with strength and 
steadfastness. 
Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Like a cloud of light the Virgin Mary, the Theotokos, hath truly shone forth upon 
us today, coming forth from the righteous ones for our glory. No longer is Adam 
condemned, and Eve hath been freed from her bonds. Wherefore, we exclaim, crying 
aloud with boldness to her who alone is pure: Thy nativity doth announce joy to the 
whole world!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE IV 
Canon I  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
We hymn Thee, O Lord, Who hast given unto all, as a haven of salvation, her who 
gaveth birth to Thee.  
Christ hath revealed thee, O Bride of God, to all who with faith hymn thy mystery 
as their boast and might.  
Delivered from transgressions by thy supplications, O Lady who knewest not 
wedlock, we all bless thee with a good and proper understanding.  
Canon II  
Irmos: With noetic eyes the Prophet Habbakuk * foresaw Thy coming, O 
Lord; * wherefore he cried aloud: * ‘God shall come out of Theman!’ Glory to 
Thy power! * Glory to Thy condescension!  
The Patriarch Jacob, clearly foreseeing the mighty works of Thy dispensation, O 
Savior, cried out in the Spirit, saying mystically to Judah: “From the tender plant thou 
art gone up, O my Son!”, referring to Thee, O God, Who wast born of the Virgin.  
Now the pure Virgin, the rod of Aaron which sprung forth from the root of 
David, cometh forth from Anna, and heaven and earth, and all the nations of the 
gentiles mystically join chorus together with Anna and Joachim.  
Let heaven now be glad; let the earth rejoice! And let Joachim and David join 
chorus: the one as the father of thee who truly hast given birth to God, and the other 
as thine ancestor who proclaimed thy mighty deeds, O pure one.  
The whole world rejoiceth with thee today, O divinely wise Anna; for thou hast 
budded forth the Mother of its Redeemer, she who from the root of David put forth 
for us the rod of strength which beareth Christ as a flower.  
Triadicon: I glorify God, the beginningless Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the 
consubstantial, uncreated Trinity, before Whom, the seraphim stand with reverence, 
crying aloud: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, O God!  
Theotokion: The beginningless Origin receiveth a beginning from thee in the flesh 
and in time, O Theotokos, and He remaineth equally the beginningless and incarnate 
Word of the Father, equally everlasting with the Spirit, maintaining His divine dignity.  
Katavasia: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: Having destroyed the darkness of shadowy images * and illumined the 
hearts of the faithful * by the coming of Truth through the divine Maiden, O 
Christ, * do Thou guide us by Thy light.  
O ye people, let us hymn the cause of the Cause of all that is, Who became like 
unto us. For the prophets, deemed worthy to behold her image, rejoiced, clearly 
seeing the fruit of salvation brought forth through her.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
The sprouting of the dry rod of the priest showed forth the destiny of Israel; and 
now the all-glorious offspring of the barren woman most gloriously shineth forth the 
splendor of those who gave birth to her.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Lord our God, bestow Thy peace upon us; * O Lord our God, take us 
for Thy possession; * O Lord, besides Thee we know none other: * and we call 
upon Thy Name. 
Thy nativity is most pure, O immaculate Virgin, thy conception is ineffable, and 
thy birthgiving unutterable, O Bride unwedded; for God hath clothed Himself in all 
of me.  
Let the angelic ranks be glad; let the descendants of Adam join chorus; for the rod 
who alone budded forth the Flower Christ, our Redeemer, hath been born.  
Today the condemnation of Eve hath been lifted by thy nativity, the barrenness of 
Anna hath been loosed, and Adam hath been freed from the ancient curse; for by 
thee have we been delivered from corruption.  
Glory to Thee Who hast glorified the barren woman today! For, according to the 
promise, she hath given birth to the flowering rod from whence Christ, the Flower of 
our life, hath budded forth. 
Triadicon: Glory to Thee, O holy Father, unbegotten God! Glory to Thee, O 
timeless and only-begotten Son! Glory to Thee, O Spirit divine and co-enthroned, 
Who proceedest from the Father and restest in the Son!  
 
Theotokion: Thy womb became the chariot of the Sun; thy purity remained intact 
as before, O Virgin; for Christ the Sun hath appeared from thee like a Bridegroom 
from a bridal chamber.  
Katavasia: O thrice-blessed Tree, on which Christ the king and Lord was 
stretched! * Through thee the beguiler fell, * who tempted mankind with the 
tree. * He was caught in the trap set by God, * who was crucified upon thee in 
the flesh, * granting peace unto our souls. 
ODE VI 
Canon I  
Irmos: From within the sea monster Jonah cried unto the Lord: * “Lead me up 
from the abyss of Hades, I pray Thee; * for with a voice of praise as to my 
Redeemer, * in the spirit of truth * I offer myself to Thee.”  
The divinely wise parents of the Mother of God cried out to the Lord in grief over 
their barrenness; but they have now given birth to her, our common boast and 
salvation for generations of generations.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
The divinely wise parents of the Mother of God received a gift worthy of heaven 
from God, for she is a chariot more highly exalted than the cherubim, the Mother of 
the Word and Creator.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The billows of life trouble me like the waters of the sea, * O Lover of 
Mankind. * Wherefore, like Jonah I cry unto Thee, O Word: * Raise up my life 
from corruption, O compassionate Lord. 
We hymn thy holy nativity and honor thine immaculate conception of Christ, O 
divinely chosen Bride and Virgin. And with us the ranks of angels and the souls of the 
saints glorify thee.  
Thy chaste parents placed thee, who art holy among the saints, in the temple of 
the Lord, O pure one, to be raised with honor in preparation to become His Mother.  
Join chorus, ye barren women and mothers! Be of good cheer and leap up, O ye 
childless! For a childless and barren woman hath budded forth the Theotokos who 
delivereth Eve from her birth pangs and Adam from the curse.  
I hearken to David who singeth to thee: The virgins that follow after thee shall be 
brought into the temple of the King. And with him I also hymn thee, the daughter of 
the King.  
Triadicon: In thee, O pure one, is the mystery of the Trinity hymned and glorified; 
for well pleased was the Father to have the Word make His abode within thee, and 
the divine Spirit to overshadow thee.  
Theotokion: Thou wast a golden candlestick, O pure Birthgiver of God, for in thy 
womb the Fire made His abode: the Word from the Holy Spirit; and He became 
visible in thee in human form.  
Katavasia: Jonah stretched out his hands in the form of a cross * within the 
belly of the sea monster, * plainly prefiguring the redeeming Passion. * Cast 
out from thence after three days, * he foreshadowed the marvelous 
Resurrection of Christ our God, * who was crucified in the flesh and 
enlightened the world * by His Rising on the third day. 
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
In thy holy nativity, O most pure one, * Joachim and Anna have been freed from 
the reproach of childlessness, * and Adam and Eve from mortal corruption. * And, 
delivered from the affliction of sin, * thy people celebrate it, crying out to thee: * A 
barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, * the nurturer of our Life!  
Ikos: The supplication of Joachim over his childlessness, together with the sighing 
of Anna over her barrenness, were right acceptable to God: they entered the ears of 
the Lord and brought forth life-bearing fruit for the world. For the one made 
supplication on the mountain, and the other bore her reproach in the garden; and 
with joy the barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, the nurturer of our Life.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VII  
Canon I  
Irmos: The bush which burned with fire on the mountain * and the dew-
bearing furnace of the Chaldeans * clearly prefigured thee, O Bride of God; * 
for, without being consumed, * thou didst receive the divine and immaterial 
Fire * within thy material womb. * Wherefore, we chant unto Him Who was 
born of thee: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou! 
Once, the transmitter of the law was prevented from understanding thy great 
mystery in material manifestations, O most pure one, though instructed through 
images to not think earthly thoughts. Wherefore, marveling at the wonder, he said: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
In a godly manner the divine choir called thee beforehand the mountain and portal 
of heaven and the noetic ladder; for from thee was the Stone cut without the aid of 
the hands of man, and thou art the door through which passed the Lord of wonders, 
the God of our fathers.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The Chaldean furnace, burning with fire, * was bedewed by the Spirit * 
through the presence of God; * and the children chanted: * O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
We celebrate and bow down with faith before thy holy nativity, O pure one, 
honoring thy Son, by Whom we have now been delivered from the ancient 
condemnation of Adam.  
Now Anna maketh merry and, rendering praise, crieth aloud: Though barren, I 
have given birth unto the Mother of God, for whose sake the condemnation of Eve, 
the travail of birthgiving, hath been loosed!  
Adam hath been freed and Eve danceth; and they cry out to thee in spirit, O 
Theotokos: Through thee have we been delivered from the primeval curse by the 
appearance of Christ!  
O the womb which contained the dwelling place of God! O the womb which bore 
her who is more spacious than the heavens, the holy throne, the noetic ark of 
sanctification!  
Triadicon: We glorify-the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit in the unity of the 
Godhead, the most holy Trinity, indivisible, uncreated, equally everlasting and 
consubstantial.  
Theotokion: Most gloriously didst thou alone give birth unto God, O Virgin. By 
thy nativity thou hast renewed nature, O Mary. Thou hast released Eve from the 
primeval curse, O pure Birthgiver of God.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Katavasia: The senseless decree of the wicked tyrant, * breathing forth threats 
and blasphemy hateful to God, * confused the people. * Yet neither the fury of 
the wild beast nor the roaring of the fire * could frighten the three Children: * 
but standing together in the flame, * fanned by the wind that brought the dew 
as refreshment, they sang: * ‘Blessed and supremely praised art Thou, * O our 
God and the God of our fathers.’ 
ODE VIII 
Canon I  
Irmos: Of old in the furnace of the holy children, * Thou didst prefigure Thy 
Mother, O Lord, * in the image of those who entered therein, * and rescued 
therefrom remained unconsumed. * Her who hath been revealed today do we 
hymn * unto the ends of the earth, * supremely exalting her throughout all 
ages.  
Now the designated tabernacle of our reconciliation to God, who is to give birth 
to the Word Who hath revealed Himself to us in the coarseness of our flesh, 
beginneth her existence. Him do we, who have been brought into existence out of 
non-existence, hymn and supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
The reversal of Anna’s barrenness hath loosed the world’s lack of good things, and 
hath plainly shown forth a miracle: Christ, Who hath come to mortal men. Him do 
we, who have been brought into existence out of non-existence, hymn and supremely 
exalt throughout all ages.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Thou who dost cover Thy chambers on high with the waters, * Thou 
Who hast set the sands to bound the sea * and Who upholdest all things: * the 
sun doth sing Thy praises, * the moon giveth Thee glory, * every creature 
offereth a hymn unto Thee, * as their Fashioner, throughout the ages. 
Thou, O holy God, Who wrought most glorious things through the barren womb, 
Who opened the childless womb of Anna and gave her fruit, and Thou, O Son of the 
Virgin, didst receive flesh from her, the ever-flourishing Virgin and Theotokos.  
Thou, O Lord, Who dost close the abyss and open it, Who dost raise water to the 
clouds and give rain, hast granted the holy Anna to bud forth and give birth unto the 
most pure fruit, the Theotokos, from a barren root.  
O Cultivator of our thoughts, Planter of our souls, Who hast shown forth the 
barren earth to be right fruitful, hast made the holy Anna, a field which before was 
barren, to become plentiful, right fertile and fruitful, giving rise to the Theotokos, the 
most pure fruit.  
Come ye all, let us gaze upon the city of God born as if from a little chamber, 
issuing forth from the gate of Anna’s womb, yet lacking in any knowledge of the path 
of intercourse, for the one God and Creator hath issued forth via this strange path.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Triadicon: O transcendent Trinity, beginningless Unity, the multitude of angels 
hymneth and trembleth before Thee; heaven and earth are in awe of Thee; men bless 
Thee, and fire doth serve Thee in obedience. Everything in creation doth submit to 
Thee with fear, O holy Trinity.  
 
Theotokion:  O report most new! God hath become the Son of a woman! O 
seedless birthgiving! O Mother without a husband, O begotten God! O awesome 
sight! O, the strange conception of the Virgin! O the ineffable nativity, truly past all 
understanding and contemplation!  
Katavasia: O children equal in number to the Trinity: * bless ye God, the 
Father and Creator; * hymn ye the Word Who came down * and transformed 
the fire into dew; * and supremely exalt ye Him Who giveth life unto all, * the 
all-holy Spirit, * throughout the ages! 
ODE IX  
At ODE IX we do not sing the Magnificat, we chant before the Irmos and before 
each of the Troparia of Canon I, this refrain:  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most glorious nativity of the Mother of God!  
Canon I  
Irmos: Thee do we magnify, O blessed and all-pure Theotokos, * who through 
thy virginal womb ineffably brought forth * God incarnate, * the Luminary 
Who shone forth before the sun * and hath come to us in the flesh.  
He Who poured forth water from the stone for the rebellious people, through the 
womb of a barren woman hath given to us, the right submissive nations, the fruit of 
gladness: thee, O most pure Mother of God, whom we magnify as is meet.  
Thee, O Theotokos, do we magnify, who hast removed the ancient and 
precipitous condemnation: the restoration of our first mother, the cause of the 
reconciliation of our race to God, the bridge to the Creator.  
Before the Irmos and Troparia of Canon II, we chant this refrain:  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the Virgin Mary who hath been born of the 
barren woman!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Virginity is alien to motherhood, * and childbearing is a thing 
strange to virgins: * yet in thee, O Theotokos, both have come to pass. * 
Therefore we, and all the nations of the earth, * without ceasing call 
thee blessed. 
Thou hast received a nativity worthy of thy purity, O Mother of God; for, 
according to the promise, thou wast given to the barren one as a fruit divinely 
springing forth. Wherefore, all we, the peoples of the earth, unceasingly magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
I shall raise up the tabernacle of sacred David which hath fallen, which was a fore-
type of thee, O pure one, through whom the dust of all mankind hath been fashioned 
into a body for God.  
We venerate thy swaddling clothes, O Theotokos. We glorify Him Who gaveth 
fruit to her who before was barren, and Who most gloriously opened the womb of 
her who was unable to give birth. For as God, He doeth all things whatsoever He 
desireth with complete authority.  
To thee, O Theotokos who wast born of Anna, do we faithfully offer up hymnody 
as a gift, mothers and virgins glorifying thee as the only Mother and Virgin; and we 
bow down before thee and hymn and glorify thee.  
Triadicon: It is foreign for the iniquitous to glorify the beginningless Trinity: the 
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the uncreated omnipotent Principle, by Whom 
the whole world is held fast at the behest of His might.  
Theotokion: Within thy womb, O Mother, thou didst contain One of the Trinity: 
Christ the King, Whom all creation doth hymn and before Whom the ranks of 
heaven tremble. Him do thou entreat, O all-pure one, that our souls be saved.  
As Katavasia, we chant here both Irmoi of ODE IX of the canon of the Exaltation of 
the Cross:  
Katavasia I: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought 
forth Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted 
upon the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
Katavasia II: Today the death that came to man through eating of the tree, * is 
made of no effect through the Cross. * For the curse of our Mother Eve * that 
fell on all mankind * is destroyed by the fruit of the pure Mother of God, * 
whom all the powers of heaven magnify. 
Exapostilarion of the feast: 
Today the Theotokos doth issue forth like a flower from the barren Anna, 
instilling all the ends of the world with a most divine fragrance, filling all creation with 
joy. Hymning her, we praise her as is meet, as the one who is more exalted than all 
those earthborn. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Be thou renewed, O Adam! Be thou magnified, O Eve! Join ye chorus with the 
apostles and the righteous! For Mary the Theotokos, the common joy of the angels 
and mortals, hath shone forth today from the righteous Joachim and Anna.  
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the feast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O wondrous marvel! ...”: 
O wondrous miracle! The well-spring of Life is born of the barren woman, and 
grace doth splendidly begin to bring forth fruit. Be glad, O Joachim, as thou art the 
father of the Theotokos! There is none to compare with thee among mortal parents, 
O God-pleaser! For the Maiden who contained God, the divine dwelling place, the 
most holy mountain, hath been given to us by thee! (Twice)  
O wondrous miracle! Fruit hath shone forth from the barren woman at the behest 
of the Almighty Creator of all. She hath boldly loosed the barrenness of the world. Ye 
mothers, join chorus with the mother of the Theotokos, crying: O joyous one, rejoice! 
The Lord is with thee, Who through thee granteth the world great mercy!  
The right glorious Anna, who hath been revealed to be an animate pillar of 
chastity, a splendid receptacle resplendent with grace, hath truly given birth to the 
bulwark of virginity, the divine flower who manifestly imparteth the beauty of 
virginity to all the virginal who desire to preserve the gift of virginity, and bestoweth 
great mercy upon all the faithful.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
This is the day of the Lord! Rejoice, O ye people! For, lo! the bridal-chamber of 
the Light and the book of the Word of life hath issued forth from the womb, and the 
portal which faceth toward the east, having been born, awaiteth the entry of the great 
High Priest. She alone leadeth the one Christ into the world, for the salvation of our 
souls.  
Great Doxology. Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Thy nativity, O Virgin Theotokos, * hath proclaimed joy to all the world; * for 
from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, * Who, having 
annulled the curse, hath given His blessing, ** and having abolished death, hath 
granted us life everlasting.  
Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I of the feast, and 4 
from ODE VI of Canon II of the feast.  
Having lived blamelessly for God, ye gave birth unto the salvation of all, O 
divinely wise parents of her who hath given birth to our Creator and God. (Twice) 
From a barren woman did the Lord, Who poureth forth life upon all, cause the 
Virgin to come forth, in whom He was pleased to make His abode, preserving her 
incorrupt even after giving birth.  
Let us hymn Mary today as the Theotokos, the fruit of Anna, the intercessor and 
helper of all, who gaveth birth to the life-bearing Cluster.  
We hymn thy holy nativity and honor thine immaculate conception of Christ, O 
divinely chosen Bride and Virgin. And with us the ranks of angels and the souls of the 
saints glorify thee.  
Thy chaste parents placed thee, who art holy among the saints, in the temple of 
the Lord, O pure one, to be raised with honor in preparation to become His Mother.  
Glory ..., In thee, O pure one, is the mystery of the Trinity hymned and glorified; 
for well pleased was the Father to have the Word make His abode within thee, and 
the divine Spirit to overshadow thee.  
 Both now ..., Thou wast a golden candlestick, O pure Birthgiver of God, for in 
thy womb the Fire made His abode: the Word from the Holy Spirit; and He became 
visible in thee in human form.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Thy nativity, O Virgin Theotokos, * hath proclaimed joy to all the world; * for 
from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, * Who, having 
annulled the curse, hath given His blessing, ** and having abolished death, hath 
granted us life everlasting.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
In thy holy nativity, O most pure one, * Joachim and Anna have been freed from 
the reproach of childlessness, * and Adam and Eve from mortal corruption. * And, 
delivered from the affliction of sin, * thy people celebrate it, crying out to thee: * A 
barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, ** the nurturer of our Life!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: The hymn of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS, § 240 (PHIL. 2: 5-11)  
Brethren: Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who, being in the 
form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made Himself of no 
reputation, and took upon Himself the form of a servant, and was made in the 
likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, and 
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath 
highly exalted Him, and given Him a name which is above every name: that at the 
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and 
things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, 
to the glory of God the Father.  
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 54 (LK. 10: 38-42; 11: 27-28)  
At that time, Jesus entered into a certain village: and a certain woman named 
Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat 
at Jesus’ feet, and heard His word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, 
and came to Him, and said, Lord, dost Thou not care that my sister hath left me to 
serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me. And Jesus answered and said unto 
her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing 
is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from 
her. And it came to pass, as He spoke these things, a certain woman of the company 
lifted up her voice, and said unto Him, Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the 
breasts which Thou hast sucked. But He said, yea, rather, blessed are they that hear 
the word of God, and keep it.  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most glorious nativity of the Mother of God!  
Irmos: Thee do we magnify, O blessed and all-pure Theotokos, * who through 
thy virginal womb ineffably brought forth * God incarnate, * the Luminary 
Who shone forth before the sun * and hath come to us in the flesh.  
This is done until the leave-taking of the feast. 
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
 
