--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 7th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER  
FOREFEAST OF THE NATIVITY OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR SOZON  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the forefeast, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel. “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Noetic beams of universal joy * have shone forth upon the world, * heralding 
Christ God, the Sun of righteousness unto all, * through thy nativity O most pure 
one. * For thou hast been revealed to be ** the mediatress of true gladness and grace.  
This, the glory of thy forefeast, O most pure one, * doth proclaim unto all the 
people * thy benefactions which transcend description; * for thou hast become for us 
the mediatress of gladness * and the cause of joy to come, ** O Ever-virgin 
Theotokos.  
The Maiden who held God within her womb, * the pure Theotokos, * the glory of 
the prophets, the daughter of David * is born today of Joachim and the chaste Anna; 
* and the curse of Adam which lay upon us ** is annulled by her nativity.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
When He Who of His own will * took our weakness upon Himself, * He 
strengthened thine infirmity with power, O blessed one, * for His sake thou didst run 
the race of martyrdom, rejoicing, * and with thy most beautiful feet * didst crush the 
impotent enemy. * Wherefore, Jesus, the Lover of mankind, * the Savior of our souls, 
** hath woven wreaths of victory for thee.  
When thou wast wounded, O glorious one, * thou didst wound thine enemies * 
and cast them down to the ground, * armed with the Cross * and manifestly arrayed 
in invincible armor, * made steadfast by the love * of Him Who hath translated thee 
to the noetic kingdoms * as an unvanquished martyr, ** and a heavenly man.  
Manifestly emulating * the Savior and Lord * Who for thee underwent voluntary 
sufferings, * O spiritual athlete Sozon, * thou didst of thine own will give thyself over 
* to wounds and stripes and unbearable torments. * Wherefore, He hath honored 
thee with heavenly gifts * and showed thee forth as a well-spring of healings ** for 
those who love thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
O Virgin most holy and pure, we, the multitude of angels in heaven and the race of 
mankind on earth, bless thy most honored nativity, in that thou didst become the 
Mother of Christ God, the Creator of all. Cease thou never to entreat Him, we pray, 
on behalf of us who, after God, have placed our trust in thee, O all-praised 
Theotokos who knewest not wedlock.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
But if it be Friday evening: Glory ..., the above Doxasticon of the Forefeast; Both 
now ..., the Dogmaticon of the current tone. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O most glorious wonder! * The rod which is to bear the Flower * springeth forth 
today from the righteous Joachim and Anna, * from a barren mother * and a fruitless 
womb, O Mother of God * Who knewest not wedlock. * Wherefore, the council of 
the prophets * and the whole festive assembly of the patriarchs ** rejoice now in her 
nativity.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
Today David doth rejoice, * Jesse now danceth, * Levi is magnified, * and the 
righteous Joachim rejoiceth in spirit: * for the childlessness of Anna is loosed * by thy 
nativity, O most pure Mary, * divinely joyous one. * And all of us, the assembly of 
angels and men, ** call thy divine womb blessed.  
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.  
Rejoice, O assembly of men! Rejoice, O temple of the Lord! * Rejoice, holy 
mountain! Rejoice, divine table! * Rejoice, O lamp of the Light! * Rejoice, O honored 
glory of the Orthodox! * Rejoice, O Mary, Mother of Christ God! * Rejoice, O all-
immaculate one! * Rejoice, offering of the Bread divine! * Rejoice, O tabernacle! 
Rejoice, O bush unburnt! ** Rejoice thou hope of all!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone IV: 
Universal joy hath shone forth upon us from the righteous Joachim and Anna, O 
all-praised Virgin who, in thine exceeding purity, didst become the animate temple of 
God, and who alone art truly known to be the Theotokos. Through her prayers, O 
Christ God, grant peace unto the world and great mercy unto our souls.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Sozon O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Mary, the divine Maiden, is born unto us today * from the root of Jesse and the 
loins of David; * and all things rejoice and are made new through joy. * Rejoice 
together, O heaven and earth! * Praise her, ye lands of the gentiles! * Joachim maketh 
glad, and Anna holdeth festival, crying aloud: ** A barren woman giveth birth to the 
Theotokos, the Nourisher of our Life!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the forefeast:  
Mary, the divine Maiden, is born unto us today * from the root of Jesse and the 
loins of David; * and all things rejoice and are made new through joy. * Rejoice 
together, O heaven and earth! * Praise her, ye lands of the gentiles! * Joachim maketh 
glad, and Anna holdeth festival, crying aloud: ** A barren woman giveth birth to the 
Theotokos, the Nourisher of our Life! (Twice) 
Glory ..., that of the holy martyr in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Sozon O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Both now ..., that of the forefeast (Once).  
After the first chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: ‘When the stone had been sealed ...”:  
Having been born most gloriously from the womb of a barren woman, thou didst 
give birth from thy virginal womb in a manner transcending nature; for, revealed as a 
beautiful stem, thou didst give rise to the Life of the world. Wherefore, the hosts of 
heaven cry out to thee, O Theotokos: Glory to thine advent, O pure one! Glory to 
thy nativity! Glory to thy virginity, O Mother who hast not known wedlock!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the second chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
All those of heaven now rejoice, and the human race doth now keep festival with 
them. The prophets mystically are glad; for she whom they foresaw in generations of 
old in the images of the bush, the jar and the staff, the cloud, the portal, the throne 
and the great mountain - is born today.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE I  
Canon of the forefeast, with 8 Troparia, including its Irmos, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I hymn the nativity of the divine Virgin”, composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
Rejoicing today, let us with gladness hymn the divine nativity of the Mother of 
God; for she hath given birth to the Joy of the universe which destroyeth the grief of 
our first mother.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
From a barren woman doth the most pure and all-immaculate Lady issue forth 
barren of sin, whom the law prefigured and the proclamations of the divine heralds of 
God announced.  
The temple and palace of the King didst thou become, wherein, fashioning a 
habitation for Himself, the Transcendent One hath made for the faithful a dwelling-
place of the Holy Trinity.  
Theotokion: The most comely wedding chamber, the most exalted throne of God, 
whereon the Transcendent One hath seated Himself in the flesh, hath issued forth 
from a barren woman; raising up those who sit in the darkness of perdition, unto the 
knowledge of the Light, by His exceeding goodness.  
Canon of the holy martyr, with 4 Troparia, by Theophanes, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
O most glorious one, entreat now the Lord and Benefactor, that those who honor 
thy memory today be saved from all manner of dangers, tribulations and sorrows; and 
do thou help them.  
Christ hath truly revealed thee to be a most radiant star in the firmament of the 
Church, O all-famed martyr, illumining the whole world with the splendors of thy 
sufferings.  
Having roiled the sea of impiety as a steed of the Lord, O martyr, in the abyss of 
thy precious and holy blood thou didst drown all the power of the adversary, as if 
another Pharaoh.  
Theotokion: By the will of the Father, through the divine Spirit, didst thou 
conceive the Son of God without seed and give birth in the flesh unto Him Who 
existeth from the Father without mother and Who for our sake, was born of thee 
without a father.  
ODE III  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Likened to a barren woman * the Church from among the nations hath 
given birth, * and the assembly abundant in children, hath grown weak. * Let 
us cry out to our wondrous God: * Holy art Thou, O Lord!  
A fertile land is born from a barren land, bearing as fruit the Husbandman of all 
good things, the life-bearing Grain Who nourisheth all by His divine providence.  
Today hath the rod of virginity sprouted forth, from whence our God, the 
Gardener, hath blossomed forth as a flower, cutting down the branches of 
wickedness by His extreme beauty.  
Lo! the mountain unquarried, which arose from a barren rock, produceth the 
noetically quarried Stone, Who crusheth the delusion of all graven idols.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
The streams of thy blood, flowing forth like a river for Christ’s sake, have 
quenched the fire of the impious, O ever-hymned martyr and spiritual athlete.  
Thou didst patiently endure the infliction of wounds, like an impregnable tower, O 
glorious one, bringing down the fortress of deception.  
Like David thou didst bring low the noetic Goliath, the tyrant and his army, with 
the stone of faith, O all-glorious one.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, thou alone hast in a manner transcending nature 
shown thyself to be the mediatress of good things. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: 
Rejoice!  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”  
Assembling today, with a loud voice let us praise Sozon, * the true and divinely 
wise martyr, * the skilled spiritual athlete of piety, * the initiate of the mysteries of 
grace, * the most generous bestower of healings: * for he entreateth Christ God ** on 
behalf of us all.  
Ikos: Come ye, and with hymns let us all now earnestly praise Sozon offering 
worthy hymns unto the great spiritual athlete who hath shone forth in the honored 
and divine Church of Christ: for he truly laid low the savagery of the idolaters, and, 
bestowing salvation, ever abideth with the faithful Wherefore, drawn by love, O 
mortals, let us now call him blessed, honoring the precious and glorious memory of 
the spiritual athlete, and crying aloud: O all-blessed Sozon, entreat Christ God on 
behalf of us all!  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Saved by faith, O much-suffering Sozon, thou art become a refuge for the 
tempest-tossed through the providence of Christ God; for pouring forth rivers of 
healings upon those who honor thee, thou dost ever drive out sickness and fever. 
Wherefore, we honor thy divine memory with faith.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically ordained ...”:  
Let heaven rejoice and let the earth be glad! For the heaven of God is born on 
earth: the divine Bride born of the promise. A barren woman nourisheth the babe 
Mary, and Joachim rejoiceth in her nativity, saying: The rod is born to me, from 
whence Christ, the Flower, hath arisen from the root of David! Truly this is a most 
glorious wonder!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE IV  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
The Maiden who is more exalted than the angels is born on earth, in holiness and 
purity beyond compare; and she giveth birth unto Christ, the purification, 
sanctification and perfect deliverance of all.  
Blessed was the fruit of Anna; for she bore in her womb her who would contain 
the blessed and infinite Word Who bestoweth regeneration upon all the faithful.  
Now doth the gloom of evil begin to break, for the all-immaculate one, the 
animate cloud of the Sun, hath shone forth from a barren womb, and this, her radiant 
nativity, we celebrate.  
As a fruitful olive-tree sprung forth from the root of Jesse, O Virgin, hath Anna 
first given birth unto thee who will cause the merciful Word to spring forth. His 
mercy and truth abide forever.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Set afire by the love of God, O all-blessed one, with thy words thou didst utterly 
consume all the tinder-like fuel of the ungodly; and, rejoicing, thou didst cry aloud: 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
As a sanctified temple of the Lord, thou didst run into the temple of the ungodly 
and manfully break the objects of their worship, O all-praised spiritual athlete and 
martyr.  
Thy sacred temple hath been shown to be the healing of all manner of illnesses for 
those who have recourse to it in faith and who honor thy valiant deeds therein, O all-
famed spiritual athlete Sozon.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth unto the Lord without knowing wedlock, O 
Virgin, and after thy birthgiving wast shown to remain a Virgin. Wherefore, with 
unwavering faith and never silent voices we cry out to thee, O Lady: Rejoice!  
ODE V  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Now is the book which shall remain sealed born, that which is impossible for 
mortals to fathom, because it is contrary to natural law, but which is to be kept as the 
dwelling-place of the Word, that book which by the Spirit shall be revealed to the 
divinely eloquent.  
The vine of salvation is born today, which blossomed forth the divine Cluster of 
incorruption, pouring forth sweetness; and everyone, drinking mystically thereof, shall 
bring forth divine and salvific gladness as fruit.  
Leap up, O mortals, join ye chorus with the angels! For the Virgin is born today 
from the barren woman, sadness hath come to an end and been transformed into joy 
for those who celebrate her divine nativity.  
Most manifestly did the prophet describe thee as a new and divine scroll, upon 
which the Word is to be written by the finger of the Father, O Virgin, in His 
goodness inscribing in the Book of Life all who submit to His authority.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Thou, O martyr, illumined by the light of the Trinity, didst destroy the gloom of 
the ungodliness of polytheism, as an ever-radiant beacon.  
Shown to be a rose of comely blossom by the flow of thy blood, O blessed one, 
thou hast perfumed the world with the sweet fragrance of thy miracles.  
As a noetic cluster of the vineyard of Christ, thou hast poured forth the right-
compunctionate wine of martyrdom upon those who glorify thee with faith.  
Theotokion: We hold thee as an invincible weapon against the enemy, and we have 
thee as the foundation and hope of our salvation, O Bride of God.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Today the bridge which leadeth mankind to the Light is born, the ladder of 
heaven, the most manifest mountain of God, the Virgin Theotokos, whom we call 
blessed.  
Anna, the shell of all purple, hath given rise to the purple which will later dye the 
fleece of the King’s incarnation. Her do we all hymn as is meet.  
A well-spring hath now issued forth from the littlest drop: the all-immaculate one 
who, having given birth to the Abyss of salvation, hath caused the boundless streams 
of polytheism to cease.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou didst spring forth from a barren root, O ever-blessed Virgin Birthgiver of 
God, and by thy divine budding forth hast cut off at the root the thorns of 
wickedness.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Desiring to be slain as an unblemished sacrifice, for the sake of God’s love, thou 
didst offer thyself up on His altar. Wherefore, we piously honor thee, O all-famed 
one.  
Having sailed over the deep of deception without foundering, thou didst attain 
unto the calm haven of the kingdom on high, O blessed martyr, enjoying everlasting 
quietude.  
The tormenter pitilessly raked thy sides with claws of iron; but thou didst 
gloriously commit thy spirit into the hands of God, O ever memorable and all- 
blessed one.  
Theotokion: O wonder more recent than all wonders! The Virgin conceived in her 
womb, without knowing a man, Him Who sustaineth all things, yet did not confine 
Him.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Today Mary, the Virgin and Theotokos, * the boundless chamber of the heavenly 
Bridegroom, is born! * From a barren woman, by the counsel of God, * the chariot of 
the Word is rightly adorned; ** for she was foretold as the divine portal and Mother 
of life.  
Ikos: The divine Maiden Mary, whom once the prophets of God foresaw in the 
Spirit, hath been given as the fruit of a barren woman. Beholding her today leaping up 
in the womb of Anna, with the faithful Joachim we noetically make haste to the 
appointed feast, and, standing afar off, cry aloud, saying: The restoration of this world 
hath now sprouted forth from the womb of the barren woman: the divine portal and 
Mother of life!  
ODE VII  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Blessed are Joachim and Anna, who manifestly gave birth to the blessed and pure 
Mother of God who hath given birth to the blessed Word Who rendereth all the 
faithful blessed.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
As a precious gift thy parents acquired thee who conceived God, Who hath 
enriched with better gifts those who cry aloud: O Lord and God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
More blessed than wine are thy breasts, O divinely called Anna; for with sacred 
breasts thou didst nurture with milk her who gaveth suck to the supremely good 
Word, the Bestower of milk, the Nourisher of all things that have breath.  
O divinely inspired David, leap up, strike thy psaltery and dance! For, lo! the ark 
which of old thou didst proclaim hath come forth from a barren womb, reserved for 
the King and God of creation.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Cast into the furnace of painful torments, O martyr, thou didst receive from God 
the dew of endurance, and didst cry out in thanksgiving: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Possessed of a soul more luminous than any gold, thou didst in no wise desire to 
sacrifice to the soulless gods of beaten gold, but rather offered thyself to the Lord as 
a sacrifice of sweet savor.  
The great Shepherd appointed thee, His unblemished lamb, as shepherd for the 
sheep of his true flock, O martyr, showing thee un-devoured by the noetic wolves, O 
all-praised one.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O hallowed and divine habitation of the Most High For 
through thee, O Theotokos, hath joy been given to those who cry aloud: Blessed art 
thou among women, O all-immaculate Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Let us move our tongues in hymnody, honoring the divine nativity of her who, 
through the Spirit, rendered incarnate the supremely divine Word; and let us cry 
aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Leap up, ye prophets of God, honoring the nativity of the Virgin; for she hath 
fulfilled the prophecy of all of you, giving birth to Christ, the God of all, Who was 
foretold by you. Him do ye supremely exalt throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Ye mountains, resound with gladness! O apostles and martyrs, join chorus! Ye 
venerable and righteous, rejoice today in the nativity of the Mother of the Lord, cry 
out: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
The all-pure Mother of the Word hath blossomed forth as a fragrant apple; she 
hath appeared as a divine rose, perfuming the ends of the world today and banishing 
the cause of our sin. Her do we supremely exalt throughout all ages!  
Human nature, bereft of the precious gifts of the divine Spirit, was made glad on 
this day, seeing the divine Maiden born of a barren woman; and it crieth aloud: Hymn 
the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Removing the arm of the golden idol, O wise one, thou didst distribute it among 
the poor, securing for thyself the truly incalculable riches of martyrdom, O ever-
memorable one who cried aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
When the incorporeal foe wrestled with thee, thou didst cast him down with the 
assistance of Christ. Wherefore, He Himself hath bestowed honors upon thee: the 
ability to work miracles. To Him didst thou cry out, rejoicing: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
Opening thy mouth, thou didst fill it with the Spirit, O all-praised Sozon, and the 
mouths of those who blaspheme the Creator didst thou fill with all manner of shame; 
and, rejoicing, thou didst cry out to Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Among all generations, O pure Virgin, thou alone hast been revealed 
to be the Mother of God. Thou wast the receptacle of God, O all-immaculate one, 
who wast not consumed by the fire of the unapproachable Light. Wherefore, we all 
call thee blessed, O Mary, Bride of God.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Lo! the holy place of God hath been shown forth! The exceedingly glorious city of 
the King hath been erected! The luminous garden of paradise hath splendidly 
blossomed forth her who is the mediatress of paradise, the point of reconciliation 
between God and man.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Today hath the lamp of the Light appeared, in which the pre-eternal Light of 
golden luster, having taken up His abode, illumining those who languish in the night 
of evils, destroying the gloom of ungodliness, and truly leading all to share in the day, 
because of their faith.  
Today the earth joineth in chorus, for it hath seen the new and most comely 
heaven of God born. And dwelling therein in the flesh, He hath raised up mankind 
higher than the heavens and deifieth all in His goodness. Chanting, we magnify Him 
with faith.  
Joachim and Anna, the most comely pair, have given rise to the unblemished 
heifer. And the fatted Calf Who came forth from her hath been slain for the world, 
taking upon Himself the transgressions of mankind and destroying the sacrifices 
offered to the demons.  
O Birthgiver of God, who hast given birth to the Light, illumine us who in the 
Spirit celebrate thy radiant nativity, and show us to be participants in the light which 
is to come; and by thy maternal supplications, O most pure one, grant us peace and 
deliverance from evils.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Cast down to the ground, thou wast shown to be a chosen stone of Christ the 
Chief Cornerstone, O martyr, destroying the fortress of deception, and making firm 
the hearts of the faithful.  
The Church of Christ, having now acquired thee as a stream of life, is ever 
adorned with the majesty of thy sufferings and miracles, O martyr, having quenched 
its thirst with thy blood as with water.  
Thou didst find the kingdom of heaven to be the reward of thy struggles and 
labors, O divinely wise Sozon. Joining chorus therein, O all-glorious one, be thou 
mindful of those who with faith keep thy sacred memory.  
Theotokion: Loose thou now the chains of mine offenses, O Virgin Theotokos 
who hast given birth to the Source of tender compassion; and fill me with joy, O thou 
who alone art blessed of God, that I may magnify thee as is meet.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Armed with the weapon of thy precious Cross, O Word, Thy spiritual athlete 
soundly vanquished the hosts of the adversary and put the tyrants to shame; he 
suffered for Thee, O my Christ, King of all, and ever reigneth with Thee.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the forefeast:  
Be renewed, O Adam, and be thou magnified, O Eve! Ye prophets, join chorus 
with the apostles and the righteous! For the common joy of angels and mortals hath 
shone forth today from the righteous Joachim and Anna: Mary the Theotokos.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Come, ye descendants of Adam, * let us hymn the Virgin, * the most pure Mary, * 
who hath sprung forth from David ** and given birth to Christ.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
Let us offer praise * unto our Redeemer and Lord * Who from a barren woman * 
hath given us the Theotokos, ** the only Ever-virgin.  
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.  
The Mother of the King of all, * the joy of all the universe, * is born today * from 
a barren womb ** most gloriously.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II:  
The Queen of all, the dwelling-place of God who was foretold of old, the divine 
habitation of the ever-existent Essence, hath come forth today from the barren womb 
of the glorious Anna. Because of her, Hades hath been trampled underfoot, and Eve, 
the mother of us all, hath been led into steadfast life. Let us cry out to her as is meet: 
Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the forefeast, 
and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the holy martyr.  
A fertile land is born from a barren land, bearing as fruit the Husbandman of all 
good things, the life-bearing Grain Who nourisheth all by His divine providence. 
(Twice) 
Today hath the rod of virginity sprouted forth, from whence our God, the 
Gardener, hath blossomed forth as a flower, cutting down the branches of 
wickedness by His extreme beauty.  
Lo! the mountain unquarried, which arose from a barren rock, produceth the 
noetically quarried Stone, Who crusheth the delusion of all graven idols.  
Desiring to be slain as an unblemished sacrifice, for the sake of God’s love, thou 
didst offer thyself up on His altar. Wherefore, we piously honor thee, O all-famed 
one.  
Having sailed over the deep of deception without foundering, thou didst attain 
unto the calm haven of the kingdom on high, O blessed martyr, enjoying everlasting 
quietude.  
The tormenter pitilessly raked thy sides with claws of iron; but thou didst 
gloriously commit thy spirit into the hands of God, O ever memorable and all- 
blessed one.  
Theotokion: O wonder more recent than all wonders! The Virgin conceived in her 
womb, without knowing a man, Him Who sustaineth all things, yet did not confine 
Him.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Sozon O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Mary, the divine Maiden, is born unto us today * from the root of Jesse and the 
loins of David; * and all things rejoice and are made new through joy. * Rejoice 
together, O heaven and earth! * Praise her, ye lands of the gentiles! * Joachim maketh 
glad, and Anna holdeth festival, crying aloud: ** A barren woman giveth birth to the 
Theotokos, the Nourisher of our Life!  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II: 
Assembling today, with a loud voice let us praise Sozon, * the true and divinely 
wise martyr, * the skilled spiritual athlete of piety, * the initiate of the mysteries of 
grace, * the most generous bestower of healings: * for he entreateth Christ God ** on 
behalf of us all.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III:  
Today Mary, the Virgin and Theotokos, * the boundless chamber of the heavenly 
Bridegroom, is born! * From a barren woman, by the counsel of God, * the chariot of 
the Word is rightly adorned; ** for she was foretold as the divine portal and Mother 
of life.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, § 233 (Eph. 6: 10-17)  
Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high (places). 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; And your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; Above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God: 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 52 (JN. 15: 17-16: 2) 
The Lord spake unto His Disciples saying: These things I command you, that ye 
love one another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before (it hated) 
you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of 
the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. 
Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If 
they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, 
they will keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for my name’s 
sake, because they know not him that sent me. If I had not come and spoken unto 
them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloke for their sin. He that hateth 
me hateth my Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other 
man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both me and 

--- PAGE 15 ---
my Father. But (this cometh to pass), that the word might be fulfilled that is written 
in their law, They hated me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, whom 
I will send unto you from the Father, (even) the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth 
from the Father, he shall testify of me: And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have 
been with me from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye 
should not be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time 
cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service. 
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
