--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 15th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER  
THE AFTERFEAST OF THE EXALTATION OF THE PRECIOUS CROSS OF THE LORD 
THE COMMEMORATION OF  
THE HOLY GREATMARTYR NICETAS  
N.B.: Should the commemoration fall on the Sunday after the Exaltation of 
the Precious Cross, see notes at the end of the service for special directions.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast.  
The Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice, thou Life-bearing Cross ...”: 
Rejoice, thou Life-bearing Cross, invincible victory of piety, door to paradise, 
confirmation of the faithful, rampart of the Church, whereby corruption hath been 
utterly destroyed, the dominion of death trampled down, and we have been lifted up 
from earth to those who are in Heaven, invincible weapon, contender against the 
demons, glory of the martyrs, true adornment of the venerable, haven of salvation, 
which grantest the world great mercy.  
Rejoice, thou Cross of the Lord, whereby mankind hath been loosed from the 
curse, all-honorable standard of joy which disperseth the enemy in thine exaltation, 
our helper, might of kings, Strength of the righteous, splendor of priests; which, when 
traced, doth deliver from misfortune, staff of power whereby we are tended, weapon 
of peace which the angels surround with fear, divine glory of Christ Who granteth the 
world great mercy.  
Rejoice, thou guide of the blind, physician of the ailing, resurrection of all the 
dead, which hast raised us up who had fallen into corruption, O precious Cross, 
whereby the curse was annulled and incorruption budded forth, and the earthly have 
been deified, and the devil utterly cast down! Beholding thee raised on high today in 
the hands of the high priest, we exalt Him who was exalted in thy midst, and bow 
down before thee, plenteously drawing forth from thee great mercy.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy great-martyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of Heaven ...”: 
Arrayed in the armor of piety, * thou wast shown to be a champion of Christ, the 
King of all, * O passion-bearer Nicetas, * as was almighty Gideon of old, * setting at 
naught legions of aliens ** by thy noble boldness.  
That which is alien didst thou enslave * by thine all-powerful faith in Christ, * O 
divinely wise martyr who didst endure suffering. * Wherefore, thou didst turn the 
barbarians * to the Creator and Master of all, O wise one, ** who piously glorify Him.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Thou, the first-fruits of the barbarians, O martyr, * dying for the Trinity, didst 
bring glory to Christ, * and wast shown to be a divinely eloquent sufferer. * 
Wherefore, thou hast manifestly received a crown, * and dost shine with splendor in 
the world like a beacon, ** O right glorious one.  
Glory ..., of the holy great-martyr, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI: 
We know thee as a lamp unto the martyrs, O Nicetas, sufferer for Christ, for, 
having forsaken the glory of earthly rank and despised the godlessness of thy father, 
thou didst shatter his gods, triumphantly putting the barbarians to shame; and 
undergoing martyrdom for confessing Christ, thou wast revealed to be a warrior of 
the God of Heaven. Entreat thou the Benefactor of all on our behalf, that He take 
pity and save our souls.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in the same tone: 
The voices of the prophets foretold the holy Tree whereby Adam was loosed from 
the ancient curse of death, and creation raiseth a cry to that which today is exalted, 
begging great mercy of God. O Master, Who alone art boundless in tender 
compassion: be Thou our cleansing and save our souls!  
Entrance; the Great Prokeimenon 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Our God is in Heaven and on earth; * all things 
whatsoever He hath willed, He hath done.  
Verse: When Israel went out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from among a 
barbarous people, Judaea became His sanctuary.  
Verse: The sea beheld and fled, Jordan turned back.  
Verse: What aileth thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? And thou, O Jordan, that 
thou didst turn back?  
Then, the Ektenia: “Let us all say ...,” 
But if it fall on Sunday, we chant the Prokeimenon of the day: “The Lord is 
King ...,” and the Great Prokeimenon we chant on the eve of the feast.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”:  
Raised on high, * the Cross exhorteth all creation * to hymn the most pure Passion 
* of Him who was lifted up thereon. * For thereon having slain him that slew us, * in 
that He is merciful, * He gave life unto the dead, * and in the exceeding greatness of 
His goodness * He hath made them beautiful and deemed them worthy to live in the 
heavens. * Wherefore, rejoicing, * we exalt His name, ** and magnify His extreme 
condescension.  
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; * for 
He is holy.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Moses prefigured Thee, * stretching forth his arms on high, * and vanquished the 
tyrant Amalek, * O precious Cross, boast of the faithful, * confirmation of sufferers, 
* savior of all the venerable. * Wherefore, creation, * beholding thee lifted up, is 
gladdened, * and keepeth festival, * glorifying Christ, * Who through thee hath 
gathered the dispersed ** in His extreme goodness.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
O most precious Cross, * who art today exalted, * and about whom the ranks of 
angels stand in gladness, * by divine command thou dost uplift all * who for the 
stealing of the fruit * were driven out and were sunk in death. * Wherefore, we, the 
faithful, * venerating thee with hearts and lips, * derive from thee sanctification, * 
crying aloud: Exalt ye Christ, * the supremely good God, ** and worship His divine 
footstool.  
Glory ..., of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Thou didst show thyself to be the namesake of victory, O most honored martyr 
Nicetas; proclaiming Christ our God amid thy struggle, thou didst confess Him 
before kings and tormentors. Wherefore, cease thou never in thy prayers to Him who 
alone is the Lover of mankind, on behalf of the world, for Christ-loving kings, and 
for all who faithfully keep thy memory, that he deliver them from all wrath.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in the same tone  
O God, the words of Moses Thy prophet have been fulfilled, who said: “Ye shall 
see your life hanging before your eyes!” Today the Cross is exalted, and the world is 
freed from deception. Today the resurrection of Christ is renewed, and the ends of 
the earth rejoice, offering music to Thee on cymbals, like David, and saying: “Thou 
hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth, O God: the Cross and resurrection! 
For their sake Thou hast saved us, O Good One Who lovest mankind! O Almighty 
Lord, glory be to Thee!”  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV: 
Fervently taking up the Cross of Christ, * as it were a sword, * thou didst make 
haste to do battle with the enemy, * and, suffering for Christ, * thou didst at last 
commit thy sacred soul to the Lord, * and hence thou hast been deemed worthy to 
receive from Him gifts of healing. ** O great-martyr Nicetas, Entreat Christ God that 
our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion of the feast in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth. (Twice) 
 Glory ..., Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV: 
Fervently taking up the Cross of Christ, * as it were a sword, * thou didst make 
haste to do battle with the enemy, * and, suffering for Christ, * thou didst at last 
commit thy sacred soul to the Lord, * and hence thou hast been deemed worthy to 
receive from Him gifts of healing. ** O great-martyr Nicetas, Entreat Christ God that 
our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Full of tender compassion ...”: 
When Thou wast crucified, O Christ Master, the dominion and might of death 
were overthrown, and all the tyranny of the enemy was trampled down, and those 
who died of old through the tree of disobedience were given life by the Tree of the 
Cross. Wherefore, we hymn Thy sufferings.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
Thou didst will to suffer death and the Cross, affixing it in the midst of creation; 
when it was Thy good pleasure that Thy body be nailed, the sun hid its rays. 
Beholding these things, the thief on the cross hymned thee, crying aloud: Remember 
me, O Lord! And, believing, he received paradise.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Two canons: the canon for the Elevation of the Cross, with 6 Troparia counting the 
Irmos, and the canon of the holy great-martyr, with 6 Troparia.  
ODE I  
The canon of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross upon the waters, * Moses 
marked a straight line before him with his staff * and divided the Red Sea, * 
opening a path for Israel who went over dry-shod. * Then he marked a second 
line across the waters * and united them in one, * overwhelming the chariots 
of Pharaoh. * Therefore let us sing to Christ our God, * for He hath been 
glorified. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Of old, Moses, standing between the priests, prefigured in himself the image of 
Christ’s most pure sufferings; for, forming a cross with his outstretched arms, he 
raised up victory, vanquishing the might of the tyrant Amalek. Wherefore, let us 
hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
Upon a pole Moses set the cure of the deadly and venomous sting of the serpents, 
and the deliverance therefrom; for to the tree, in the image of the Cross, he bound a 
serpent which crawleth upon the ground, triumphing over the sinister bane therein. 
Wherefore, let us hymn Christ God, for He hath been glorified.  
The sky showed forth the victory of the Cross to the divinely wise Emperor 
Constantine, the pious ruler; and therein the audacity of the hostile foe was cast 
down, delusion was destroyed and the divine Faith spread to the ends of the earth. 
Wherefore let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
The canon of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV, the composition of Theophanes, the 
Acrostic whereof is: “I hymn Nicetas, the namesake of victory.”  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Having slain the arrogance of my flesh, illumine thou my mind with the radiance 
of enlightenment, that I may hymn thy victory, O Nicetas, who, as an eminent victor, 
dost entreat Christ.  
Putting aside the poison which cometh from the passions, thou didst mightily 
endure wounds and in suffering clothed thyself in a precious robe, dyed with thine 
own blood.  
Having been nailed to the Tree for us, Thou didst show the path of suffering to be 
new and wondrous, for Thou, O Master, wast the Source of the strength and 
confession of the martyrs.  
Theotokion: The portal of Thy condescension towards us do we mystically call the 
East, the Sun and the Light, for she supra-naturally shone Thee forth in two natures, 
O Lover of mankind.  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The rod of Aaron is an image of this mystery, * for when it budded it 
showed who should be priest. * So in the Church, that once was barren, * the 
wood of the Cross hath now budded forth, * filling her with strength and 
steadfastness. 
The rough stone, struck, put forth water for a disobedient and hard-hearted 
people, and showed forth the mystery of the divinely elect Church, whereof the Cross 
is the might and confirmation.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
When Christ’s most pure side was pierced by the spear, blood and water flowed 
therefrom, renewing the covenant and washing sin away, for the Cross is the boast of 
the faithful, the might and confirmation of kings.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
With steadfastness of soul didst thou endure the threats of the tormentors, O 
glorious martyr of Christ, aided by divine power.  
O all-praised martyr of Christ, enduring the scattering of thy flesh and the 
dismemberment of thy limbs, thou didst preserve thy soul.  
The assembly of Christ’s martyrs rejoice in thee, beholding thy memory celebrated 
today.  
Theotokion: O Mary, pure and honored abode of virginity: heal thou the wounds 
of my heart. 
The Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly upon the Cross, * bestow Thy mercies upon 
the new community named after Thee, * O Christ God; gladden with Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over enemies; ** may they have as Thy 
help the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace. 
Ikos: He that was caught up to the third heaven of paradise and heard unspeakable 
and divine words which the human tongue cannot utter, what writeth he to the 
Galatians, which, as lovers of the Scriptures, ye have both read and come to 
understand? God forbid, saith he, that I should glory, save only in the Cross of the 
Lord, whereon having suffered He slew the passions. Let us all then firmly hold this 
boast, the Cross of the Lord; for this Wood is our salvation, the invincible trophy, the 
weapon of peace.  
Sessional Hymn of the saint, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou that wast lifted up ...”:  
Showing thyself to be an invincible warrior, thou didst overcome the cunning of 
the barbarians and, having suffered, O glorious one, thou didst most mightily enslave 
hosts of invisible foes. Wherefore, thou didst receive a crown of victory. O blessed 
Nicetas, cease thou never to pray for us that hymn thee with faith. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast, in the same tone: 
Stretching forth his hands aloft to the heavens, Moses prefigured the Cross, the 
divine weapon of the faithful, to which Christ affixed our sins. Wherefore, the enemy 
wept bitterly, his senses wracked with pain, saying: The spear of the Tree hath pierced 
me in the midst of my heart! Christ hath released all from the bonds of Hades!  
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Of old, Moses transformed the bitter springs in the desert with a tree, showing 
forth the conversion of the gentiles to piety through the Cross.  
Jordan, having hidden in its depths an axe-head, gave it forth again through the 
power of a stick, signifying the cutting off of deception by the Cross and baptism.  
In a sacred manner the people encamped in four divisions; and preceding in this 
fashion the tabernacle of the witness, they were glorified in the cross-like formation 
of their ranks.  
Wondrously stretched forth, the Cross emitted rays like the sun’s, and the heavens 
declared the glory of our God.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Redeemed by the Blood of the Master, the sufferer Nicetas offered his blood to 
Christ, rejoicing. Wherefore, slaughtered, he cried aloud: Glory to Thee, O my God!  
Aflame with love for the Master, O martyr, thou didst trample down the flame of 
idolatry and all the might of the demons, crying unto the Creator: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
Delighting in the sight of the Lord and reveling in the radiance thereof, the martyr 
knew not suffering, but, rejoicing, cried aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Adorned with a most distinct radiance, the most pure Virgin, O 
Christ, the animate heaven of Thee, the King of kings, is now glorified as the 
Theotokos.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast 
Irmos: O thrice-blessed Tree, on which Christ the king and Lord was 
stretched! * Through thee the beguiler fell, * who tempted mankind with the 
tree. * He was caught in the trap set by God, * who was crucified upon thee in 
the flesh, * granting peace unto our souls. 
O ever-hymned Tree, whereon Christ was stretched: the whirling sword which 
guarded Eden stood in awe of thee, O Cross, and the dread cherubim withdrew, 
when Christ was nailed to thee, Who granteth peace unto our souls.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
The adverse powers of the nether world are stricken with fear when the sign of the 
Cross is traced in the air in which they live, as are the generations of the earthborn 
and the heavenly, who bend the knee to Christ, Who granteth peace unto our souls.  
Having shone forth a divine light and revealed itself in rays of incorruption unto 
the darkened gentiles astray in error, the divine Cross acquireth them for Christ Who 
was nailed thereto, and granteth peace unto our souls.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
O all-praised Nicetas, who can recount thine ordeals, or the crowns which Christ 
gave thee who suffered for Him?  
Having completed their struggles upon the earth, the martyrs have received from 
Thee, O Bestower of life, a heavenly reward in the highest.  
Now dost thou shine forth like a beacon, O all-praised Nicetas. Thou art become a 
light of secondary radiance, standing gloriously before the great Light.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, thou didst give birth unto the timeless Light Who 
became subject to time for us who are in the darkness of this life, and thereby 
illumined the whole world.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast 
Irmos: Jonah stretched out his hands in the form of a cross * within the belly 
of the sea monster, * plainly prefiguring the redeeming Passion. * Cast out 
from thence after three days, * he foreshadowed the marvelous Resurrection of 
Christ our God, * who was crucified in the flesh and enlightened the world * 
by His Rising on the third day. 
Bent with age and weighed down with infirmity, Jacob drew himself up when he 
crossed his arms, showing forth the power of the life-bearing Cross; for God Who 
was nailed in the flesh hath set aright the obsolescence of the law of the Scripture 
which was written in shadows, and dispelled the soul-destroying disease of deception.  
Divine Israel laid his hands cross-wise upon the heads of the youths, and insofar as 
those serving under the law give glory to the firstborn, he suspected he had erred in 
laying his hands thus, yet he did not alter the life-bearing image; wherefore, crying 
aloud, raising the Cross on high, the newly established people of Christ God are 
protected thereby.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Desiring the comeliness of the Creator, O glorious one, and receiving illumination 
therefrom, thou didst take wing, O martyr, and, scorning death, drew nigh unto Him.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
O martyr Nicetas, preferring with chaste thought those things which are 
inexhaustible to those things which are transitory, thou didst gladly submit thy body 
to tortures.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, finding thee alone to be an apple amid a grove, a 
lily most pure and a lily of the valley, the noetic Bridegroom dwelt within thee.  
Kontakion of the Saint, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Having cut down the dominion of falsehood * by thy resistance, * and having 
received a crown of victory for thy sufferings, * thou dost rejoice with the angels, O 
Nicetas, * namesake of victory, * unceasingly praying with them to Christ God ** on 
behalf of us all  
Ikos: Having set the knowledge of Thee in my soul, cleanse Thou my mind and 
show me forth as a keeper of Thy commandments, O Savior, that I may be able to 
conquer the divers rebellions of my passions, receiving the honor of the victory of 
dispassion, through the prayers of Thy mighty martyr and passion-bearer Nicetas, O 
Lover of mankind: For Thou Thyself hast called us to remember on the day of his 
commemoration him that doth unceasingly pray for us all.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast 
Irmos: The senseless decree of the wicked tyrant, * breathing forth threats and 
blasphemy hateful to God, * confused the people. * Yet neither the fury of the 
wild beast nor the roaring of the fire * could frighten the three Children: * but 
standing together in the flame, * fanned by the wind that brought refreshment 
as the dew, they sang: * ‘Blessed and supremely praised art Thou, * O our God 
and the God of our fathers.’ 
The first man, tasting of the tree, went to dwell in corruption; for, having 
condemned himself to a shameful banishment from life, he imparted corruption to 
the whole race of mankind. But we mortals, finding restoration through the tree of 
the Cross, cry aloud: O supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Breaking the commandment of God came about through disobedience, and the 
untimely partaking of the fruit of the tree brought death to mankind, but to preserve 
that which is most precious, access to the tree of life was forbidden, until God 
opened it to the suffering thief who with a proper understanding cried aloud: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Israel, foreseeing things to come, laid hold of the tip of Joseph’s staff, revealing 
beforehand that the most glorious Cross would seize the power of the kingdom, for it 
is the victorious boast of kings and a light for those who cry aloud with faith: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
 
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
O martyr, who art now illumined with unapproachable radiance, do thou enlighten 
with thy radiance those who now chant thy festival, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O 
my Lord and God!  
The angelic forces were astounded at thy courage, O blessed one, beholding thee 
patiently suffering and saying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord and God of all!  
Theotokion: With the choir on high the incorporeal Gabriel cried out to thee in 
gladness: Rejoice, O pure Virgin! Blessed art thou among women, O all-immaculate 
Lady!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast 
Irmos: O ye Children, equal in number to the Trinity, * bless ye God the 
Father and creator; * sing ye the praises of the Word who descended and 
changed the fire into dew; * and supremely exalt ye throughout the ages * the 
most Holy Spirit, who giveth life unto all. 
O hosts of heaven, chant ye to the exalted Tree which was drenched in the blood 
of the incarnate Word of God, and celebrate the restoration of those born on earth. 
O Ye people, worship the Cross of Christ, by which the world hath been granted the 
resurrection throughout all ages!  
O ye mortal stewards of grace, with your hands reverently raise on high the Cross 
whereon Christ God stood and the spear which pierced the body of God the Word, 
that all the nations may see the salvation which is of God, glorifying Him throughout 
all ages!  
O faithful Christian kings, forechosen by divine decree, be ye glad! And having 
received from God the precious Cross, rejoice in it, the weapon of victory, for 
thereby tribes of enemy warriors seeking to make battle have been scattered 
throughout all ages.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
O invincible martyr, thou didst bring thyself as a whole and acceptable sacrifice, 
and as a whole-burnt offering to thy Master, Who was crucified for our sake; and with 
gladness cried aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
As thou wast a lawful divine contender, thou didst worthily receive an imperishable 
crown of victory from the life-bearing right hand of God, before Whom thou now 
dost stand, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Boundless was thy love of Christ, and pierced by many wounds and gorings, thou 
didst mingle thy blood with His. And now, as an emulator of Him, thou dost reign 
with Him, crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: O pure and all-immaculate Theotokos, who didst give birth to Christ 
Who alone is most pure, thou hast clearly washed away the defilement of our nature, 
and art more highly exalted than the cherubim and seraphim, who cry: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast 
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought forth 
Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted upon 
the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
Let all the trees of the forests rejoice, for their nature hath been sanctified by Him 
Who planted them in the beginning - Christ Who was stretched out upon the Tree. 
Wherefore, worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
A sacred horn hath been lifted up, the chief horn for all the divinely wise: the 
Cross, whereby all the horns of the sinful are noetically broken asunder. Wherefore, 
worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
My whole self do I offer thee, O divinely blessed Nicetas, that I may find thee to 
be an intercessor before the Master who can save me from every evil circumstance, 
and a mediator of divine salvation.  
Thou wast truly a witness to the truth, O passion-bearer, and now standing and 
rejoicing before precious hypostatic Truth, thou hast boldly accepted the reward for 
thy struggles.  
Arriving at the calm harbor, thou dost rest from thy pains, and, O crown-bearer, 
dost rejoice in paradise with the martyrs of Christ. Wherefore, we all now fittingly 
glorify thee as glorified by God.  
Theotokion: In a manner beyond the laws of nature, O pure and blessed one, thou 
hast given birth unto the Lawgiver Who in His tender compassion immutably became 
flesh and is known in two natures.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
 
Exapostilarion of the holy great-martyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Defending himself with the weapon of Thy precious Cross, Thy sufferer, O Word, 
mightily vanquished the powers of the adversary, and put the tormentors to shame, 
and suffered for Thee; and with Thee, O my Christ, King of all, doth Nicetas reign. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast: in the same melody: 
Today is the Cross raised on high, and the world is sanctified; for He that sitteth 
with the Father and the Holy Spirit stretched out his arms thereon. It hath brought 
the whole world to the knowledge of Thee, O Christ. Therefore, to those who hope 
in Thee do Thou grant divine glory.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Today is exalted * the Cross of Christ, * the life-bearing Tree, * whereon He was 
nailed ** in the flesh.  
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the footstool of His feet; for 
He is holy.  
Rejoice, divine preservation * of the faithful, * unassailable rampart, * thou Cross 
of the Lord, ** whereby we are exalted above the earth.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
Come ye, in gladness * let us all venerate * the life-bearing Tree * whereon was 
stretched ** Christ our deliverance.  
Glory ..., of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VI: 
Today the whole world rejoiceth in the suffering of the passion-bearer, and the 
Church of Christ, adorned with flowers, crieth out to thee, O martyr of Christ: O 
favorite of Christ and most fervent intercessor, ceaselessly pray on behalf of thy 
servants!  
Both now ..., in the same tone: 
Today, from the impenetrable bosom of the earth the shoot of life hath been put 
forth, and it announceth the Resurrection of Christ Who was nailed thereto; and, 
lifted up by priestly hands, it proclaimeth His ascension to Heaven, whereby our 
nature, which was bound to the earth by the fall, doth now dwell in the heavens. 
Wherefore, in thanksgiving we cry alooud: O Lord Who wast lifted up thereon and 
thereby raised us up with Thyself: grant us Thy heavenly joys, since Thou lovest 
mankind.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes: 4 Troparia from ODE I of the canon to the Cross, and 4 
Troparia from ODE VI of the canon of the holy great-martyr.  
Of old, Moses, standing between the priests, prefigured in himself the image of 
Christ’s most pure sufferings; for, forming a cross with his outstretched arms, he 
raised up victory, vanquishing the might of the tyrant Amalek. Wherefore, let us 
hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified. (Twice) 
Upon a pole Moses set the cure of the deadly and venomous sting of the serpents, 
and the deliverance therefrom; for to the tree, in the image of the Cross, he bound a 
serpent which crawleth upon the ground, triumphing over the sinister bane therein. 
Wherefore, let us hymn Christ God, for He hath been glorified.  
The sky showed forth the victory of the Cross to the divinely wise Emperor 
Constantine, the pious ruler; and therein the audacity of the hostile foe was cast 
down, delusion was destroyed and the divine Faith spread to the ends of the earth. 
Wherefore let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
Desiring the comeliness of the Creator, O glorious one, and receiving illumination 
therefrom, thou didst take wing, O martyr, and, scorning death, drew nigh unto Him. 
(Twice) 
O martyr Nicetas, preferring with chaste thought those things which are 
inexhaustible to those things which are transitory, thou didst gladly submit thy body 
to tortures.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, finding thee alone to be an apple amid a grove, a 
lily most pure and a lily of the valley, the noetic Bridegroom dwelt within thee.  
 
At the Entrance, we end the hymn “O come let us worship ...” with the words: 
“O Son of God Who wast crucified in the flesh, save us that chant unto Thee: 
Alleluia.” And we sing thus until the Leave-taking.  
 
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV: 
Fervently taking up the Cross of Christ, * as it were a sword, * thou didst make 
haste to do battle with the enemy, * and, suffering for Christ, * thou didst at last 
commit thy sacred soul to the Lord, * and hence thou hast been deemed worthy to 
receive from Him gifts of healing. ** O great-martyr Nicetas, Entreat Christ God that 
our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
 
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II: 
Having cut down the dominion of falsehood * by thy resistance, * and having 
received a crown of victory for thy sufferings, * thou dost rejoice with the angels, O 
Nicetas, * namesake of victory, * unceasingly praying with them to Christ God ** on 
behalf of us all  
The Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly upon the Cross, * bestow Thy mercies upon 
the new community named after Thee, * O Christ God; gladden with Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over enemies; ** may they have as Thy 
help the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace. 
Prokeimenon of the feast in Tone VII (also until the Leave-taking): Exalt ye the 
Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; * for He is holy. 
And of the saint, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * 
and shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY, §292 (II Tim. 2:1-10)  
Timothy my child: be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things 
that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful 
men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a 
good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs 
of (this) life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a 
man also strive for masteries, (yet) is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The 
husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; 
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the 
seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel: Wherein I suffer 
trouble, as an evil doer, (even) unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. 
Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sakes, that they may also obtain the 
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. 
Alleluia of the feast, in Tone IV: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast 
purchased from the beginning.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and like a 
cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God 
they shall blossom forth. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §36 (Matt. 10:16-22)  
The Lord spake unto His disciples saying: Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the 
midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware 
of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues; And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a 
testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against (their) parents, and cause them to be put to 
death. And ye shall be hated of all (men) for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to 
the end shall be saved. 
 
Instead of “It is truly meet...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the all-honored Cross of the Lord!  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought forth 
Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted upon 
the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
 
Communion Verse of the feast: The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, hath 
been signed upon us.  
And of the saint: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not 
be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
NOTES CONCERNING THE ORDER OF SERVICES ON THE SUNDAY 
AFTER THE EXALTATION OF THE PRECIOUS CROSS  
Be it known: Should the after-feast of the Exaltation of the Precious Cross fall on 
a Sunday and the saint of the day have four or six Troparia prescribed for his canon, 
the service is taken thus:  
On Saturday at Little Vespers: The Stichera of the Resurrection and of the 
Theotokos, as usual. The Troparion of the Resurrection; Glory ..., Both now ..., its 
Theotokion.  
At Great Vespers: After the usual Kathisma, On “Lord, I have cried ...,” we sing: 3 
Stichera of the Resurrection; 1 of Anatolius; 3 of the feast (as printed under the date 
in question), and 3 of the saint of the day. If the saint have 6 Stichera prescribed for 

--- PAGE 16 ---
his feast, or Polyeleos, we sing 3 Stichera of the Resurrection, 3 of the feast, and 4 of 
the saint. Glory ..., of the saint; Both now ..., the principal Theotokion (Dogmatic) of 
the Tone. At Litiya, we sing the Stichera of the feast printed for the Aposticha 
Stichera under the date in question; Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast, printed as the 
Glory Sticheron at the end of the Matins Aposticha. If the saint have a Glory 
Sticheron of his own, then we sing Glory ..., of the saint; Both now ..., of the feast. 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection. Glory , of the saint (if there be 
one), Now and ever , of the feast. If the saint does not have a Glory Sticheron, then 
we sing Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast. At the Blessing of the Loaves, the 
Troparion: “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Twice); and the Troparion of the feast, 
(Once).  
At Matins: On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Resurrection, (Twice); 
Glory ..., of the saint, if there be one; Both now ..., of the feast. If the saint have no 
Troparion, then we sing: Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast. After the readings of the 
Psalter, the Sessional Hymns of the Resurrection with their Theotokia. Then the 
reading from the Gospel Interpreted, as appointed for the Sunday after the 
Exaltation. Then the 17th Kathisma and its Troparia, and the Hypacoi of the tone. 
And the reading from the Gospel Interpreted for the appropriate Sunday after 
Pentecost. If the saint have Polyeleos, after the two Kathismata, we sing the Polyeleos 
for the saint, and after the Polyeleos, the Troparia: “The assembly of angels ...” Then, 
the Hypacoi of the tone, and then all the Sessional Hymns of the saint. And a reading. 
The Song of Ascent and the Prokeimenon of the tone. “Let every breath ...” The 
Gospel of the Resurrection, the Sticheron of the Resurrection, etc. The canon of the 
Resurrection, with four Troparia, including its Irmos; the canon of the Theotokos, 
with two Troparia; the canon of the Cross, with four Troparia; and of the saint, with 
four. Katavasia of the feast. If the saint’s feast be of Polyeleos rank, or of doxology 
rank, we sing: the canon of the. Resurrection, with four Troparia, including the Irmos; 
of the feast, four Troparia; and of the saint, with six Troparia. After the third ode, the 
Kontakion of the feast, and of the saint, if there be one; and the Ikos and Sessional 
Hymn of the saint. Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast. And a reading. After the sixth 
ode, the Kontakion of the Resurrection, and its ikos, and the reading from the 
Prologue. At the ninth ode, we chant the Hymn of the Theotokos; and after the ninth 
ode, the Exapostilarion of the Resurrection; Glory ..., of the saint, if there be one; if 
not, Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast. On the Praises, 4 Stichera to the 
Resurrection; then 4 Stichera to the saint, if there be such: three from the end of 
Matins, and the Glory ...verse, and we utilize the saint’s verses. If the saint does not 
have Stichera on the Praises, we sing: 4 Stichera to the Resurrection, and 4 to the 
feast, using the Matins Aposticha Stichera under the date in question, with the verses 

--- PAGE 17 ---
of the feast. Glory ..., the Evangelical Sticheron; Both now ...,”Most blessed art thou 
...” The Great Doxology, and after the Trisagion, the Resurrection Troparion only. 
The Ektenias and dismissal. Then, the usual reading from the catecheses of St. 
Theodore the Studite and the departure to the vestibule.  
At The Hours: The First Hour is read at the end of Matins. At the First Hour, the 
Troparion of the Resurrection, Glory ..., of the feast, Both now ..., the Theotokion of 
the tone. After Our Father, the Kontakion of the feast. Likewise, in the rest of the 
Hours, we alternate the Kontakia of the feast, Resurrection and the saint, if the latter 
be of Polyeleos rank.  
At Liturgy: On the Beatitudes, six verses from the tone, and the appointed ODE 
from the canon of the feast, 4 verses. If the saint have an ODE prescribed from his 
canon, then: 4 to the Resurrection, 4 from the appointed ODE of the festal canon, 
and 4 to the saint, from ODE VI of his canon. After the Entrance, Troparia of the 
Resurrection and the feast, then of the temple and the saint, if there be one; Glory ..., 
the Kontakion of the saint; Both now ..., that of the feast. If the saint does not have a 
Troparion or a Kontakion, then: Glory ..., the Kontakion of the Resurrection; Both 
now ..., of the feast. The Prokeimenon, Epistle and Gospel of the Sunday after the 
Exaltation, then of the saint, if there be one prescribed; if not, that of the usual cycle. 
The Prokeimenon of the tone is omitted. Communion verses: Praise the Lord from 
the heavens ..., and that of the saint; if the saint does not have one prescribed, that of 
the feast.  
 
