--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 19th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER  
AFTERFEAST OF THE EXALTATION OF THE PRECIOUS CROSS  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS TROPHIMUS, SABBATIUS & 
DORYMEDON  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
The all-holy Cross, * the invincible trophy, * cometh forth today, revealed from 
the earth * like a hidden treasure, * enriching the whole world * with the rays of its 
universal goodness. * Wherefore, we glorify the supremely good economy * of Christ 
our God ** Who deigned to be crucified thereon.  
Of old, the Cross, depicted * by Moses, the faithful beholder and favorite of God, 
* the divine prophet, * routed the hordes of the aliens; * and now, depicted in the 
divine elevation * at the hands of the sacred ministers, * it dispelleth the hordes of the 
demons * and the assemblies of the Jews, ** and is the reproof of the audacity of the 
ungodly.  
Thy Cross, O our Savior, * is the invincible might of Christians, * whereby 
multitudes of alien nations * are vanquished, * and the peace of Thy Church, O 
Christ * is bestowed upon those who render goodly glory. * Venerating it now, * we 
entreat Thee, O Lover of mankind: ** Deem us worthy of a portion with Thy saints.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs ...”: 
Desiring to take pleasure in inexhaustible food, O martyr Trophimus, thou didst 
strive with the pangs of thy body and didst pass over from corruption to 
incorruption, rejoicing and adorned with thy martyric witness. Wherefore, by thy 
supplications entreat great mercy for all.  
The glorious Sabbatius, having endured many torments, hath now been deemed 
worthy to celebrate with great joy in the courts of heaven. Receiving honors for his 
struggles, he is numbered among the assemblies of the angels. By his supplications, O 
Christ, grant Thy people great mercy.  
Setting at naught the counsel of the ungodly, thou didst make thy mind steadfast 
with divine counsels, O Dorymedon, manfully entering the trials of tortures, and re-
ceiving trophies of honor. And thou reignest ever with Christ, praying for us all.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV:  
Let us clap our hands today for the victory which is praised with hymns, and with 
a radiant countenance and tongue let us openly cry: O Christ, Who for our sake didst 
deign to be tried, to be spat upon and scourged and arrayed in a purple robe, and 
Who ascended the Cross; Whom beholding, the sun and the moon hid their light, and 
the earth trembled with fear, and the veil of the temple was rent in twain: Do Thou 
now grant unto us Thine honored Cross as a preserver and protector, and a dispeller 
of demons; that, kissing it, we may all cry aloud to it: Save us by thy power, O Cross! 
Sanctify us by Thy radiance, O precious Cross! And fortify us by thine exaltation, for 
thou hast been given to us as the light and salvation of our souls. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
The Cross is raised up, and the demons are driven away; * the thief openeth the 
gates of Eden; * death is slain, and now is shown to be void; * and Christ is 
magnified. * Wherefore, all mortals are glad, ** for the curse hath been annulled.  
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet, * for 
He is holy.  
Come, all ye who love God, * and, beholding the precious Cross uplifted, * let us 
magnify together, and give glory * to the one Redeemer and God, crying aloud: * O 
Thou Who wast crucified on the tree of the Cross, ** disdain not those who entreat 
Thee.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages; * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
Moses, of old, sweetening bitterness, delivered Israel, * prefigured the Cross in 
image; * and all of us, the faithful, * depicting it ever in our hearts * in godly manner 
and mystically, ** are saved by its might.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
The words of Thy prophets, Isaiah and David, have been fulfilled, O God, which 
said: All nations will come, O Lord, and bow down before Thee. For, behold the 
people who have been filled with Thy grace in Thy courts in Jerusalem, O Good One. 
O Thou Who didst endure the Cross for us and hast imparted life through Thy 
resurrection, preserve and save us!  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
God Who is praised in the Trinity hath glorified a trinity of martyrs: * Trophimus, 
Sabbatius and Dorymedon. * For, believing in Him, they cast down the enemy. ** By 
their supplications, O Christ our God, have mercy upon us.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth. (Twice) 
Glory ..., the Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
God Who is praised in the Trinity hath glorified a trinity of martyrs: * Trophimus, 
Sabbatius and Dorymedon. * For, believing in Him, they cast down the enemy. ** By 
their supplications, O Christ our God, have mercy upon us.  
Both now ..., the Troparion of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII:  
Bowing down before Thee, O Christ God, in the pine, cedar and cypress, the 
Church crieth out to Thee: Granting victory over heresies to our hierarchs through 
the Theotokos, have mercy upon us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Shining forth like a light, Thy Cross, O Lord, driveth away legions of the demons, 
illumining the faithful who chant: The Cross is the boast of the world!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Canon of the feast, with 8 Troparia, including its Irmos; and that of the martyrs, with 
4 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross upon the waters, * Moses 
marked a straight line before him with his staff * and divided the Red Sea, * 
opening a path for Israel who went over dry-shod. * Then he marked a second 
line across the waters * and united them in one, * overwhelming the chariots 
of Pharaoh. * Therefore let us sing to Christ our God, * for He hath been 
glorified. 
Of old, Moses, standing between the priests, prefigured in himself the image of 
Christ’s most pure sufferings; for, forming a cross with his outstretched arms, he 
raised up victory, vanquishing the might of the tyrant Amalek. Wherefore, let us 
hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
Upon a pole Moses set the cure of the deadly and venomous sting of the serpents, 
and the deliverance therefrom; for to the tree, in the image of the Cross, he bound a 
serpent which crawleth upon the ground, triumphing over the sinister bane therein. 
Wherefore, let us hymn Christ God, for He hath been glorified.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
The sky showed forth the victory of the Cross to the divinely wise Emperor 
Constantine, the pious ruler; and therein the audacity of the hostile foe was cast 
down, delusion was destroyed and the divine Faith spread to the ends of the earth. 
Wherefore let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I hymn the thrice-radiant splendor of the martyrs”: 
The composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
O martyrs of Christ, of great renown, illumined with the most radiant lightning-
flashes of the Spirit, dispel the clouds from my soul, and enlighten my mind, and 
open my lips, that I may hymn and praise you.  
With steadfastness of mind ye opposed the vain-minded one who sought to 
compell you to render alien worship to his gods, O martyrs, and ye brought 
yourselves to the King of all as perfect sacrifices through divers torments.  
Strength was given you by almighty God to cast down all the strength of the 
serpent, O honored great-martyrs, warriors of the Trinity, right wondrous Sabbatius 
and godly Dorymedon and Trophimus.  
Theotokion: Splendidly illumined with thy radiant and flowing grace, O only 
divinely joyous portal of the Light, the valiant martyrs passed through the uttermost 
darkness of unbearable sufferings, chanting hymns unto thee.  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The rod of Aaron is an image of this mystery, * for when it budded it 
showed who should be priest. * So in the Church, that once was barren, * the 
wood of the Cross hath now budded forth, * filling her with strength and 
steadfastness. 
The rough stone, struck, put forth water for a disobedient and hard-hearted 
people, and showed forth the mystery of the divinely elect Church, whereof the Cross 
is the might and confirmation.  
When Christ’s most pure side was pierced by the spear, blood and water flowed 
therefrom, renewing the covenant and washing sin away, for the Cross is the boast of 
the faithful, the might and confirmation of kings.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
With most beautiful resolve and a firm conscience, ye proceeded to the trial of 
martyrdom; and, lacerated exceedingly and afflicted with wounds, ye remained 
immovable in your unshakable resolve.  
Having dyed your most sacred purple robes in the outpourings of your blood, O 
valiant warriors, ye now stand before the immortal King and Lord, unceasingly 
making supplication for us.  
Subjected to tortures, lacerated bodily in divers ways, cruelly bound, and cast to 
the wild beasts, ye did not deny Christ, O all-glorious warriors, holy great-martyrs.  
Theotokion: Submitting to the laws of the Master Who became incarnate of thee, 
O all-immaculate Maiden, the valiant spiritual athletes conquered the iniquitous ones, 
having as their helper thee who dost save our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “As the first-fruits ...”:  
As the foundation of spiritual athletes and confirmation of piety * the Church doth 
honor and glorify thy luminous suffering, * O right wise and glorious Trophimus, 
ever-hymned and blessed spiritual athlete. * With those who suffered with thee ask 
cleansing for those who hymn thee, ** in that thou art invincible.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Having manfully endured the pain of martyrdom, ye have now passed over 
together to a life without pain, O glorious Dorymedon, Trophimus and Sabbatius. 
Wherefore, the Church of Christ, celebrating your sacred memory, rejoiceth today in 
a godly manner.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone I:  
Having heaven as Thy throne on high, in that Thou art God, and bearing the earth 
as Thy footstool, O Christ our Savior, Thou hast shown us the Cross as the footstool 
of Thy feet. Before it do we all bow down like David, and, having it as a protector 
and helper, we faithfully glorify Thee.  
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Of old, Moses transformed the bitter springs in the desert with a tree, showing 
forth the conversion of the gentiles to piety through the Cross.  
Jordan, having hidden in its depths an axe-head, gave it forth again through the 
power of a stick, signifying the cutting off of deception by the Cross and baptism.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
In a sacred manner the people encamped in four divisions; and preceding in this 
fashion the tabernacle of the witness, they were glorified in the cross-like formation 
of their ranks.  
Wondrously stretched forth, the Cross emitted rays like the sun’s, and the heavens 
declared the glory of our God.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Illumined by the endurance of tortures, ye were suspended upon a tree, O martyrs; 
and, your sides raked with iron claws, O glorious ones, in the nakedness of your 
bodies ye were invested with divine incorruption, and stand ever before the throne of 
the Trinity.  
Wounded for Christ, O martyr Trophimus, looking to the divine rewards of 
heaven and inexhaustible sweetness, thou didst take delight in intense pain. And now, 
having completed thy race, thou hast been deemed worthy thereof, as spiritual 
nourishment for the Master.  
Enduring torments in thy youth, O Sabbatius, rejoicing, thou didst surrender thy 
soul into the hands of God, and hast come to rest in the mansions of heaven, having 
vanquished the accursed one who was expelled therefrom; and thou hast received the 
honors of victory.  
Theotokion: The company of the three martyrs, calling upon thee as the pure 
palace of the King, O most pure Virgin, destroyed the temples of the demons and 
have passed over to the temple of glory on high, ever honoring thee in praises.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O thrice-blessed Tree, on which Christ the king and Lord was 
stretched! * Through thee the beguiler fell, * who tempted mankind with the 
tree. * He was caught in the trap set by God, * who was crucified upon thee in 
the flesh, * granting peace unto our souls. 
O ever-hymned Tree, whereon Christ was stretched: the whirling sword which 
guarded Eden stood in awe of thee, O Cross, and the dread cherubim withdrew, 
when Christ was nailed to thee, Who granteth peace unto our souls.  
The adverse powers of the nether world are stricken with fear when the sign of the 
Cross is traced in the air in which they live, as are the generations of the earthborn 
and the heavenly, who bend the knee to Christ, Who granteth peace unto our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Having shone forth a divine light and revealed itself in rays of incorruption unto 
the darkened gentiles astray in error, the divine Cross acquireth them for Christ Who 
was nailed thereto, and granteth peace unto our souls.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Having withdrawn from carnal love, O all-praised ones, through all manner of 
pangs and wounds ye achieved union with the most compassionate God, Who loved 
you with mercy and hath slain the passions by your sufferings.  
Thy steps were directed to the paths of martyrdom, O all-wise martyr Trophimus; 
and made beautiful therein, shod with sandals pierced with nails, thou didst crush the 
head and sting of Belial.  
Giving voice to divine speech, O much-suffering Trophimus, thou didst put the 
tyrant to shame; and with the blood flowing from thy feet, thou didst sanctify the 
earth. And thou hast joyfully passed over to paradise, asking salvation for us.  
Theotokion: The mighty warriors, calling upon the divinely joyous and all-
immaculate holy Virgin for help, with steadfast wisdom passed through the 
oppression of tortures and the violence of wounding.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Jonah stretched out his hands in the form of a cross * within the belly 
of the sea monster, * plainly prefiguring the redeeming Passion. * Cast out 
from thence after three days, * he foreshadowed the marvelous Resurrection of 
Christ our God, * who was crucified in the flesh and enlightened the world * 
by His Rising on the third day. 
Bent with age and weighed down with infirmity, Jacob drew himself up when he 
crossed his arms, showing forth the power of the life-bearing Cross; for God Who 
was nailed in the flesh hath set aright the obsolescence of the law of the Scripture 
which was written in shadows, and dispelled the soul-destroying disease of deception.  
Divine Israel laid his hands cross-wise upon the heads of the youths, and insofar as 
those serving under the law give glory to the firstborn, he suspected he had erred in 
laying his hands thus, yet he did not alter the life-bearing image; wherefore crying 
aloud, raising the Cross on high, the newly established people of Christ God are 
protected thereby.  
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Sailing peacefully over the abyss of torments with the guidance of the Spirit, O 
right glorious spiritual athletes, in a sacred manner ye reached the tranquil harbor of 
salvation.  
Seeing thy members falling to the ground, O Trophimus, and having vinegar 
poured into thy nostrils, thou didst greatly receive the sweet fragrance of the love of 
Christ.  
As a counselor of the justifications of Christ, thou didst utterly reject the counsels 
of the ungodly foe, O martyr Dorymedon, and, wounded, didst give thyself over to 
tortures.  
Theotokion: Enlivened by the power which doth emanate from Thee, O Christ, 
Thy spiritual athletes suffered lawfully, hymning Thy pure Mother who ineffably gave 
birth to Thee.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly upon the Cross, * bestow Thy mercies upon 
the new community named after Thee, * O Christ God; gladden with Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over enemies; ** may they have as Thy 
help the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace. 
Ikos: He that was caught up to the third heaven of paradise and heard unspeakable 
and divine words which the human tongue cannot utter, what writeth he to the 
Galatians, which, as lovers of the Scriptures, ye have both read and come to 
understand? God forbid, saith he, that I should glory, save only in the Cross of the 
Lord, whereon having suffered He slew the passions. Let us all then firmly hold this 
boast, the Cross of the Lord; for this Wood is our salvation, the invincible trophy, the 
weapon of peace.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The senseless decree of the wicked tyrant, * breathing forth threats and 
blasphemy hateful to God, * confused the people. * Yet neither the fury of the 
wild beast nor the roaring of the fire * could frighten the three Children: * but 
standing together in the flame, * fanned by the wind that brought refreshment 
as the dew, they sang: * ‘Blessed and supremely praised art Thou, * O our God 
and the God of our fathers.’ 
The first man, tasting of the tree, went to dwell in corruption; for, having 
condemned himself to a shameful banishment from life, he imparted corruption to 
the whole race of mankind. But we mortals, finding restoration through the tree of 
the Cross, cry aloud: O supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Breaking the commandment of God came about through disobedience, and the 
untimely partaking of the fruit of the tree brought death to mankind, but to preserve 
that which is most precious, access to the tree of life was forbidden, until God 
opened it to the suffering thief who with a proper understanding cried aloud: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Israel, foreseeing things to come, laid hold of the tip of Joseph’s staff, revealing 
beforehand that the most glorious Cross would seize the power of the kingdom, for it 
is the victorious boast of kings and a light for those who cry aloud with faith: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Rendered comely in every way by thy disposition towards God, O blessed 
Dorymedon, thou didst endure mightily, seared with heated goads, and thy sides 
unjustly lacerated.  
Desiring to behold the ineffable glory of God, O Trophimus, thou wast blinded in 
thine eyes by heated irons, and cried aloud to the Lord in thanksgiving: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Enflamed with love for the adored Trinity, the three martyrs completed the 
greatest of struggles and now rejoice with the myriads of heaven. With them be thou 
mindful of us, ever asking that we be released from our transgressions.  
Theotokion: As the Sovereign Lady who is more pure than all creation thou didst 
receive the Word Who was ineffably born from thee. And, having loving Him, the 
valiant martyrs endured a multitude of torments.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O children equal in number to the Trinity: * bless ye God, the Father 
and Creator; * hymn ye the Word Who came down * and transformed the fire 
into dew; * and supremely exalt ye Him Who giveth life unto all, * the most 
holy Spirit, * throughout the ages! 
O hosts of heaven, chant ye to the exalted Tree which was drenched in the blood 
of the incarnate Word of God, and celebrate the restoration of those born on earth. 
O Ye people, worship the Cross of Christ, by which the world hath been granted the 
resurrection throughout all ages!  
O ye mortal stewards of grace, with your hands reverently raise on high the Cross 
whereon Christ God stood and the spear which pierced the body of God the Word, 
that all the nations may see the salvation which is of God, glorifying Him throughout 
all ages!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
O faithful Christian kings, forechosen by divine decree, be ye glad! And having 
received from God the precious Cross, rejoice in it, the weapon of victory, for 
thereby tribes of enemy warriors seeking to make battle have been scattered 
throughout all ages.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Having struggled against wounds with your naked bodies, ye received the 
adornment of incorruption, having clad the eternal enemy in shame, O crowned ones; 
and having passed over to the places of God’s rest, ye cry aloud: Ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Driven along on foot, the witnesses to Christ’s sufferings were bound to trees and 
endured laceration with a valiant resolve; and with the streams of their blood they 
drowned legions’ of the evil demons, chanting in godly manner: Ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Let Trophimus be praised, let Sabbatius be glorified, and let Dorymedon be 
magnified today: the unshakeable pillars, the ramparts of the faithful, and the splendid 
beacons of the Church, which is honorably illumined by the rays of their magnificent 
struggles, throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, thou hast given birth unto Christ our God as a 
little babe, Who is understood to be one in essence with the Father and the Spirit. 
And the valiant martyrs, confessing Him, suffered in a sacred manner. With them the 
people, tribes and nations bless thee with faith throughout all ages, O all-holy one.  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought forth 
Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted upon 
the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
Let all the trees of the forests rejoice, for their nature hath been sanctified by Him 
Who planted them in the beginning - Christ Who was stretched out upon the Tree. 
Wherefore, worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
A sacred horn hath been lifted up, the chief horn for all the divinely wise: the 
Cross, whereby all the horns of the sinful are noetically broken asunder. Wherefore, 
worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
That Thou mayest show the Cross, the invincible weapon, to the world, O adored 
Lord and King, in the sight of all Thou didst form its most glorious image in the 
skies, radiant with boundless light. Wherefore, all the powers of heaven magnify 
Thee.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
With the might of the Creator of all ye restrained the raging of the wild beasts and 
remained unharmed by them, O martyrs, despite their constant assaults. Wherefore, 
ye have been enrolled in the flock of the martyrs, ever praying on our behalf.  
Most gloriously beheaded with the sword ye offered yourselves as sacrifices for the 
mystical altar; and ye now dwell most joyously in the habitations of the firstborn, 
beholding the glory of God and receiving the fruits of your pangs and honors for 
your suffering.  
Assembling together, come, ye faithful, and let us praise Dorymedon, Sabbatius 
and the glorious Trophimus, the mighty witnesses to the truth, the grapes of the 
noetic Vine, from whence the wine of gladness poureth forth upon us by the grace of 
God.  
The most festive memorial of the wise spiritual athletes, shining forth today, doth 
truly illumine all more brightly than the rays of the sun, dispelling the darkness of the 
passions and the clouds of despondency. Through their supplications, O Christ, grant 
Thy mercies unto us all.  
Theotokion: He Who kept thee a virgin, truly shining forth from thy womb as the 
never-waning Sun, O Virgin, hath most manifestly illumined the spiritual athletes who 
struggled with endurance; and with them do thou entreat Him, that He have pity 
upon us who piously magnify thee.  
Exapostilarion of the feast:  
The Cross is the preservation of the whole world; the Cross is the adornment of 
the Church; the Cross is the might of kings; the Cross is the confirmation of the 
faithful; the Cross is the glory of angels and the wounding of demons.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
We bow down before the place * where the feet of Christ stood, * exalting the 
thrice-blessed Cross * upon which was shed the blood of the Master ** Who hath 
poured forth resurrection upon the world.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet, * for 
He is holy.  
Having mortified the passions of the flesh and spirit, * having crucified yourselves 
with Christ the Master, * O ye divinely wise, let us strive to elevate ourselves, * 
through the elevation of the Cross, ** to the rest of heaven.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages; * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
A life-bearing well-spring hath manifestly welled forth * from the divine side of the 
Savior, * giving drink to the souls * of those who with faith worship ** His divine 
Passion, Cross and Resurrection.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V:  
The words of Thy prophets, Isaiah and David, have been fulfilled, O God, which 
said: All nations will come, O Lord, and bow down before Thee. For, behold the 
people who have been filled with Thy grace in Thy courts in Jerusalem, O Good One. 
O Thou Who didst endure the Cross for us and hast imparted life through Thy 
resurrection, preserve and save us!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia from ODE VII of the canon of the feast.  
The first man, tasting of the tree, went to dwell in corruption; for, having 
condemned himself to a shameful banishment from life, he imparted corruption to 
the whole race of mankind. But we mortals, finding restoration through the tree of 
the Cross, cry aloud: O supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
(Twice) 
Breaking the commandment of God came about through disobedience, and the 
untimely partaking of the fruit of the tree brought death to mankind, but to preserve 
that which is most precious, access to the tree of life was forbidden, until God 
opened it to the suffering thief who with a proper understanding cried aloud: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! (Twice) 
Israel, foreseeing things to come, laid hold of the tip of Joseph’s staff, revealing 
beforehand that the most glorious Cross would seize the power of the kingdom, for it 
is the victorious boast of kings and a light for those who cry aloud with faith: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! (Twice) 
 Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth. (Twice) 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
God Who is praised in the Trinity hath glorified a trinity of martyrs: * Trophimus, 
Sabbatius and Dorymedon. * For, believing in Him, they cast down the enemy. ** By 
their supplications, O Christ our God, have mercy upon us.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
As the foundation of spiritual athletes and confirmation of piety * the Church doth 
honor and glorify thy luminous suffering, * O right wise and glorious Trophimus, 
ever-hymned and blessed spiritual athlete. * With those who suffered with thee ask 
cleansing for those who hymn thee, ** in that thou art invincible.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly upon the Cross, * bestow Thy mercies upon 
the new community named after Thee, * O Christ God; gladden with Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over enemies; ** may they have as Thy 
help the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the all-honored Cross of the Lord!  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought forth 
Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted upon 
the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
 
Communion Verse: The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, hath been signed 
upon us.  
 
