--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 19th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY PASSION-BEARER, THE PIOUS PRINCE IGOR 
OF CHERNIGOV,  
WHO RECEIVED THE NAME GEORGE IN MONASTIC TONSURE  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 3 of the feast; in Tone VI:  
Raised on high, * the Cross exhorteth all creation * to hymn the most pure 
Passion * of Him who was lifted up thereon. * For thereon having slain him that slew 
us, * in that He is merciful, * He gave life unto the dead, * and in the exceeding 
greatness of His goodness * He hath made them beautiful and deemed them worthy 
to live in the heavens. * Wherefore, rejoicing, * we exalt His name, ** and magnify 
His extreme condescension.  
Moses prefigured Thee, * stretching forth his arms on high, * and vanquished the 
tyrant Amalek, * O precious Cross, boast of the faithful, * confirmation of sufferers, 
* savior of all the venerable. * Wherefore, creation, * beholding thee lifted up, is 
gladdened, * and keepeth festival, glorifying Christ, * Who through thee hath 
gathered the dispersed ** in His extreme goodness.  
O most precious Cross, * who art today exalted, * and about whom the ranks of 
angels stand in gladness, * by divine command thou dost uplift all * who for the 
stealing of the fruit were driven out and were sunk in death. * Wherefore, we, the 
faithful, * venerating thee with hearts and lips, * derive from thee sanctification, * 
crying aloud: Exalt ye Christ, the supremely good God, ** and worship His divine 
footstool.  
And 5 Stichera of the holy passion-bearer, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
When of thine own will * thou didst forsake thine earthly kingdom, * and having 
desired to labor for the Lord in monasticism, * the enemy of the human race * 
inflicted many and cruel tribulations upon thee; * yet, firm as adamantine, thou wast 
not shaken thereby, * but manfully endure them all. * And now thou standest before 
Christ, ** praying for those who honor thy memory. (Twice)  
When thou didst commit thyself * to the Monastery of Saint Theodore, * and 
there gave thyself over to monastic obedience, * the enemy of the human race incited 
lawless people against thee, * who unjustly dragged thee forth * to slaughter thee like 
an innocent lamb, * though thou hadst done no wrong to anyone. * But thou didst 
pray unto the Lord, * emulating the first martyr of Christ, and crying out with him: ** 
“O Lord, lay not this sin to their charge!” (Twice) 

--- PAGE 2 ---
When thou wast praying on bended knees * before the image of the most pure 
one, * thy murderers, like wild beasts, * fell upon thee with rage; * and willingly giving 
thyself over * into their hands without complaint, * thou didst accept great suffering * 
and torment from them with patience, ** and didst thereby commit thy righteous soul 
to the Lord.  
Glory ..., of the holy passion-bearer, in Tone VI: 
The city of Chernigov, which preserveth thy holy and much-suffering body in the 
Church of the Savior, rejoiceth today and crieth out to thee with love: O passion-
bearer Prince Igor, entreat Christ God, that He preserve our land in peace profound, 
and that He protect this city and save us all.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone II:  
Come, all ye nations, let us worship the blessed Tree whereby everlasting 
righteousness hath come to be; for he who by the tree deceived our forefather Adam, 
is himself deceived by the Cross, and he who by tyranny held fast the royal house, 
falleth, cast down by a strange fall. By the Blood of God the venom of the serpent is 
washed away, and the curse of the just condemnation was lifted by the Righteous 
One when He was condemned by an unjust sentence; for it was fitting that the tree be 
healed by a Tree, and that, by the sufferings of the Dispassionate One on the Tree, 
the sufferings of the condemned be loosed. Glory, O Christ our King, to Thy wise 
dispensation toward us, whereby Thou hast saved all, in that Thou art good and the 
Lover of mankind.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: All the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be 
gathered out of them. Who will declare these things? or who will declare to you things 
from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let 
them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith 
the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, 
and understand that I am He. Before Me there was no other God, and after Me there 
shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have 
saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My 
witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that 
can deliver out of My hands: I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the 
Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 

--- PAGE 3 ---
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy passion-bearer, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Blessed art thou, O city of Kiev, * and holy are thy streets * which drank the 
precious blood * of the passion-bearing Prince Igor, ** who there was unjustly slain.  
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Rejoice, O city of Chernigov! * Be glad, O holy house of the Savior! * For ye guard 
a priceless treasure: * the holy relics of the passion-bearer Igor, ** who prayeth 
unceasingly on behalf of our souls.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, * in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
Suffering steadfastly * and manfully enduring tribulations, * thou didst behold the 
Lord face to face, * Who adorneth thee with the crown of martyrdom ** and hath 
caused thee to dwell in the mansions of heaven.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Come, all ye who love the martyrs, let us glorify the glorious Igor, the passion-
bearer of Christ; for he hath crushed the head of the serpent, and with his blood hath 
sanctified the earth, and having passed over from that which is on earth to the eternal 
habitations, he hath received honors for his struggles from the hand of the Almighty; 
and asketh that cleansing and great mercy be granted to our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
That which Moses prefigured with his body of old cast down and vanquished 
Amalek; and David the psalmist, crying out, hath commanded us to bow down before 
Thy footstool, Thy precious Cross, O Christ God. Today we sinners also do homage 
with our unworthy lips to Thee Whose will it was to be nailed thereto; and, chanting, 
we pray: O Lord, grant that with the thief we may receive Thy kingdom!  
Troparion of the holy passion-bearer, in Tone IV:  
Illumined by divine baptism, * enlightened by the splendors of the Holy Spirit, * 
thou didst take the Gospel of Christ into thy heart, * fulfilling the word of the Son of 
God by thy deeds, * O right-believing Prince Igor. * Entreat our supremely good 
Savior, * that He grant us peace and mercy, * and the salvation of the souls of us ** 
who cherish thine honored memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  
  

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth. (Twice) 
 Glory ..., the Troparion of the holy passion-bearer, in Tone IV:  
Illumined by divine baptism, * enlightened by the splendors of the Holy Spirit, * 
thou didst take the Gospel of Christ into thy heart, * fulfilling the word of the Son of 
God by thy deeds, * O right-believing Prince Igor. * Entreat our supremely good 
Savior, * that He grant us peace and mercy, * and the salvation of the souls of us ** 
who cherish thine honored memory.  
Both now ..., that of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Forsaking an earthly kingdom of thine own will, O passion-bearer, thou didst 
desire the glory which is in heaven, and endured pangs and a violent death; 
wherefore, we celebrate thy most holy memory today, offering praise unto Christ, O 
most blessed Igor.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone I:  
No sooner was the tree of Thy Cross planted, O Christ our Lord, than the 
foundations of death were shaken. That which Hades swallowed greedily it spewed 
forth, trembling. Thou hast revealed to us Thy salvation, O Holy One, and we glorify 
Thee. O Son of God, have mercy upon us!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Completing the race of truth, thou didst vanquish all the might of the tyrannous, 
and received a crown from the hand of the Almighty, O most blessed Igor; and thou 
hast been revealed to be a companion of the angels.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone VI: 
Today the words of the prophet have been fulfilled! For, behold! we bow down 
before the place where Thy feet stood, O Lord, and, receiving the Tree of salvation, 
we have achieved liberation from sinful passions through the supplications of the 
Theotokos, O Thou only Lover of mankind.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy passion-bearer 
Prince Igor, and we reverence thine honored sufferings, which thou didst 
endure for Christ.  
Selected Psalm verses:  
A: Our God is refuge and strength. A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  

--- PAGE 6 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
With multifarious tortures the cruel tormenters subjected thy much-suffering body 
to wicked execution, O divinely wise Prince Igor; yet thou didst endure all these 
things as though it were another who was suffering, awaiting future reward and 
immortal life.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded ...”: 
Of old, Joshua, the son of Nun, mystically prefigured the image of the Cross when 
he stretched forth his arms in the form of the Cross, O my Savior; and the sun stood 
still until he had cast down all the enemy which was opposed to Thee, O God. And 
now Thou hast raised with Thee the whole world, which saw Thee set upon the 
Cross, destroying the might of death.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, * 
and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God 
they shall blossom forth.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 36 (MT. 10: 16-22)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of 
wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: 
for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a 
testimony against them and the gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end 
shall be saved.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
The city of Chernigov, which preserveth thy holy and much-suffering body in the 
Church of the Savior, rejoiceth today and crieth out to thee with love: O passion-
bearer Prince Igor, entreat Christ God, that He preserve our land in profound peace, 
and that He protect this city and save us all.  
Canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the holy passion-
bearer, with 8 Troparia, in Tone VIII: 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE I  
Irmos: Inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross upon the waters, * Moses 
marked a straight line before him with his staff * and divided the Red Sea, * 
opening a path for Israel who went over dry-shod. * Then he marked a second 
line across the waters * and united them in one, * overwhelming the chariots 
of Pharaoh. * Therefore let us sing to Christ our God, * for He hath been 
glorified. 
Of old, Moses, standing between the priests, prefigured in himself the image of 
Christ’s most pure sufferings; for, forming a cross with his outstretched arms, he 
raised up victory, vanquishing the might of the tyrant Amalek. Wherefore, let us 
hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
Upon a pole Moses set the cure of the deadly and venomous sting of the serpents, 
and the deliverance therefrom; for to the tree, in the image of the Cross, he bound a 
serpent which crawleth upon the ground, triumphing over the sinister bane therein. 
Wherefore, let us hymn Christ God, for He hath been glorified.  
The sky showed forth the victory of the Cross to the divinely wise Emperor 
Constantine, the pious ruler; and therein the audacity of the hostile foe was cast 
down, delusion was destroyed and the divine Faith spread to the ends of the earth. 
Wherefore let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
Canon of the holy passion-bearer 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Forsaking the mirky water of ungodliness, thou didst hasten to the water of 
purification, O holy Igor. Cleanse thou our hearts, that in purity we may hymn thy 
sufferings.  
Washed with the water of baptism, thou wast delivered from the ancestral sin and 
didst unite thyself unto Christ, the pure Master. Unite us also unto Him by thy 
supplications.  
Emulating Him Who drowned the wicked serpent in the waters, thou didst drown 
the power of the enemy in the blood of thy martyrdom, O passion-bearer. Entreat 
thou the Savior, that we also may be delivered therefrom.  
Theotokion: Grant me the purifying water of tears, O most pure one, and having 
cleansed me of the mire of iniquities, present me pure to thy Son and God, O 
Theotokos.  
Katavasia: Inscribing the invincible weapon ..., 
ODE III  
Irmos: The rod of Aaron is an image of this mystery, * for when it budded it 
showed who should be priest. * So in the Church, that once was barren, * the 
wood of the Cross hath now budded forth, * filling her with strength and 
steadfastness. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
The rough stone, struck, put forth water for a disobedient and hard-hearted 
people, and showed forth the mystery of the divinely elect Church, whereof the Cross 
is the might and confirmation.  
When Christ’s most pure side was pierced by the spear, blood and water flowed 
therefrom, renewing the covenant and washing sin away, for the Cross is the boast of 
the faithful, the might and confirmation of kings.  
Canon of the holy passion-bearer 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Giving thy whole life to the Fashioner of the vault of heaven, thou didst love Him 
utterly. Grant that, by thy supplications, O passion-bearer, we also may love the Lord 
until the end of our days.  
Desiring the heavenly life, thou didst reject all things in thine earthly life. Grant, O 
holy one, that by thy supplications we may be deemed worthy of the life of heaven.  
Desiring the heavenly bridal-chamber, thou didst preserve the purity of thy 
virginity; and now joinest chorus with the virginal in the bridal-chambers of heaven.  
Theotokion: In giving birth to the Creator of heaven, O all-hymned Theotokos, 
thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens. Turn me away from the 
broad path of destruction, guide me to the heavenly way, I pray thee.  
Kontakion of the Cross, in Tone IV:  
O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly upon the Cross, * bestow Thy mercies upon 
the new community named after Thee, * O Christ God; gladden with Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over enemies; ** may they have as Thy 
help the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace. 
Sessional Hymn of the saint, in Tone II:  
Enlightened by the splendors of the virtues, and adorned with the light of 
martyrdom, O most wise one, thou shinest forth steadily, more brightly than the sun, 
truly illumining those who celebrate thy radiant memory with faith. O most glorious 
passion-bearer Igor, save us by thy supplications.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Rejoicing in thee, O thrice blessed and life-bestowing Cross, the people celebrate 
together with the immaterial choirs, the ranks of hierarchs reverently hymn thee, 
multitudes of monastics and fasters bow down before thee in adoration, and we all 
glorify Christ Who was crucified on thee.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Of old, Moses transformed the bitter springs in the desert with a tree, showing 
forth the conversion of the gentiles to piety through the Cross.  
Jordan, having hidden in its depths an axe-head, gave it forth again through the 
power of a stick, signifying the cutting off of deception by the Cross and baptism.  
In a sacred manner the people encamped in four divisions; and preceding in this 
fashion the tabernacle of the witness, they were glorified in the cross-like formation 
of their ranks.  
Wondrously stretched forth, the Cross emitted rays like the sun’s, and the heavens 
declared the glory of our God.  
Canon of the holy passion-bearer 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Hearing the heavens declare the glory of God, O Igor, thou didst desire to glorify 
God on earth. Grant His glory also unto us.  
Hearing that thine enemies had risen up against thee, thou wast not daunted by 
their savagery, but didst meekly give thyself over into their vile hands, crying out to 
the Lord: “Lay not this sin to their charge!”  
Hearing the threats of thine enemies, and enduring torments at their hands, thou 
didst remain unshaken. Make me also unshaken in the virtues.  
Theotokion: Hearken, O most pure Lady, to mine entreaty, and deliver me from 
evils; and deem me worthy to hear the voice which summoneth the blessed to the 
kingdom.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O thrice-blessed Tree, on which Christ the king and Lord was 
stretched! * Through thee the beguiler fell, * who tempted mankind with the 
tree. * He was caught in the trap set by God, * who was crucified upon thee in 
the flesh, * granting peace unto our souls. 
O ever-hymned Tree, whereon Christ was stretched: the whirling sword which 
guarded Eden stood in awe of thee, O Cross, and the dread cherubim withdrew, 
when Christ was nailed to thee, Who granteth peace unto our souls.  
The adverse powers of the nether world are stricken with fear when the sign of the 
Cross is traced in the air in which they live, as are the generations of the earthborn 
and the heavenly, who bend the knee to Christ, Who granteth peace unto our souls.  
Having shone forth a divine light and revealed itself in rays of incorruption unto 
the darkened gentiles astray in error, the divine Cross acquireth them for Christ Who 
was nailed thereto, and granteth peace unto our souls.  
Canon of the holy passion-bearer 
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Illumining the path of thy life with the light of divine knowledge, thou didst love 
Christ the Lord with all thy soul, O passion-bearer. Grant that I also may be an 
emulator of thee therein.  
The faithful were enlightened, beholding thee valiantly enduring unbearable 
torments. Grant that I also may have such endurance, O spiritual athlete.  
Enlighten me, O splendid martyr Igor, who am darkened by the darkness of sin, 
and cause me to be illumined with the never-waning light, I pray thee.  
Theotokion: In giving birth to the true Light, O Theotokos, thou hast enlightened 
our darkened nature; wherefore, having enlightened me with Light, free me from the 
dark foe.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Jonah stretched out his hands in the form of a cross * within the belly 
of the sea monster, * plainly prefiguring the redeeming Passion. * Cast out 
from thence after three days, * he foreshadowed the marvelous Resurrection of 
Christ our God, * who was crucified in the flesh and enlightened the world * 
by His Rising on the third day. 
Bent with age and weighed down with infirmity, Jacob drew himself up when he 
crossed his arms, showing forth the power of the life-bearing Cross; for God Who 
was nailed in the flesh hath set aright the obsolescence of the law of the Scripture 
which was written in shadows, and dispelled the soul-destroying disease of deception.  
Divine Israel laid his hands cross-wise upon the heads of the youths, and insofar as 
those serving under the law give glory to the firstborn, he suspected he had erred in 
laying his hands thus, yet he did not alter the life-bearing image; wherefore crying 
aloud, raising the Cross on high, the newly established people of Christ God are 
protected thereby.  
Canon of the holy passion-bearer 
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Hearkening to thy suffering entreaty, O Igor, Christ gave thee the strength and 
power to bear thy pangs. By thy supplications grant that I too may be steadfast amid 
the sufferings of life.  
Having strengthened thyself with prayer before the image of the most pure one, 
thou didst go forth to thine enemies who were seeking thee; and like an innocent 
lamb, suffered at their hands, and wast unjustly slain.  
Everyone who bringeth supplication unto thee with faith, O spiritual athlete, 
quickly receiveth the healing of the sufferings of their souls and bodies. Grant this 
also abundantly unto us, we pray.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Accept thou our prayer, O most pure one, and with thine omnipotent 
supplication beseech God Who is the Lover of mankind and Who was born of thee, 
that He deliver us from enemies, visible and invisible, from sins and all torments.  
Kontakion of the holy passion-bearer, in Tone VI:  
Thou didst exchange the glory of an earthly princedom * for the humble habit of a 
monk, * and, ending thine earthly life in martyrdom, * thou now rejoiceth in the 
heavens, * earnestly praying for those who honor thee, O Igor, ** boast of spiritual 
athletes. 
 Ikos: Thy princely diadem was stained with thy blood, O divinely wise passion-
bearer Igor; but taking the Cross in thy hand instead of a scepter, thou wast shown to 
be a victor. And didst offer thyself to the Master as an unblemished sacrifice; for like 
an innocent lamb thou wast slain by thine own subjects. And now, rejoicing, thou 
standest before the Holy Trinity. Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The senseless decree of the wicked tyrant, * breathing forth threats and 
blasphemy hateful to God, * confused the people. * Yet neither the fury of the 
wild beast nor the roaring of the fire * could frighten the three Children: * but 
standing together in the flame, * fanned by the wind that brought refreshment 
as the dew, they sang: * ‘Blessed and supremely praised art Thou, * O our God 
and the God of our fathers.’ 
The first man, tasting of the tree, went to dwell in corruption; for, having 
condemned himself to a shameful banishment from life, he imparted corruption to 
the whole race of mankind. But we mortals, finding restoration through the tree of 
the Cross, cry aloud: O supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Breaking the commandment of God came about through disobedience, and the 
untimely partaking of the fruit of the tree brought death to mankind, but to preserve 
that which is most precious, access to the tree of life was forbidden, until God 
opened it to the suffering thief who with a proper understanding cried aloud: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Israel, foreseeing things to come, laid hold of the tip of Joseph’s staff, revealing 
beforehand that the most glorious Cross would seize the power of the kingdom, for it 
is the victorious boast of kings and a light for those who cry aloud with faith: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy passion-bearer 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
The Angel Who preserved the Hebrew children unconsumed by the fire 
strengthened thee in thy suffering, O Igor, and thou didst chant: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord our God, throughout the ages!  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Considering torments to be like childish games, thou didst not spare thy body, but, 
manfully enduring sufferings, thou didst chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages!  
Emulating the tortured children, O Igor, I also praise Christ, Who gave thee 
strength. Strengthening me for the contest of the virtues, grant that I may chant with 
thee: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: I marvel at thine Offspring, Who hath preserved thee a virgin even 
after giving birth, O Theotokos. Show forth as wondrous the mercy of thy Son upon 
men that, treated compassionately by thee, I may chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
our God, throughout the ages!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: O ye Children, equal in number to the Trinity, * bless ye God the 
Father and creator; * sing ye the praises of the Word who descended and 
changed the fire into dew; * and supremely exalt ye throughout the ages * the 
most Holy Spirit, who giveth life unto all. 
O hosts of heaven, chant ye to the exalted Tree which was drenched in the blood 
of the incarnate Word of God, and celebrate the restoration of those born on earth. 
O Ye people, worship the Cross of Christ, by which the world hath been granted the 
resurrection throughout all ages!  
O ye mortal stewards of grace, with your hands reverently raise on high the Cross 
whereon Christ God stood and the spear which pierced the body of God the Word, 
that all the nations may see the salvation which is of God, glorifying Him throughout 
all ages!  
O faithful Christian kings, forechosen by divine decree, be ye glad! And having 
received from God the precious Cross, rejoice in it, the weapon of victory, for 
thereby tribes of enemy warriors seeking to make battle have been scattered 
throughout all ages.  
Canon of the holy passion-bearer 
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thou wast shown to be a victor over the enemies who tormented thee, O glorious 
Igor; for, suffering long and cruel tortures, thou didst unceasingly cry aloud: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
By thy courage thou didst vanquish all the machinations of the tyrant, O glorious 
passion-bearer Igor; wherefore, entreat Christ the Master, we beseech thee, that He 
grant victory over the enemy to all the faithful, who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Thou wast shown to be victorious over the cruel-hearted murderers, O glorious 
Igor; for they have been cast down into the flames of Hades by heavenly fire, while 
thou hast ascended into heaven, where thou chantest now with the angels: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Theotokion: O most pure one, conquer the enemies, visible and invisible, who 
strive to bring us down; and deliver me from all the passions, that I may solemnly 
chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought forth 
Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted upon 
the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
Let all the trees of the forests rejoice, for their nature hath been sanctified by Him 
Who planted them in the beginning - Christ Who was stretched out upon the Tree. 
Wherefore, worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
A sacred horn hath been lifted up, the chief horn for all the divinely wise: the 
Cross, whereby all the horns of the sinful are noetically broken asunder. Wherefore, 
worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
That Thou mayest show the Cross, the invincible weapon, to the world, O adored 
Lord and King, in the sight of all Thou didst form its most glorious image in the 
skies, radiant with boundless light. Wherefore, all the powers of heaven magnify 
Thee.  
Canon of the holy passion-bearer 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Truly confessing God, O passion-bearer, thou hast inherited a dwelling-place in 
heaven. Grant that we also may eternally magnify Christ with thee.  
In thee, O blessed Igor, hath truly been fulfilled the prophecy of Christ: “He who 
endureth to the end shall be saved.” For with all the saved thou dost now eternally 
magnify Christ.  
No one who truly hath recourse unto thee departeth without thy grace, O passion-
bearer. Fill me also therewith, that I may magnify thee.  
Theotokion: Thou didst truly give birth to the true God in the flesh, O Theotokos. 
Move Him to mercy for us on the day of judgment, that we may unceasingly magnify 
thee together with Him.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Exapostilarion of the holy passion-bearer:  
Like the radiant sun hath thy memorial now shone forth, O passion-bearer, filling 
all the faithful with gladness; and they cry out to thee in supplication: Pray thou 
earnestly, that we be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the feast  
The Cross is the guardian of the whole world! The Cross is the beauty of the 
Church! The Cross is the dominion of kings! The Cross is the confirmation of the 
faithful! The Cross is the glory of the angels and the wounding of the demons! 
On the Praises, 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast; in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! * the Life-bearing Tree, * the most holy Cross * is 
revealed today, lifted up on high. * All the ends of the earth glorify it, * and the 
hordes of the demons are affrighted. * O what a gift hath been given to mortals! * 
Thereby, O Christ, save Thou our souls, ** in that Thou alone art compassionate.  
O most glorious wonder! * The Cross which bore the Most High * like a cluster of 
grapes full of life * is seen today lifted up from the earth. * Thereby we have all been 
drawn to God, * and death hath been utterly slain. * O the most precious Tree * 
whereby we have received the food of immortality in Eden, ** glorifying Christ!  
O most glorious wonder! * The length and height of the Cross * is equal to 
heaven! * For it sanctifieth all things with divine grace. * In it are the barbarian 
nations vanquished. * In it are the scepters of kings made firm. * O divine ladder, * 
whereby we ascend to the heavens, ** exalting Christ the Lord in hymns!  
And 3 of the holy passion-bearer, in Tone VIII: 
Rejoice, O Igor, passion-bearer of Christ, for thou didst consider the glory of this 
world to be naught, and at the eleventh hour of thy life thou didst serve the Lord well 
in monasticism. And standing now with the martyrs and the venerable before the 
throne of God, pray thou earnestly on behalf of our souls. (Twice)  
Rejoice, O Igor, passion-bearer of Christ, boast of the city of Chernigov, and 
sacred adornment of the whole land of Russia, O thou who didst shed thine innocent 
blood! Pray thou earnestly on behalf of our souls!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Today the glorious city of Chernigov hath been enlightened with the rays of the 
passion-bearer, and the holy house of the Savior, adorned, crieth out to thee, O 
favorite of Christ: Cease thou never to pray for all who celebrate thy holy memory 
with love!  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Both now ..., of the feast, in the Tone VI: 
Today the Cross of the Lord cometh forth; and the faithful receive it with desire, 
and they derive healings of soul and body, and every pang. Let us venerate it with joy 
and fear: with fear, for we are unworthy because of our sins; and with joy, because of 
the salvation which is granted to the world by Christ God, Who hath great mercy, and 
Who was nailed to it.  
Great Doxology, Troparia, Litanies, First Hour.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE VII of the canon of the feast, and 
4 from ODE VI of the canon of the holy passion-bearer.  
The first man, tasting of the tree, went to dwell in corruption; for, having 
condemned himself to a shameful banishment from life, he imparted corruption to 
the whole race of mankind. But we mortals, finding restoration through the tree of 
the Cross, cry aloud: O supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
(Twice) 
Breaking the commandment of God came about through disobedience, and the 
untimely partaking of the fruit of the tree brought death to mankind, but to preserve 
that which is most precious, access to the tree of life was forbidden, until God 
opened it to the suffering thief who with a proper understanding cried aloud: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Israel, foreseeing things to come, laid hold of the tip of Joseph’s staff, revealing 
beforehand that the most glorious Cross would seize the power of the kingdom, for it 
is the victorious boast of kings and a light for those who cry aloud with faith: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Hearkening to thy suffering entreaty, O Igor, Christ gave thee the strength and 
power to bear thy pangs. By thy supplications grant that I too may be steadfast amid 
the sufferings of life.  
Having strengthened thyself with prayer before the image of the most pure one, 
thou didst go forth to thine enemies who were seeking thee; and like an innocent 
lamb, suffered at their hands, and wast unjustly slain.  
Everyone who bringeth supplication unto thee with faith, O spiritual athlete, 
quickly receiveth the healing of the sufferings of their souls and bodies. Grant this 
also abundantly unto us, we pray.  
Theotokion: Accept thou our prayer, O most pure one, and with thine omnipotent 
supplication beseech God Who is the Lover of mankind and Who was born of thee, 
that He deliver us from enemies, visible and invisible, from sins and all torments.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  
Troparion of the holy passion-bearer, in Tone IV:  
Illumined by divine baptism, * enlightened by the splendors of the Holy Spirit, * 
thou didst take the Gospel of Christ into thy heart, * fulfilling the word of the Son of 
God by thy deeds, * O right-believing Prince Igor. * Entreat our supremely good 
Savior, * that He grant us peace and mercy, * and the salvation of the souls of us ** 
who cherish thine honored memory.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Kontakion of the holy passion-bearer, in Tone VI:  
Thou didst exchange the glory of an earthly princedom * for the humble habit of a 
monk, * and, ending thine earthly life in martyrdom, * thou now rejoiceth in the 
heavens, * earnestly praying for those who honor thee, O Igor, ** boast of spiritual 
athletes. 
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly upon the Cross, * bestow Thy mercies upon 
the new community named after Thee, * O Christ God; gladden with Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over enemies; ** may they have as Thy 
help the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace. 
 
Prokeimenon of the feast in Tone VII (also until the Leave-taking): Exalt ye the 
Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; * for He is holy. 
Prokeimenon of the saint, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the 
Lord, * and shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, § 17 (ACTS 6: 8-15; 7: 1-5,47-60) 
In those days, Stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles 
among the people. Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the 
synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia 
and of Asia, disputing with Stephen. And they were not able to resist the wisdom and 
the spirit by which he spake. Then they suborned men, who said: “We have heard 
him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and against God.” And they stirred up 
the people, and the elders, and the scribes, and came upon him, and caught him, and 
brought him to the council, and set up false witnesses, who said: “This man ceaseth 
not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and the law: for we have 
heard him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change 
the customs which Moses delivered us. And all who sat in the council, looking stead-
fastly on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an angel. Then said the high 
priest: “Are these things so?” And he said: “Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken; the 
God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, 
before he dwelt in Charran, and said unto him: ‘Get thee out of thy country, and from 
thy kindred, and come into the land which I shall shew thee.’ Then came he out of 
the land of the Chaldeans, and dwelt in Charran: and from thence, when his father 
was dead, he removed him into this- land, wherein ye now dwell. And He gave him 
none inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on: Solomon built him a 
house. Howbeit the most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands; as saith the 
prophet: “Heaven is my throne, and earth is My footstool: what house will ye build 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Me? saith the Lord”: or “What is the place of My rest? Hath not my hand made all 
these things?” Ye stiff necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist 
the Holy Spirit: as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the prophets have not your 
fathers persecuted? and they have slain those who showed before of the coming of 
the Just One; of Whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers: who have 
received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it.” When they heard 
these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their teeth. But 
he, being full of the Holy Spirit, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory 
of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, and said: “Behold, I see the 
heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God!” Then they 
cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one 
accord, and cast him out of the city, and stoned him: and the witnesses laid down 
their clothes at a young man’s feet, whose name was Saul. And they stoned Stephen, 
calling upon God, and saying: “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!” And he kneeled down, 
and cried with a loud voice: “Lord, lay not this sin to their charge!” And when he had 
said this, he fell asleep.  
Alleluia of the feast, in Tone IV: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast 
purchased from the beginning  
And that of the saint, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-
tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God 
they shall blossom forth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 52 (JN. 15: 17-16: 2) 
The Lord said to His disciples: “These things I command you, that ye love one 
another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated Me before it hated you. If ye 
were of the world, the world would love its own: but because ye are not of the world, 
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember 
the word that I said unto you: The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have 
persecuted Me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept My saying, they will 
keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for My name’s sake, 
because they know not Him Who sent me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, 
they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin. He that hateth me 
hateth My Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other 
man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both Me and 
My Father. But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in 
their law: They hated Me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, Whom I 
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, Who proceedeth from 

--- PAGE 19 ---
the Father, he shall testify of Me. And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been 
with Me from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not 
be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that 
whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.”  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the all-honored Cross of the Lord!  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought forth 
Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted upon 
the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
Communion Verse: The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, hath been signed 
upon us.  
Communion Verse of the saint: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous 
be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
