--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 16th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY GREAT-MARTYR EUPHEMIA  
THE ALL-PRAISED  
AFTERFEAST OF THE EXALTATION OF THE PRECIOUS CROSS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign...”: 
Today, Thy precious Cross * hath shone forth radiantly like the sun, O Christ, * 
set up and elevated O Savior, * on the most glorious place of the skull, * on Thy most 
holy mountain, * showing forth most manifestly * that it is thereby, O Omnipotent 
One, * that Thou hast raised our nature up to the heavens, ** in that Thou lovest 
mankind.  
Today, O Unapproachable One, * the heavens have declared Thy glory unto 
mankind; * for the image of the Cross, * shining forth in radiance * with 
unapproachable light, * hath denounced the savage and cruel nature * of those who 
slew God. * Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving dispensation, ** O almighty Jesus, 
Savior of our souls.  
By stretching forth his arms * Moses vanquished Amalek, * prefiguring the image 
of the Cross; * and we now, bowing down before the tree of the Cross, * trample 
underfoot the wiles and machinations of the enemy, * having Christ as our champion, 
* Who was lifted up upon it in the flesh, * slaying the serpent ** and thereby saving 
mankind.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy great-martyr, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Having adorned thy soul * with the beauties of virginity * and the blood of 
martyrdom, O glorious martyr, * thou wast betrothed to the Creator * Who hath truly 
preserved thee incorrupt for all ages; * for which sake thou hast joined chorus * with 
choirs of the archangels and angels, * the apostles, prophets and martyrs, ** O all-
praised one.  
Bound to wheels of torture, * rent asunder by wild beasts, * with thy mind 
sharpened * with fire and water by the divine Spirit, * thou didst manfully choke the 
princes of darkness * with the torrents of thy blood, * and hastening to the noetic 
bridal-chambers, * thou didst offer thy suffering ** to thy Bridegroom as a dowry, O 
virgin.  
Though thou hast died, thou dost live forever, O martyr, * having poured forth 
torrents of blood * unto the praise of the Lord, * thereby watering the faithful * and 
illumining them with understanding, * but drowning the unbelieving enemy therein. * 
Wherefore, the divine scrolls of the dogmas of the Church * were entrusted to thee, 
** which thou dost preserve and hold throughout the ages.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O all-glorious Euphemia, who flourished in the virtues and wast illumined in mind, 
pouring myrrh into the hearts of the faithful, shining forth from the East like a 
radiant star, and, through the coming of the Holy Spirit, assembling the council of the 
divine fathers: Cease thou never to pray to the Lord for us, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in the same tone:  
The four comers of the world are sanctified today as the four parts of Thy Cross 
are elevated, O Christ our God; and the horn of all Orthodox hierarchs is exalted 
with it. Wherefore, we crush the horns of our enemies. Great art Thou, O Lord, and 
wondrous art Thou in Thy works! Glory be to Thee!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
We bow down before the place * where the feet of Christ stood, * exalting the 
thrice blessed Cross * whereon was shed the blood of the Master * Who hath poured 
forth resurrection ** upon the world.  
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God; and worship the footstool of His feet, * for 
He is holy.  
Having mortified the passions of flesh and spirit, * O ye divinely wise, * let us 
hasten to elevate ourselves above earthly things * to the resting-place of heaven, * 
through the exaltation of the Cross, ** having crucified ourselves with Christ the 
Master. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
An ever-flowing well-spring * hath manifestly issued forth * from the divine side 
of the Savior, * watering the souls of those who with faith * worship His divine 
sufferings, ** His Cross and resurrection.  
Glory ..., of the holy great-martyr, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VIII:  
Let every tongue be moved to the goodly praise of Euphemia the all-praised, and 
let us all - every generation, every age, youths and virgins, crown the virgin martyr of 
Christ with praises; for, having lawfully shown manly courage and cast aside feminine 
weakness, she brought low the tyrannous foe with the pangs of her suffering, and 
having been adorned with a divine crown, she entreateth her Bridegroom and God, 
that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., of the feast, the composition of John the Monk, in the same tone: 
That which Moses prefigured with his body of old cast down and vanquished 
Amalek; and David the psalmist, crying out, hath commanded us to bow down before 
Thy footstool, Thy precious Cross, O Christ God. Today we sinners also do homage 
with our unworthy lips to Thee Whose will it was to be nailed thereto; and, chanting, 
we pray: O Lord, grant that with the thief we may receive Thy kingdom!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV: 
Thy ewe-lamb Euphemia O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth. (Twice) 
Glory ..., that of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV: 
Thy ewe-lamb Euphemia O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
 Both now ..., of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
Thou didst willingly suffer death and the Cross, affixing it in the midst of creation; 
when it was Thy good pleasure that Thy body be nailed thereto, the sun hid its rays. 
Beholding these things, the thief on the cross hymned thee, crying aloud: Remember 
me, O Lord! And, believing, he received paradise.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “The hope of the world ...”: 
Lifted up upon the tree of the Cross in thy great mercy, and pierced in the side by 
a spear, O Savior, Thou didst rend asunder the grievous record of the sins of 
mankind, in that Thou art God Almighty. Wherefore, we piously hymn Thine 
ineffable dispensation, O Word.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the holy great-
martyr, with 6 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, the acrostic whereof is, “Setting my hope on the Cross, I give 
utterance to hymnody”, the composition of Cosmas of Maiuma, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross upon the waters, * Moses 
marked a straight line before him with his staff * and divided the Red Sea, * 
opening a path for Israel who went over dry-shod. * Then he marked a second 
line across the waters * and united them in one, * overwhelming the chariots 
of Pharaoh. * Therefore let us sing to Christ our God, * for He hath been 
glorified. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Of old, Moses, standing between the priests, prefigured in himself the image of 
Christ’s most pure sufferings; for, forming a cross with his outstretched arms, he 
raised up victory, vanquishing the might of the tyrant Amalek. Wherefore, let us 
hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
Upon a pole Moses set the cure of the deadly and venomous sting of the serpents, 
and the deliverance therefrom; for to the tree, in the image of the Cross, he bound a 
serpent which crawleth upon the ground, triumphing over the sinister bane therein. 
Wherefore, let us hymn Christ God, for He hath been glorified.  
The sky showed forth the victory of the Cross to the divinely wise Emperor 
Constantine, the pious ruler; and therein the audacity of the hostile foe was cast 
down, delusion was destroyed and the divine Faith spread to the ends of the earth. 
Wherefore let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr, the acrostic whereof is, “I praise the all-famed 
maiden”, the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
By her miracles the most praised maiden hath drawn the armies of heavenly beings 
and the choirs of mortals to her hymnody.  
Having spurned heritage and the splendor which cometh from wealth, the 
honored Euphemia acquired Christ in their place.  
The Master of all, desiring the beauty of thy most comely heart, O all-praised one, 
hath deemed thee worthy of the mansions of heaven.  
Theotokion: O most pure Theotokos, we hymn thee who supra-naturally gave 
birth to the incarnate, eternal and supremely divine Word.  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The rod of Aaron is an image of this mystery, * for when it budded it 
showed who should be priest. * So in the Church, that once was barren, * the 
wood of the Cross hath now budded forth, * filling her with strength and 
steadfastness. 
The rough stone, struck, put forth water for a disobedient and hard-hearted 
people, and showed forth the mystery of the divinely elect Church, whereof the Cross 
is the might and confirmation.  
When Christ’s most pure side was pierced by the spear, blood and water flowed 
therefrom, renewing the covenant and washing sin away, for the Cross is the boast of 
the faithful, the might and confirmation of kings.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou didst appear before the tribunal, bearing thy soul manfully, thereby 
vanquishing the cowardly enemy, O all-praised one.  
There was neither blemish in thy beauty nor wrinkle in thy soul; wherefore Christ 
received thee as His bride in the bridal-chambers of incorruption.  
Heal thou the wounds of my soul, O all-praised martyr of Christ, and by thy 
supplications calm the tempest of my life.  
Theotokion: Thee have we Christians acquired as our refuge and bulwark, and thee 
do we glorify without ceasing, O unwedded bride.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly upon the Cross, * bestow Thy mercies upon 
the new community named after Thee, * O Christ God; gladden with Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over enemies; ** may they have as Thy 
help the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace. 
Ikos: He that was caught up to the third heaven of paradise and heard unspeakable 
and divine words which the human tongue cannot utter, what writeth he to the 
Galatians, which, as lovers of the Scriptures, ye have both read and come to 
understand? God forbid, saith he, that I should glory, save only in the Cross of the 
Lord, whereon having suffered He slew the passions. Let us all then firmly hold this 
boast, the Cross of the Lord; for this Wood is our salvation, the invincible trophy, the 
weapon of peace.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
With the streams of thy blood O all-praised martyr of Christ, thou dost ever 
drown the ungodly, ever watering the noetic meadows with the gentle showers of 
grace, and producing the grain of faith therein. Wherefore, even after thy repose thou 
hast most gloriously been revealed to be a cloud pouring forth a witness to Life. O 
all-praised passion-bearer, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto 
those who honor thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
In the midst of Eden a tree budded forth death, and in the midst of all the world a 
tree hath budded forth life; for they who were once incorrupt became corrupt upon 
tasting the former, but they who have received the latter have inherited incorruption. 
For, as God, Thou dost save the human race through Thy Cross.  
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Of old, Moses transformed the bitter springs in the desert with a tree, showing 
forth the conversion of the gentiles to piety through the Cross.  
Jordan, having hidden in its depths an axe-head, gave it forth again through the 
power of a stick, signifying the cutting off of deception by the Cross and baptism.  
In a sacred manner the people encamped in four divisions; and preceding in this 
fashion the tabernacle of the witness, they were glorified in the cross-like formation 
of their ranks.  
Wondrously stretched forth, the Cross emitted rays like the sun’s, and the heavens 
declared the glory of our God.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Having made thyself an undistorted reflection of divine understandings, O martyr, 
thou didst shine forth as an exceedingly magnificent beacon among spiritual athletes.  
Thou didst not offer sacrifices to the dark demon, O invincible martyr, for thou 
didst long to receive a life-bearing death for thy piety.  
Bearing a body without pain, with the passion-bearers O immaculate one, thou 
didst remain insensible to thy wounds through divine love.  
As thy countenance suffered patiently, O martyr, it was splendidly adorned with 
wounds and darkened the thoughts of the enemy with the lightning of the divine 
Spirit.  
Theotokion: As Thou art sinless, O God, grant us purification from our ignorance, 
and grant peace to the world through the supplications of her who gave birth to 
Thee.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O thrice-blessed Tree, on which Christ the king and Lord was 
stretched! * Through thee the beguiler fell, * who tempted mankind with the 
tree. * He was caught in the trap set by God, * who was crucified upon thee in 
the flesh, * granting peace unto our souls. 
O ever-hymned Tree, whereon Christ was stretched: the whirling sword which 
guarded Eden stood in awe of thee, O Cross, and the dread cherubim withdrew, 
when Christ was nailed to thee, Who granteth peace unto our souls.  
The adverse powers of the nether world are stricken with fear when the sign of the 
Cross is traced in the air in which they live, as are the generations of the earthborn 
and the heavenly, who bend the knee to Christ, Who granteth peace unto our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Having shone forth a divine light and revealed itself in rays of incorruption unto 
the darkened gentiles astray in error, the divine Cross acquireth them for Christ Who 
was nailed thereto, and granteth peace unto our souls.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Recognizing that which is opposed to the day and to peace, thou didst not wish to 
embrace the war-loving demon.  
Thinking to weaken thy divine strength, O martyr, the all-evil one was revealed to 
be daring in his wiles.  
Grant me enlightenment and peace, O all-praised one, quelling my greatly vexing 
turmoil by thy prayers.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, we hymn thee who art a Virgin even after giving birth; 
for thou hast given birth to God the Word on behalf of all the world.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Jonah stretched out his hands in the form of a cross * within the belly 
of the sea monster, * plainly prefiguring the redeeming Passion. * Cast out 
from thence after three days, * he foreshadowed the marvelous Resurrection of 
Christ our God, * who was crucified in the flesh and enlightened the world * 
by His Rising on the third day. 
Bent with age and weighed down with infirmity, Jacob drew himself up when he 
crossed his arms, showing forth the power of the life-bearing Cross; for God Who 
was nailed in the flesh hath set aright the obsolescence of the law of the Scripture 
which was written in shadows, and dispelled the soul-destroying disease of deception.  
Divine Israel laid his hands cross-wise upon the heads of the youths, and insofar as 
those serving under the law give glory to the firstborn, he suspected he had erred in 
laying his hands thus, yet he did not alter the life-bearing image; wherefore crying 
aloud, raising the Cross on high, the newly established people of Christ God are 
protected thereby.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Bearing manly wisdom of soul in thy womanly nature, O glorious one, thou didst 
pay no heed to the beasts in the waters.  
Without sustaining harm, thou didst vanquish the pride of the tyrants in the 
waters, O invincible martyr, abiding with the beasts like Jonah.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Hearkening to thy supplications, the Lord delivered thee from the corruption of 
the beasts, as He did Daniel from the pit, O all-praised one.  
Theotokion: O thou who at the word of the archangel hast given birth to the 
Word in the flesh, we pray thee to deliver our souls from the snares of the enemy.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Thou didst struggle well in thy contest, * and after death * dost sanctify us with 
streams of miracles, O all-praised one. * Wherefore, we hymn thy holy repose, * 
having recourse to thy divine temple with faith, * that we may be delivered from 
spiritual afflictions, ** and draw forth the grace of miracles.  
Ikos: The temple of the all-praised one hath been shown to be a paradise, having 
in its midst a garden of immortality, her precious body; and those who gather the 
goodly flourishing fruits thereof are quickly sanctified. For beholding a dead body 
shedding blood like one that is alive, and perfuming all, they are awestruck. 
Wherefore, hasten ye, and with me the lowly one, let us be purified from all defile-
ment; and, venerating it, let us draw forth the grace of miracles.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The senseless decree of the wicked tyrant, * breathing forth threats and 
blasphemy hateful to God, * confused the people. * Yet neither the fury of the 
wild beast nor the roaring of the fire * could frighten the three Children: * but 
standing together in the flame, * fanned by the wind that brought refreshment 
as the dew, they sang: * ‘Blessed and supremely praised art Thou, * O our God 
and the God of our fathers.’ 
The first man, tasting of the tree, went to dwell in corruption; for, having 
condemned himself to a shameful banishment from life, he imparted corruption to 
the whole race of mankind. But we mortals, finding restoration through the tree of 
the Cross, cry aloud: O supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Breaking the commandment of God came about through disobedience, and the 
untimely partaking of the fruit of the tree brought death to mankind, but to preserve 
that which is most precious, access to the tree of life was forbidden, until God 
opened it to the suffering thief who with a proper understanding cried aloud: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Israel, foreseeing things to come, laid hold of the tip of Joseph’s staff, revealing 
beforehand that the most glorious Cross would seize the power of the kingdom, for it 
is the victorious boast of kings and a light for those who cry aloud with faith: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the 
Trinity, * as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
The goodly courage of the divine martyr was shown to be beyond understanding; 
for the Creator of all causeth creation to submit to those who cry out amid sufferings: 
O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The maiden closed the frivolous and prating mouths of the tyrants, and put down 
the pride of the all-iniquitous ones through the divine Spirit, chanting in a godly 
fashion: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Of old, the furnace having been set afire, was consumed by the three venerable 
youths, and now the divinely wise one, hymning the Trinity, hath ensnared the 
servants, hymning the God of our fathers: Blessed art Thou, O God!  
The Bridegroom, mystically coming to His most pure bride in the furnace, hath by 
the dew of the Spirit, and at the behest of the Father, preserved her as she sang: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: As Thou didst desire to arrange our salvation, O Savior, thou didst 
make Thine abode within the Virgin’s womb, and hast shown her to be the 
intercessor for the world. O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O ye Children, equal in number to the Trinity, * bless ye God the 
Father and creator; * sing ye the praises of the Word who descended and 
changed the fire into dew; * and supremely exalt ye throughout the ages * the 
most Holy Spirit, who giveth life unto all. 
O hosts of heaven, chant ye to the exalted Tree which was drenched in the blood 
of the incarnate Word of God, and celebrate the restoration of those born on earth. 
O Ye people, worship the Cross of Christ, by which the world hath been granted the 
resurrection throughout all ages!  
O ye mortal stewards of grace, with your hands reverently raise on high the Cross 
whereon Christ God stood and the spear which pierced the body of God the Word, 
that all the nations may see the salvation which is of God, glorifying Him throughout 
all ages!  
O faithful Christian kings, forechosen by divine decree, be ye glad! And having 
received from God the precious Cross, rejoice in it, the weapon of victory, for 
thereby tribes of enemy warriors seeking to make battle have been scattered 
throughout all ages.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
The most blessed among women, having won the grace of the Most High as her 
reward, hymneth Christ, praising Him for all ages.  
Fortified by the thought of her Bridegroom and by immaterial love, the martyr 
gave her body over to death, and liveth for all ages.  
Having armed herself with the Holy Spirit against falsehood as against a wild beast, 
the martyr hath received her reward for all ages.  
Thou didst not receive the death which corrupteth the soul, O pure and 
immaculate one, but by the bite of the wild beast didst right boldly exchange it for life 
which never waxeth old.  
Theotokion: Thou dost fend off the assaults of temptations and the attacks of the 
passions, O Virgin; wherefore, we hymn thee throughout all ages.  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: With never ceasing praises we magnify thee, * the Mother of God Most 
High, * who art higher than the most pure hosts, * and who beyond 
comprehension knew not wedlock, * yet hath truly given birth to God.  
Let all the trees of the forests rejoice, for their nature hath been sanctified by Him 
Who planted them in the beginning - Christ Who was stretched out upon the Tree. 
Wherefore, worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
A sacred horn hath been lifted up, the chief horn for all the divinely wise: the 
Cross, whereby all the horns of the sinful are noetically broken asunder. Wherefore, 
worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
That Thou mayest show the Cross, the invincible weapon, to the world, O adored 
Lord and King, in the sight of all Thou didst form its most glorious image in the 
skies, radiant with boundless light. Wherefore, all the powers of heaven magnify 
Thee.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought forth 
Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted upon 
the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
The flow of thy life’s blood, O all-praised martyr, is a token of the incorrupt life 
given thee; for thou hast been revealed to be a treasury continually full of healings for 
those who draw forth from it with faith.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Death touched thee through the law of nature, O divinely wise one, for having 
dispassionately arrayed thyself in life-bearing mortality, and having laid down thy 
most honored and animate body, thou dost ever abide incorruptibly, of which the 
streams of thy blood bear witness to.  
Crowned with the laws of suffering, O martyr Euphemia, thou preacher of Christ, 
the scroll of the pious and precious dogmas entrusted to thee by the council didst 
thou show forth, holding it in thy hands like a living pillar of Orthodoxy.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother, thou Bride who knewest not wedlock, vessel of 
sweet fragrance, we magnify thee as the true and immaculate cloud of divine light 
who received the Rain of heaven in thy womb.  
Exapostilarion of the holy great-martyr: 
Having endured death for the living God, thou remainest alive, O all-praised 
Euphemia; and holding in thy grasp His scroll, thou wast a bulwark of defense for the 
Orthodox who celebrate thine honored, divine and most sacred memory with faith. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the feast: 
With splendors of bright radiance and divine desire the Cross of the Lord, which 
lieth before us, doth summon all to its elevation. Come ye all, and with joy, love and 
fear let us kiss it with faith and glorify the one Creator and Master!  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy great martyr, in Tone III: 
Beholding the spiritual athlete’s victory accomplished with divine wisdom for the 
sake of our God, Who is wondrous in His counsels, O ye faithful, let us chant 
hymnody of thanksgiving; for in her womanly nature the goodly martyr vanquished 
the invisible might of the power of the adversary, perfecting her godly power in 
weakness. Through her supplications, save Thou our souls. (Twice)  
Mingling the cup of truth with the blood of her martyrdom, and ever offering it to 
the Church, with the voice of wisdom the most praised martyr of Christ summoneth 
the children of the Church therein, saying: “Draw forth the drink which beareth 
witness to the resurrection, which driveth away unbelievers, washing away the 
passions and preserving the souls of the pious who cry out to the Savior: O Thou 
Who hast given us to drink of the torrent of the Spirit’s sweetness, save Thou our 
souls!”  
O ye whose souls have been sealed with the blood of Christ unto the day of 
deliverance, with gladness of spirit let us draw forth, as the prophet saith, the holy 
blood which floweth forth for us from the well-spring of the martyr, as a token of the 
life-bearing sufferings of the Savior and everlasting glory. And let us cry aloud to 
Him: O Lord Who art glorious in Thy saints, through the supplications of Thine all-
praised passion-bearer, save our souls!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
At the right hand of the Savior stood the virgin, passion-bearer and martyr 
Euphemia, arrayed in the virtues, invincible, adorned with the oil of purity and the 
blood of martyrdom; and she crieth out to Him, joyfully holding a lamp in her hand: 
“I have hastened to the sweet fragrance of Thy myrrh, O Christ God, for I have been 
wounded with love of Thee! Depart not from me, O my heavenly Bridegroom!” By 
her supplications send down Thy mercies upon us, O almighty Savior.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VI:  
Today the Cross of the Lord cometh forth; and the faithful receive it with desire, 
and they derive healings of soul and body, and every pang. Let us venerate it with joy 
and fear: with fear, for we are unworthy because of our sins; and with joy, because of 
the salvation which is granted to the world by Christ God, Who hath great mercy, and 
Who was nailed to it.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
With mystic hymnody * together let us hymn * the Cross of the Lord, * whereon 
the Savior was crucified, ** the Resurrection of all.  
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God; * and worship the footstool of His feet, for 
He is holy.  
Come, ye multitudes of monastics, * and, having assembled, * let us hymn in a 
godly manner, * the life-bearing Tree ** whereon Christ was stretched out.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
O ye faithful, let us glorify * the Cross of the Lord, * whereon the blood of the 
Master * was poured forth ** for the deliverance of all.  
Glory ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone I:  
Today, O all-praised one, the choirs of the fathers, assembling for the sake of 
Christ, offer thee the scroll of the Orthodox Faith, and receiving it into thine honored 
hands, thou dost preserve it forever. Wherefore, we, the choirs of mankind, 
assembling, honor thy suffering, reverently crying aloud: Rejoice, O all-praised one 
who transformed thy womanly nature into the fullness of that of a man! Rejoice, O 
all-praised one who hast preserved inviolate the Orthodox Faith handed down by the 
fathers! Rejoice, O thou who prayest for our souls!  
Both now ..., the composition of Andrew of Jerusalem, in Tone I:  
Today the holy words of David have received their fulfillment; for, lo! we 
manifestly worship the footstool of Thy most pure feet, O most Compassionate One, 

--- PAGE 14 ---
and cry out to Thee, placing our trust in the shelter of Thy wings: Let the light of Thy 
countenance be shined upon us! Exalt Thou the horn of Thine Orthodox people 
through the elevation of Thy Cross, O greatly merciful Christ!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the feast, and 4 
from ODE VI of the canon of the holy great-martyr.  
The rough stone, struck, put forth water for a disobedient and hard-hearted 
people, and showed forth the mystery of the divinely elect Church, whereof the Cross 
is the might and confirmation. (Twice) 
When Christ’s most pure side was pierced by the spear, blood and water flowed 
therefrom, renewing the covenant and washing sin away, for the Cross is the boast of 
the faithful, the might and confirmation of kings. (Twice) 
Bearing manly wisdom of soul in thy womanly nature, O glorious one, thou didst 
pay no heed to the beasts in the waters.  
Without sustaining harm, thou didst vanquish the pride of the tyrants in the 
waters, O invincible martyr, abiding with the beasts like Jonah.  
Hearkening to thy supplications, the Lord delivered thee from the corruption of 
the beasts, as He did Daniel from the pit, O all-praised one.  
Theotokion: O thou who at the word of the archangel hast given birth to the 
Word in the flesh, we pray thee to deliver our souls from the snares of the enemy.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV: 
Thy ewe-lamb Euphemia O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thou didst struggle well in thy contest, * and after death * dost sanctify us with 
streams of miracles, O all-praised one. * Wherefore, we hymn thy holy repose, * 
having recourse to thy divine temple with faith, * that we may be delivered from 
spiritual afflictions, ** and draw forth the grace of miracles.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly upon the Cross, * bestow Thy mercies upon 
the new community named after Thee, * O Christ God; gladden with Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over enemies; ** may they have as Thy 
help the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
 
Prokeimenon of the feast in Tone VII (also until the Leave-taking): Exalt ye the 
Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; * for He is holy. 
Prokeimenon of the saint, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the 
God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §181 (II COR. 6:1-10)  
Brethren: We, as workers together with Christ, beseech you also that ye receive not 
the grace of God in vain. (For He saith, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in 
the day of salvation have I succored thee: Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, 
now is the day of salvation.) Giving no offense in any thing, that the ministry be not 
blamed: but in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much pa-
tience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tu-
mults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings; by pureness, by knowledge, by 
longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of 
truth, by the power of God, by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on 
the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report: as deceivers, and yet 
true; as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold, we live; as chastened, 
and not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as 
having nothing, and yet possessing all things.  
Alleluia of the feast, in Tone IV: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast 
purchased from the beginning.  
Alleluia of the saint, in Tone VI: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, 
and He was attentive unto me  
Verse: And He brought me up out of the pit of misery, and out of the mire of 
clay.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §33 (LK 7:36-50)  
At that time, one of the Pharisees desired Jesus that he would eat with him. And he 
went down into the Pharisee’s house, and sat down to meat. And behold, a woman in 
the city, which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee’s 
house, brought an alabaster box of ointment, and stood at his feet behind him 
weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of 
her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment. Now when the 
Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spake within himself, saying, This man, if 

--- PAGE 17 ---
he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is that 
toucheth him; for she is a sinner. And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have 
somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on. There was a certain creditor 
which had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. And 
when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me, therefore, 
which of them will love him most? Simon answered and said, I suppose that he, to 
whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged. And he 
turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into 
thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath washed my feet with 
tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head. Thou gavest me no kiss: but this 
woman, since the time I came in, hath not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil 
thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment. 
Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved 
much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little. And he said unto her, Thy 
sins are forgiven. And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, 
Who is this that forgiveth sins also? And he said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved 
thee; go in peace.  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the all-honored Cross of the Lord!  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought forth 
Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted upon 
the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
 
Communion Verse: The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, hath been signed 
upon us.  
Communion Verse of the saint: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous 
be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
 
