--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 11th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER  
AFTERFEAST OF THE NATIVITY OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE MOTHER THEODORA OF ALEXANDRIA 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR AUTONOMUS  
 
 (These commemorations are moved to this day due to the apodosis of the 
Nativity on the day following)  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
In a woman’s body * but in the guise of a man, * thou didst undertake manly 
struggles, * living in the midst of men, * causing the passions to wither, * and utterly 
restraining the raging of lust * by fasting and constant supplications, O Theodora, * 
and by thy divine and never-ceasing ** contemplation of God.  
The sun, setting beneath the earth, * never saw thee sin; * and the Lord, Who 
knoweth men’s hearts and seeth hidden things, * knew thee to be untiring * and 
illumined the eyes of thy heart * with the light of repentance. * Wherefore, thou didst 
diligently strive to please Him * through painful abstinence ** and the perfection of 
the virtues.  
In nowise understanding * the ways of the enemy’s thoughts, * thou didst love the 
child * whom thou didst not beget * nurturing him with paternal kindness, * O 
Theodora, * enduring with true piety of mind * the undeserved abuse and censure of 
men. ** Wherefore, we celebrate thine honored solemnity.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Shining with the virtues, * adorned with piety, * thou wast a godly hierarch, * and 
didst pass over the world like the brilliant sun, * sowing the preaching of the Faith 
everywhere * and cutting down falsehood * with the scythe of thy tongue, * O 
divinely wise hierarch Autonomus, ** thou great preacher.  
Thou didst not hesitate to endure * painful sufferings, manly struggles, * wounds 
and sores; * for, buried under a multitude of stones, O Autonomus, * thou didst 
make them into * a stairway and ladder, * ascending thereby to God as one crowned; 
* and thou didst join the armies of the incorporeal ones, ** praying for the world.  
Thou didst make thy vesture bright * through the blood of thy martyrdom * and 
the grace of the divine Spirit; * and in a sacred manner * didst enter into the holy of 
holies on high, * where Jesus, our Forerunner, entered in, * receiving from God a 
crown of victory * with all who died by shedding their blood in martyrdom, ** O 
Autonomus.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone IV: 
In accordance with the angel’s prophecy, thou didst issue forth from the righteous 
Joachim and Anna, as a most pure fruit, heaven and the throne of God, a receptacle 
of purity, heralding forth joy to all the world, O Virgin, mediatress of our life, 
removal of the curse, bestowal of blessing. Wherefore, on the feast of thy nativity, O 
divinely called Virgin, ask peace for the world and great mercy for our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Thou didst weep tears from the depths of thy soul, * lamenting thy childlessness, * 
desiring children; * yet thou hast given birth to a babe ** who is the boast of our 
whole race.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
With voices of hymnody let us honor * the honored nativity * of the all-holy 
Virgin, * because of whom ** the world hath been renewed.  
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.  
Rejoice, O wise prophets, * ye divinely eloquent ones; * for the Virgin is born, * 
through whom the Salvation of the world ** will be given birth.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV:  
Today let the barren and childless Anna clap her hands with splendor, let those on 
earth bear lamps, let kings leap for joy, let hierarchs be glad in blessing, and let all the 
world keep festival; for, behold, the Queen, the immaculate Bride of the Father, hath 
sprung forth from the root of Jesse. No longer will women bear children in grief, for 
Joy hath blossomed forth and Life shall live amongst mortals in the world. No longer 
will the offerings of Joachim be rejected, for the lamentation of Anna hath been 
changed to joy, and she saith: “Rejoice with me, all ye chosen Israel, for, lo! the Lord 
hath given me the animate palace of His divine glory, for our common gladness and 
joy, and the salvation of our souls!”  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
In thee, O mother, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, 
thou didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Theodora.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Thy nativity, O Virgin Theotokos, * hath proclaimed joy to all the world; * for 
from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, * Who, having 
annulled the curse, hath given His blessing, ** and having abolished death, hath 
granted us life everlasting.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Thy nativity, O Virgin Theotokos, * hath proclaimed joy to all the world; * for 
from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, * Who, having 
annulled the curse, hath given His blessing, ** and having abolished death, hath 
granted us life everlasting. (Twice)  
Glory ..., the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
In thee, O mother, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, 
thou didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Theodora.  
Both now ..., the Troparion of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”:  
Having most gloriously been born from a barren womb, thou hast given birth 
from a virginal womb in a manner beyond nature; revealed to be from comely stock, 
thou didst bud forth the Life of the world, wherefore, the hosts of heaven cry out to 
thee, O Theotokos: Glory to thine issuing forth, O pure one! Glory to thy nativity! 
Glory to thy virginity, O Mother who knewest not wedlock!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
Beams of the universal joy of thy nativity have shone forth upon the land, O Mary, 
Virgin Mother, illumining the minds of those who hymn thee with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE I  
1st canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos;  
The composition of John, in Tone II:  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Come ye faithful and rejoicing with divine spirit, let us honor with hymns the 
Ever-virgin Maiden who today hath issued forth from a barren woman for the 
salvation of mankind.  
Rejoice, O pure one, Mother and handmaid of Christ God, mediatress of our 
primal blessedness! All of us, the race of mankind, glorify thee with hymns, as is meet.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Today the bridge of life is born, through which mortals have attained restoration 
after their fall into Hades, glorifying Christ, the Bestower of life, with hymns.  
Canon of the venerable one, with 4 Troparia, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
With Thy praise, O Lord, fill thou my mouth that I may sing of the greatly hymned 
glory, and honor the pangs of Theodora, who pleased thee with the splendor of her 
life.  
Today thy sacred solemnity hath shone forth more brightly than the sun, 
illumining souls which are in gloominess, and ever dispelling the darkness of the 
demons, O right wondrous one.  
Thy sin was manifestly recorded, as the Gospel hath said, O most honorable one; 
but, striving diligently, thou didst blot it out with the sweat of thine abstinence and 
the streams of thy tears.  
Theotokion: With hymns let us honor the pure Mary as the animate bridal-
chamber, the incorrupt tabernacle, the portal of heaven, the divine table, the palace 
and throne of the Master.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is:  
“Thou hast finished the lawful race, O divinely wise one”, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Nourished on the laws of the Creator from childhood, thou didst grow in the law 
of virtue to the heights of piety; wherefore, thou didst suffer lawfully, O father.  
Thou didst arm thy thoughts with the sword of patience and courage, O wise one, 
arraying thyself for the battle against deception and vanquishing it utterly.  
Shown forth as an instructor of the laws of piety and a preacher of the dogmas of 
truth, O father Autonomus, thou didst catechize all creation, as did the apostles.  
Theotokion: Acknowledging God Who revealed Himself on earth as incarnate, and 
having been deified by Him through grace, O Virgin, we hymn thee, delighting in 
spiritual gifts.  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Having lived blamelessly for God, ye gave birth unto the salvation of all, O 
divinely wise parents of her who hath given birth to our Creator and God.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
From a barren woman did the Lord, Who poureth forth life upon all, cause the 
Virgin to come forth, in whom He was pleased to make His abode, preserving her 
incorrupt even after giving birth.  
Let us hymn Mary today as the Theotokos, the fruit of Anna, the intercessor and 
helper of all, who gaveth birth to the life-bearing Cluster.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Clad in the garments of a man, thou didst wisely hasten with diligence to join the 
assembly of monastics, O honored one, entering the fray against the princes of the 
wicked ruler of this world.  
Thou didst manfully transform thy womanly weakness, O venerable one, truly 
showing thyself to be a precious gift, pleasing to God, by thy new name and guise, 
and by thy works.  
In thy mortal body thou didst show forth a life like unto that of the incorporeal 
ones, O glorious Theodora, holding firmly to genuine abstinence, unceasing vigilance 
and constant prayer.  
Theotokion: The tempest of sin and the turmoil of unseemly thoughts buffet me, 
O all-immaculate one. Take pity and extend to me a helping hand, in that thou art 
merciful; that, saved, I may magnify thee.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
With the down-pouring of thy words thou didst drown the mire of the passions of 
ungodliness, O hierarch, giving drink to the faithful.  
Thou wast a teacher and minister of Christ, O venerable one, and didst share and 
partake of His divine sufferings.  
With the sword of thy preaching thou didst make steadfast those who heeded thee 
well, O venerable one, preserving those who strove to avoid perdition.  
Theotokion: A most wondrous report hath been heard in heaven and on earth; for 
thou hast given birth ineffably to the Creator of all that is, O Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Laying waste to thy body through fasting, * thou didst entreat the Creator with 
vigils of prayer because of thy sin, * that, receiving full forgiveness, * thou might also 
receive remission of sins, ** having come to know the path of repentance.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
And the Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in the same melody:  
Thou didst blamelessly perform the divine mysteries, * O most wise and divinely 
blessed one, * and didst become a pleasing sacrifice; * for thou didst drain the cup of 
Christ, * O most glorious one, * beacon of the whole world, ** who prayest unceas-
ingly on behalf of us all.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
Having manfully endured feats of abstinence, thou didst cast down him of great 
guile, living thy life piously with men, O Theodora. And now thou hast passed over 
to God, praying for all who celebrate thy holy repose in a sacred manner.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Christ bestowed upon thee a twofold crown of incorruption, in that thou art both 
martyr and honored hierarch, O all-blessed Autonomus; for thou didst offer the un-
bloody sacrifice to Him, and didst truly emulate His divine suffering. And thou hast 
found delight in His sweetness which never groweth stale, O blessed one.  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
Joachim and Anna rejoice, for they found grace with God as is meet and gave birth 
to a God-pleasing fruit, the temple, the pure Virgin Mother of God, who alone is 
blessed, and prayeth unceasingly that our souls be saved.  
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
We hymn Thee, O Lord, Who hast given unto all, as a haven of salvation, her who 
gaveth birth to Thee.  
Christ hath revealed thee, O Bride of God, to all who with faith hymn thy mystery 
as their boast and might.  
Delivered from transgressions by thy supplications, O Lady who knewest not 
wedlock, we all bless thee with a good and proper understanding.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Thou didst boldly subject thyself to fasting for many days, like one of the 
incorporeal ones, O glorious one, but Christ strengthened thy weakness with His 
almighty power and nourished thee with divine grace.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
“Behold my lowliness and tears; behold my sorrow! And lighten the heavy burden 
of my sin!” Theodora cried out to Him Who alone is able to save.  
Drowning with the torrents of thy tears him who had deceitfully ensnared thee in 
his trap, protected by divine grace in thy safe haven thou didst vanquish him who 
hunteth men’s souls with his net.  
Theotokion: O most wondrous Mother of God, shine upon me a ray of 
repentance, dispel the darkness of my boundless evil deeds, and drive wicked 
thoughts away from my heart, O Virgin.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Having the Lord as thy mighty ally in the divine battle, O father, thou didst 
vanquish the ancient enemy of mortals by thy struggles.  
Having descended into the depths of the hidden things of God in a vision, O 
father, thou didst draw forth therefrom His ineffable mysteries.  
When thou didst utter the words, O wise one, the temples of the idolaters 
collapsed and the shrines of their deception were reduced to ashes by the fire at thy 
command.  
The flame of thy teachings bore thee up to an exalted life, O wise one, revealing 
thee unto the ends of the earth as a true guide to God.  
Theotokion: With thy supplications wash clean those who have been defiled by the 
passions, O Theotokos, and grant that we may hymn thy nativity with pure thoughts.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Having destroyed the darkness of shadowy images * and illumined the 
hearts of the faithful * by the coming of Truth through the divine Maiden, O 
Christ, * do Thou guide us by Thy light.  
O ye people, let us hymn the cause of the Cause of all that is, Who became like 
unto us. For the prophets, deemed worthy to behold her image, rejoiced, clearly 
seeing the fruit of salvation brought forth through her.  
The sprouting of the dry rod of the priest showed forth the destiny of Israel; and 
now the all-glorious offspring of the barren woman most gloriously shineth forth the 
splendor of those who gave birth to her.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
The ranks of the incorporeal ones were astonished, beholding thee in a body of 
clay, emulating their life and honorable ways, and vanquishing the enemy who before 
had seduced thee with delusion, O Theodora.  
God tamed the savagery of the wild beasts for thee, giving thee the grace of 
healing. And he who by thy hand was rescued from being devoured by a wild beast, 
and whose wounds thou didst heal, proclaimeth this, O glorious one.  
With perfect mind thou didst nurture the babe, enduring cruel slander, giving 
thanks to the Benefactor Who gave thee strength and made thee wondrous, O all-
praised Theodora.  
Theotokion: Thou art the might and confirmation of my feeble heart, O Virgin 
who knewest not wedlock, the impregnable rampart against the face of the enemy, 
who saveth me from all evils, vanquishing the hordes of the cruel enemy.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
The noetic Light shone thee forth who hast the words of life, O Autonomus, and 
hath revealed thee as a beacon unto all the ends of the earth.  
Unsheathing the word of God like a sword, thou didst cut down the array of false 
wisdom, O father Autonomus.  
Thou didst empty the quiver of the enemy of all its arrows, and didst show those 
who opposed thee to have armed themselves in vain, O blessed Autonomus.  
Theotokion: New and most glorious things have come to pass, O most honored 
one; for through thee God hath appeared on earth in the flesh and mortals have been 
deified.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: From within the sea monster Jonah cried unto the Lord: * “Lead me up 
from the abyss of Hades, I pray Thee; * for with a voice of praise as to my 
Redeemer, * in the spirit of truth * I offer myself to Thee.”  
The divinely wise parents of the Mother of God cried out to the Lord in grief over 
their barrenness; but they have now given birth to her, our common boast and 
salvation for generations of generations.  
The divinely wise parents of the Mother of God received a gift worthy of heaven 
from God, for she is a chariot more highly exalted than the cherubim, the Mother of 
the Word and Creator.  
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Offering up an ever-flowing fountain of tears, afflicting thyself and groaning, with 
thanksgiving thou didst endure the monks’ censure and shunning of thee, O divinely 
blessed one.  
Taking thy sustenance from the sea, nurtured on wondrous plants, and dwelling 
with wild beasts in the wilderness, thou didst make thine abode in heaven, O right 
wondrous one.  
Thou didst endure the burning of the day, and didst bear the frigid cold of night, 
warmed by the grace of the divine Spirit; wherefore, thou dost enjoy the blessedness 
of heaven.  
Theotokion: In hymns let us glorify the Virgin Theotokos, the divine jar, the table 
which bore the Bread of life, the untilled field, the holy mountain.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
The power of the Comforter strengthened thee as before it had the disciples, and 
it provided thee with a fiery tongue, O Autonomus, to enlighten mortals and burn up 
ungodliness with fire.  
Childlike in spiritual wisdom, O venerable father, in the weakness of thy bodily 
nature thou didst mightily accept struggles which were beyond nature, for the sake of 
thy preaching and unflagging labors.  
Thou didst set the head of the enemy, which was lifted up against his Creator, 
under the feet of the pious, arming them against his words with faith and grace.  
Theotokion: Our Creator and Fashioner, desiring to heal broken nature through 
thee, O Theotokos, gave thee as a divine cure to those who have recourse to thee in 
their infirmities.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
In thy holy nativity, O most pure one, * Joachim and Anna have been freed from 
the reproach of childlessness, * and Adam and Eve from mortal corruption. * And, 
delivered from the affliction of sin, * thy people celebrate it, crying out to thee: * A 
barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, * the nurturer of our Life!  
Ikos: The supplication of Joachim over his childlessness, together with the sighing 
of Anna over her barrenness, were right acceptable to God: they entered the ears of 

--- PAGE 10 ---
the Lord and brought forth life-bearing fruit for the world. For the one made 
supplication on the mountain, and the other bore her reproach in the garden; and 
with joy the barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, the nurturer of our Life.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The bush which burned with fire on the mountain * and the dew-
bearing furnace of the Chaldeans * clearly prefigured thee, O Bride of God; * 
for, without being consumed, * thou didst receive the divine and immaterial 
Fire * within thy material womb. * Wherefore, we chant unto Him Who was 
born of thee: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou! 
Once, the transmitter of the law was prevented from understanding thy great 
mystery in material manifestations, O most pure one, though instructed through 
images to not think earthly thoughts. Wherefore, marveling at the wonder, he said: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
In a godly manner the divine choir called thee beforehand the mountain and portal 
of heaven and the noetic ladder; for from thee was the Stone cut without the aid of 
the hands of man, and thou art the door through which passed the Lord of wonders, 
the God of our fathers.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
The most crafty enemy afflicted thee with unbearable wounds, appearing to thee 
in illusions of thine imagination; but thou didst cast down his vain savagery, chanting: 
O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst fill the dry cisterns with water through thy supplications, O glorious 
one, manifestly working miracles, and magnifying God Who glorifieth thee. To Him 
do we cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
In thy great boldness be thou ever mindful of those who celebrate thy memory, 
entreating the most compassionate God, to Whom we cry: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O Virgin Queen who hast given birth to Christ the King, taking pity, 
save me who am whirled about by the passions; make me steadfast by faith, and guide 
me to the path of salvation, O salvation of the faithful.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Joining into one chorus of piety those illumined by the Faith through thy words, O 
father Autonomus, thou didst teach them to cry out unceasingly: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
With unflagging courage thou didst shake asunder the precepts established in the 
souls of the unbelieving and impious, O wise martyr, toppling them from their 
foundations, and establishing grace in the hearts of the faithful.  
The oil of thy priestly anointing was mingled with divine suffering, O father 
Autonomus, for thy blood showed thee forth as a radiant hierarch for those who cry 
out with faith: Blessed art Thou, O Christ!  
Theotokion: He Who, as Creator and God, fashioned mankind out of earth, now 
reneweth that which had become corrupt, taking it upon Himself through thee, O 
Mother of God; and thereby deemed us worthy of mystical adoption, O pure one.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Of old in the furnace of the holy children, * Thou didst prefigure Thy 
Mother, O Lord, * in the image of those who entered therein, * and rescued 
therefrom remained unconsumed. * Her who hath been revealed today do we 
hymn * unto the ends of the earth, * supremely exalting her throughout all 
ages.  
Now the designated tabernacle of our reconciliation to God, who is to give birth 
to the Word Who hath revealed Himself to us in the coarseness of our flesh, 
beginneth her existence. Him do we, who have been brought into existence out of 
non-existence, hymn and supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
The reversal of Anna’s barrenness hath loosed the world’s lack of good things, and 
hath plainly shown forth a miracle: Christ, Who hath come to mortal men. Him do 
we, who have been brought into existence out of non-existence, hymn and supremely 
exalt throughout all ages.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
His mind illumined with purity, thine abbot was caught up and beheld the good 
things which the Lord prepared for thee, O Theodora: the radiant garden of paradise 
and the ineffable bridal-chamber, wherein thy Bridegroom, the Judge of the contest, 
hath made a dwelling for thee.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
The choirs of the angels, martyrs and the venerable, preparing for thy soul, bore it 
up to the mansions of heaven, to the place where those who rejoice find rest, wherein 
is the dwelling-place of those who cry out and supremely exalt Christ throughout the 
ages.  
A multitude of monastics, having assembled, faithfully buried thy blessed body; 
for, beholding most wondrous things, they acknowledged thine excellent qualities: 
for, though a woman, thou wast pleased to dwell bodily in the midst of men, 
protected by the hand of the Almighty, O divinely wise Theodora.  
Achieving endurance through all-night vigils of supplication, thou didst extinguish 
the uprisings of the passions, and sleeping the sleep of the righteous, thou hast passed 
over to the never-waning Light, crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Women followed in thy train, O most pure Bride of God, Maiden 
who knewest not wedlock, inhaling thy sweet-smelling Myrrh: the only-begotten Son 
Who shone forth from thy womb; and they truly reign with thee, hymning Christ 
throughout the ages.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
When Christ strengthened thee, O divinely wise one, the might of the tyrants fell; 
for by thy spirit they were stricken with fear.  
Showing forth strength in thy works of piety, O all-blessed one, with courage of 
mind thou didst denounce the foulness of falsehood.  
The rivers of thy miracles which flowed forth, O father, revealed thee as an abyss 
of healings which poureth forth grace in the world.  
Theotokion: Thy grace, O Virgin, hath truly been glorified on earth in signs; for 
strange was the wonder of thy birthgiving.  
ODE IX 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Thee do we magnify, O blessed and all-pure Theotokos, * who through 
thy virginal womb ineffably brought forth * God incarnate, * the Luminary 
Who shone forth before the sun * and hath come to us in the flesh.  
He Who poured forth water from the stone for the rebellious people, through the 
womb of a barren woman hath given to us, the right submissive nations, the fruit of 
gladness: thee, O most pure Mother of God, whom we magnify as is meet.  
Thee, O Theotokos, do we magnify, who hast removed the ancient and 
precipitous condemnation: the restoration of our first mother, the cause of the 
reconciliation of our race to God, the bridge to the Creator.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Thou didst depart from the world like a star, O all-praised one, and hast shone 
forth in the life of heaven, having left us the virtues of thy life and thy corrections, 
like rays of light, illumining the hearts of all who celebrate thy memory with faith.  
The gates of heaven were opened with splendor, admitting thee, O ever-
memorable Theodora; and the Church of the first-born now hath thy sacred soul, 
which danceth with the elect, where the sounds are the sounds of those who keep 
festival in the never-waning light.  
Thou hast found the reward for thy pangs, for thou didst hope for heavenly 
honor; thou caused desire to cease, for thou didst find its Source, and dost delight in 
good things, manifestly and purely beholding thy Bridegroom, O Theodora, as the 
angels have been deemed worthy to see Him.  
As thou hast boldness in prayer, O ever-memorable honorable and right glorious 
Theodora, beg thou that He send down release from vexations, deliverance from the 
passions and correction of life upon those who praise thee and celebrate thine 
honored memory.  
Theotokion: Save me, O pure one who hast given birth to the all-compassionate 
Savior; take pity on thy servant and guide me to the path of repentance; drive far 
away the wiles of the evil one, and deliver me from his pursuit, O Theotokos, helper 
of the faithful.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Soaring up to the heights of piety, borne aloft by the virtues, O father Autonomus, 
thou didst hasten to Christ through suffering.  
Mingling thy pangs with tears, O divinely wise one, thou didst produce fruits 
which cannot be taken away: the fruits of joy, glory and the sweetness which is in 
Christ Jesus.  
Lawfully granted crowns and divine gifts, O hierarch Autonomus, thou dost make 
us steadfast through the laws of God by thy supplications.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou hast given birth to Life and Incorruption: Him Who 
hath made victors over death, who magnify thee as the true Theotokos.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Exapostilarion of the feast:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”:  
From Anna, a barren and elderly woman, hath life and light shone forth: the all-
immaculate Maiden, the portal of the East, who ineffably shone forth light upon the 
ends of the earth. Forming a choir, let us bless her as one exalted far above all 
mortals.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of the heaven ...”: 
Today the Theotokos hath sprung forth * from Anna as a flower, a divinely 
wrought garden, * the salvation of mankind; * and in His beneficence the Creator of 
all, * Who was born of her in a manner past understanding, ** washeth away all the 
defilement of Adam, in that He is good.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
Who is sufficiently worthy * to hymn the Virgin * who ineffably became a babe 
through Anna? * Ye mountains and hills, therefore, let sweetness fall today; * for the 
pure Theotokos, the life and cleansing of all, ** is nourished on milk.  
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.  
The barren woman who before was childless * hath given birth to the only 
Theotokos, the life of all. * Human nature hath been filled with gladness * and now 
rejoiceth, * glorifying the true Mother ** of Jesus, the one Lord and Redeemer.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
On the most excellent day of our feast let us strike the spiritual harp; for the 
Mother of Life is born today from the seed of David, dispelling darkness: the renewal 
of Adam, the restoration of Eve, the Well-spring of incorruption, our release from 
corruption. Because of her we have been deified and delivered from death. And we, 
the faithful, cry out to her with Gabriel: Rejoice, thou who art full of grace, the Lord 
is with thee, granting us great mercy for thy sake!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia, 4 from ODE VII, and 4 from ODE VIII of the 
canons of the feast.  
Once, the transmitter of the law was prevented from understanding thy great 
mystery in material manifestations, O most pure one, though instructed through 
images to not think earthly thoughts. Wherefore, marveling at the wonder, he said: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! (Twice) 
In a godly manner the divine choir called thee beforehand the mountain and portal 
of heaven and the noetic ladder; for from thee was the Stone cut without the aid of 
the hands of man, and thou art the door through which passed the Lord of wonders, 
the God of our fathers. (Twice) 
Now the designated tabernacle of our reconciliation to God, who is to give birth 
to the Word Who hath revealed Himself to us in the coarseness of our flesh, 
beginneth her existence. Him do we, who have been brought into existence out of 
non-existence, hymn and supremely exalt throughout all ages. (Twice) 
The reversal of Anna’s barrenness hath loosed the world’s lack of good things, and 
hath plainly shown forth a miracle: Christ, Who hath come to mortal men. Him do 
we, who have been brought into existence out of non-existence, hymn and supremely 
exalt throughout all ages. (Twice) 
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Thy nativity, O Virgin Theotokos, * hath proclaimed joy to all the world; * for 
from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, * Who, having 
annulled the curse, hath given His blessing, ** and having abolished death, hath 
granted us life everlasting.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
In thee, O mother, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, 
thou didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Theodora.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Laying waste to thy body through fasting, * thou didst entreat the Creator with 
vigils of prayer because of thy sin, * that, receiving full forgiveness, * thou might also 
receive remission of sins, ** having come to know the path of repentance.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone II: 
Thou didst blamelessly perform the divine mysteries, * O most wise and divinely 
blessed one, * and didst become a pleasing sacrifice; * for thou didst drain the cup of 
Christ, * O most glorious one, * beacon of the whole world, ** who prayest unceas-
ingly on behalf of us all.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
In thy holy nativity, O most pure one, * Joachim and Anna have been freed from 
the reproach of childlessness, * and Adam and Eve from mortal corruption. * And, 
delivered from the affliction of sin, * thy people celebrate it, crying out to thee: * A 
barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, * the nurturer of our Life!  
 
Prokeimenon of the feast in Tone III: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and 
my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, § 208 (3: 23-29)  
Brethren: Before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith 
which should afterward be revealed. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to 
bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, 
we are no longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are all the children of God by faith in 
Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on 
Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither 
male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ’s then are ye 
Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.  
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was 
attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 28 (8: 3-11)  
At that time, the scribes and Pharisees brought to Jesus a woman taken in adultery; 
and when they had set her in the midst, They say unto him, Master, this woman was 
taken in adultery, in the very act. Now Moses in the law commanded us, that such 
should be stoned: but what sayest thou? This they said, tempting him, that they might 
have to accuse him. But Jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the 
ground, as though he heard them not. So when they continued asking him, he lifted 
up himself, and said unto them, He that is without sin among you, let. him first cast a 
stone at her. And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground. And they which 
heard it, being convicted by their own conscience, went out one by one, beginning at 
the eldest, even unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the 
midst. When Jesus had lifted up himself, and saw none but the woman, he said unto 
her, Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee? She said, 
No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no 
more.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
 
Instead of “It is truly meet...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most glorious nativity of the Mother of God!  
Irmos: Thee do we magnify, O blessed and all-pure Theotokos, * who through 
thy virginal womb ineffably brought forth * God incarnate, * the Luminary 
Who shone forth before the sun * and hath come to us in the flesh.  
 
Communion Verse of the feast: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call 
upon the name of the Lord.  
Communion Verse of the saints: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous 
be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
