--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 10th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 
AFTERFEAST OF THE NATIVITY OF OUR MOST HOLY LADY THE THEOTOKOS 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS MENODORA, METRODORA AND 
NYMPHODORA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera; 3 of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! * How the Mother of God who tasted not of wedlock * 
today springeth forth * as a rod bearing a Flower, * from a childless and barren 
womb, * from the righteous Joachim and Anna! * Wherefore, the councils of the 
prophets * and the whole assembly of the patriarchs rejoice ** at her nativity.  
Today David rejoiceth, * Jesse danceth, * Levi is magnified, * and the righteous 
Joachim leapeth up in spirit; * for the barrenness of Anna is manifestly loosed * by 
thy nativity, O pure Mary. * O thou who tasted not of wedlock, * the company of 
angels and all mortals ** call thy divine womb blessed!  
  
Rejoice, O union of the earthly! * Rejoice, temple of the Lord! * Rejoice, 
unwedded Mother, * who hast most gloriously loosed the barrenness of Anna * and 
by thy nativity * hast poured forth remission of sins upon mortals! * Rejoice, O all-
immaculate one! Rejoice, divine temple! * Rejoice, O tabernacle, ** wherein our 
Creator and Lord made His abode!  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Having adorned yourselves * with vesture empurpled with your blood, * O virgin 
maidens, * in your beauty ye united yourselves incorporeally * unto Christ our comely 
God * Who hath preserved your virginity undefiled * in the immortal bridal chamber 
of incorruption, * in the mansions of heaven, ** in a chamber not made by hands, O 
martyrs.  
In imperfect bodies, * yet with a perfect mind, * ye vanquished the ancient serpent, 
* the author of evil, * with the power of the Spirit, O glorious ones, * and showed his 
might to be feeble. * Wherefore, ye have received crowns of victory, * O Menodora, 
Metrodora and Nymphodora, ** ye champions of the Trinity.  
Though your members were twisted, * and ye were fed to the fire, * lacerated with 
iron claws, * hung upon a tree and beheaded by the sword, * ye did not deny Christ, 
O all-praised spiritual athletes. * Wherefore, ye have received crowns of victory, * O 
Menodora, Metrodora and Nymphodora, ** ye champions of the Trinity.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II:  
What is this noise of revelers? Joachim and Anna keep festival mystically, saying: 
“Rejoice with us today, O Adam and Eve!” For by their transgression was paradise 
shut, but a right glorious fruit hath now been given unto us: Mary, the divine Maiden, 
who throweth open its gates unto all.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Let the gate of the God-receiving temple be opened, * taking in today with glory * 
the temple and throne of the King * which Joachim bringeth, consecrating her to the 
Lord: * her who was taken from him ** to be the Mother of God.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
In thy nativity, O most pure one, * noetic rays of universal joy * have shone forth 
upon the world, * proclaiming beforehand unto all Christ God, the Sun of glory; * for 
thou hast been revealed to be ** the mediatress of true gladness and grace.  
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.  
This, thy most precious glory, O pure one, * proclaimeth beforehand to all 
mankind * thy kindhearted beneficence; * for thou art the mediatress of our present 
joy, * for by thy supplication thou hast been revealed to us ** as the cause of joy to 
come, O pure one.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
The Queen of all who hath been foretold, the habitation of God, the divine 
dwelling place of the eternal Essence, hath come forth today from the barren womb 
of the glorious Anna, and by her, shameless Hades hath been trampled down, and 
Eve, the mother of our race, hath been led into everlasting life. To her let us cry 
aloud, as is meet: Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy 
womb!  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Thy nativity, O Virgin Theotokos, * hath proclaimed joy to all the world; * for 
from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, * Who, having 
annulled the curse, hath given His blessing, ** and having abolished death, hath 
granted us life everlasting.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Be thou magnified, O Judah, and let David be glad! Be thou renewed, O Adam, 
and let Levi be strengthened! For Christ hath been born to me through them. Strike 
thy harp, O psalmist, and proclaim who this is who hath been born, whom thou 
callest a daughter. She is the nurturer of our life, the Mother of Christ God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded ...”:  
Be thou renewed, O Adam! Rejoice, O Eve! Make merry, O David! Be of good 
cheer, O Anna, for the Mother of thy Creator hath been most gloriously born! All the 
earth joineth chorus, renewed, and rejoiceth, clad in vesture of gladness. Let every 
tongue now cry out to thee in chorus, O Mary: Blessed is the house of David, for it 
nurtureth her who nourisheth our Life!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
The second canon of the nativity of the most holy Theotokos, with 8 Troparia, 
including its Irmos; and that of the holy martyrs, with four Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: To Him who crushed the enemy with His arm * and led Israel through 
the Red Sea, * to our Redeemer and our God let us sing, * for He hath been 
glorified. 
She who is holy among the saints is placed in the holy sanctuary as a babe, to be 
fed by the hands of angels. Let us all, therefore, faithfully keep festival together on 
her nativity.  
Let all creation join chorus, and let David be glad, for from his tribe and seed hath 
come forth the rod which beareth the Lord, the Creator of all, as a flower.  
Anna was barren and unable to give birth, yet she was not childless in God’s eyes; 
for, lo! she hath become known by all generations as the mother of the pure Virgin, 
from whom the Creator of nature hath sprung forth in the guise of a servant.  
With hymns we all honor thee, the innocent ewe-lamb who hast been born of 
Anna and who through thy womb brought Christ the Lamb into our nature.  
Triadicon: I glorify the three Beginningless Ones, I hymn the three Holy Ones, I 
proclaim the three equally Everlasting Ones to be of a single Essence; for the one 
God is glorified in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: Who hath seen a Babe fed with milk Whom a father hath now sown? 
Or where hath there been seen a Mother who is a Virgin? Truly past understanding 
are both of these things, O pure Birthgiver of God.  
Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor the fervent sufferings of 
the three sisters”; The composition of Joseph, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O glorious martyrs, make supplication to the uncreated Trinity Whom ye 
preached, on behalf of us who now honor your divine sufferings and corrections O 
divinely blessed ones. 
Protected by the divine weaponry of faith, the maidens scorned the words of the 
tyrant, and for the sake of the Life of all they submitted to the threefold waves of 
torments and to an unjust death.  
Strengthened by the omnipotent power of the Creator, the most honored ones 
assumed a manly character, and with their feet they trampled upon the twisted and 
prideful serpent and cast him down to the ground.  
Theotokion: With hymns we honor the pure Mary as an animate temple, an 
incorrupt tabernacle, the portal of heaven, the divine table, the palace and throne of 
the Master.  
ODE III 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: My heart is established in the Lord, * my horn is exalted in my God, * 
my mouth is enlarged against mine enemies, * and I rejoice in Thy salvation. 
Raised in the Holy of Holies, O most pure Virgin Theotokos, thou wast shown to 
be more exalted than all of creation, having given birth in the flesh unto the Creator.  
Blessed is thy womb, O chaste Anna, for thou didst pour forth the fruit of 
virginity, who gaveth birth without seed to Jesus the Redeemer the Nurturer of 
creation.  
O Ever-virgin, all creation calleth thee blessed who hast been born today of Anna 
as the rod sprung forth from the root of Jesse, who put forth Christ as a most pure 
Bloom.  
Showing thee to be more exalted than all creation, O pure Theotokos, thy Son 
magnifieth thy birth from Anna, gladdening all today.  
Triadicon: We worship Thee, O Father, beginningless in essence, we hymn Thy 
timeless Son, and we honor Thy Spirit Who is equally everlasting: as God three in 
Hypostases but one in Essence.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: O pure Theotokos, who hast given birth unto the Bestower of light, 
the Author of man’s life, thou hast been revealed to be the treasure of our life and the 
portal of the unapproachable Light.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Wounding thee cruelly, the all-iniquitous tormentor of our life, dead of mind, 
sought to force thee to renounce Christ, O martyr Menodora.  
The tyrant took no pity on thee who lifted thine eyes to God, O martyr, but with 
an iron rod mercilessly broke thy members, thus weaving for thee an everlasting 
crown which withereth not away.  
By your torments ye acquired treasure in the heavens and everlasting glory, O 
thrice rich holy martyrs, clearly drawing nigh unto God.  
Theotokion: O pure Virgin who hast appeared, drive the darkness from my soul, 
burst the bonds of sin, and save me, O thou who hast given birth unto the most 
Compassionate One.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Clad as sisters in the Spirit, * and having contended with endurance for the Trinity, 
* ye vanquished the greatly cunning enemy; * wherefore, ye have made your abode 
with the five virgins * in the heavenly bridal chamber, O passion-bearers, ** and with 
the angels ye stand in unceasing gladness before the King of all.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
The heavenly choirs of the incorporeal hosts marveled at your great patience; for, 
stripped naked, your members broken, enduring a bitter death, ye withstood all as 
though it were others suffering, thus crushing the apostate serpent with your feminine 
bodies, O virgin brides of the Bestower of life, champions of the Faith.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Today is Mary, the divine Maiden, born for us from the root of Jesse and the loins 
of David. All things rejoice with joy and are renewed. Rejoice together, O heaven and 
earth! Praise her, ye people of our native land! Joachim maketh merry, and Anna 
keepeth festival, crying aloud: A barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, the 
nurturer of our Life!  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: With noetic eyes the Prophet Habbakuk * foresaw Thy coming, O 
Lord; * wherefore he cried aloud: * ‘God shall come out of Theman!’ Glory to 
Thy power! * Glory to Thy condescension!  
The Patriarch Jacob, clearly foreseeing the mighty works of Thy dispensation, O 
Savior, cried out in the Spirit, saying mystically to Judah: “From the tender plant thou 
art gone up, O my Son!”, referring to Thee, O God, Who wast born of the Virgin.  
Now the pure Virgin, the rod of Aaron which sprung forth from the root of 
David, cometh forth from Anna, and heaven and earth, and all the nations of the 
gentiles mystically join chorus together with Anna and Joachim.  
Let heaven now be glad; let the earth rejoice! And let Joachim and David join 
chorus: the one as the father of thee who truly hast given birth to God, and the other 
as thine ancestor who proclaimed thy mighty deeds, O pure one.  
The whole world rejoiceth with thee today, O divinely wise Anna; for thou hast 
budded forth the Mother of its Redeemer, she who from the root of David put forth 
for us the rod of strength which beareth Christ as a flower.  
Triadicon: I glorify God, the beginningless Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the 
consubstantial, uncreated Trinity, before Whom, the seraphim stand with reverence, 
crying aloud: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, O God!  
Theotokion: The beginningless Origin receiveth a beginning from thee in the flesh 
and in time, O Birthgiver of God, and He remaineth equally the beginningless and 
incarnate Word of the Father, equally everlasting with the Spirit, maintaining His 
divine dignity.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Resplendent in the rays of the Cross, O ever-blessed Metrodora, bound to a tree 
thou didst endure torture by fire, quenching the burning coal of deception with the 
dew of the love of Christ.  
Stretching forth thy thought towards the visions manifested to thee, and beholding 
thy Bridegroom of unimaginable comeliness, O ever-blessed Metrodora, beaten with 
iron rods thou didst valiantly endure the pangs of torture.  
Ye have adorned yourselves and been radiantly glorified, O virgins, wholly loving 
the most glorious Word: for wounded by His love, ye steadfastly endured the assaults 
of suffering.  
Theotokion: Enliven me who have been slain by the malice of the deceiver, O all-
immaculate one who hast given birth unto Life, for to thee have I fled; and as thou 
art merciful, O all-immaculate one, raise me up who have fallen into the abyss of sin.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Lord our God, bestow Thy peace upon us; * O Lord our God, take us 
for Thy possession; * O Lord, besides Thee we know none other: * and we call 
upon Thy Name. 
Thy nativity is most pure, O immaculate Virgin, thy conception is ineffable, and 
thy birthgiving unutterable, O Bride unwedded; for God hath clothed Himself in all 
of me.  
Let the angelic ranks be glad; let the descendants of Adam join chorus; for the rod 
who alone budded forth the Flower Christ, our Redeemer, hath been born.  
Today the condemnation of Eve hath been lifted by thy nativity, the barrenness of 
Anna hath been loosed, and Adam hath been freed from the ancient curse; for by 
thee have we been delivered from corruption.  
Glory to Thee Who hast glorified the barren woman today! For, according to the 
promise, she hath given birth to the flowering rod from whence Christ, the Flower of 
our life, hath budded forth. 
Triadicon: Glory to Thee, O holy Father, unbegotten God! Glory to Thee, O 
timeless and only-begotten Son! Glory to Thee, O Spirit divine and co-enthroned, 
Who proceedest from the Father and restest in the Son!  
 
Theotokion: Thy womb became the chariot of the Sun; thy purity remained intact 
as before, O Virgin; for Christ the Sun hath appeared from thee like a Bridegroom 
from a bridal chamber.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Showing forth steadfast behavior and insurmountable intent before the tribunal, 
the martyrs plaited a crown of victory for themselves.  
Suspended, Nymphodora, who loveth the immortal Bridegroom, mightily endured 
laceration with iron claws.  
With hymns let the divinely wise virgins be praised, the thrice-radiant lamps, the 
house of three chambers, the habitations of the Trinity.  
Theotokion: Acquiring thee alone as elect, comely and immaculate, the supremely 
divine Word became incarnate from thee, O divinely joyous one.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The billows of life trouble me like the waters of the sea, * O Lover of 
Mankind. * Wherefore, like Jonah I cry unto Thee, O Word: * Raise up my life 
from corruption, O compassionate Lord. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thy chaste parents placed thee, who art holy among the saints, in the temple of 
the Lord, O pure one, to be raised with honor in preparation to become His Mother.  
Join chorus, ye barren women and mothers! Be of good cheer and leap up, O ye 
childless! For a childless and barren woman hath budded forth the Theotokos who 
delivereth Eve from her birth pangs and Adam from the curse.  
I hearken to David who singeth to thee: The virgins that follow after thee shall be 
brought into the temple of the King. And with him I also hymn thee, the daughter of 
the King.  
We hymn thy holy nativity and honor thine immaculate conception of Christ, O 
divinely chosen Bride and Virgin. And with us the ranks of angels and the souls of the 
saints glorify thee.  
Triadicon: In thee, O pure one, is the mystery of the Trinity hymned and glorified; 
for well pleased was the Father to have the Word make His abode within thee, and 
the divine Spirit to overshadow thee.  
Theotokion: Thou wast a golden candlestick, O pure Birthgiver of God, for in thy 
womb the Fire made His abode: the Word from the Holy Spirit; and He became 
visible in thee in human form.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Desiring to behold Thine inconceivable beauty, O beginningless Word, they who 
are wounded with Thy most sweet love valiantly endured the cruelty of tortures.  
The most glorious maidens blossomed like lilies in a garden, and by the grace of 
the Spirit perfume the Church with the fragrance of their divers torments.  
Desiring the immortal Bridegroom alone, the virgin maidens manifestly 
vanquished visible death, strengthened by invisible power.  
Theotokion: The holy Lord Who dwelt in thy womb found thee to be more holy 
and pure than all of creation, O Mother of God regal of name, O most pure 
Sovereign Lady.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
In thy holy nativity, O most pure one, * Joachim and Anna have been freed from 
the reproach of childlessness, * and Adam and Eve from mortal corruption. * And, 
delivered from the affliction of sin, * thy people celebrate it, crying out to thee: * A 
barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, * the nurturer of our Life!  
Ikos: The supplication of Joachim over his childlessness, together with the sighing 
of Anna over her barrenness, were right acceptable to God: they entered the ears of 

--- PAGE 9 ---
the Lord and brought forth life-bearing fruit for the world. For the one made 
supplication on the mountain, and the other bore her reproach in the garden; and 
with joy the barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, the nurturer of our Life.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Having quenched the all-consuming power of the Chaldean furnace * 
with the form of the Angel, that had descended therein, * the children cried 
out to the Creator: * Blessed and praised art Thou, O God of our fathers!  
We celebrate and bow down with faith before thy holy nativity, O pure one, 
honoring thy Son, by Whom we have now been delivered from the ancient 
condemnation of Adam.  
Now Anna maketh merry and, rendering praise, crieth aloud: Though barren, I 
have given birth unto the Mother of God, for whose sake the condemnation of Eve, 
the travail of birthgiving, hath been loosed!  
Adam hath been freed and Eve danceth; and they cry out to thee in spirit, O 
Theotokos: Through thee have we been delivered from the primeval curse by the 
appearance of Christ!  
O the womb which contained the dwelling place of God! O the womb which bore 
her who is more spacious than the heavens, the holy throne, the noetic ark of 
sanctification!  
Triadicon: We glorify-the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit in the unity of the 
Godhead, the most holy Trinity, indivisible, uncreated, equally everlasting and 
consubstantial.  
Theotokion: Most gloriously didst thou alone give birth unto God, O Virgin. By 
thy nativity thou hast renewed nature, O Mary. Thou hast released Eve from the 
primeval curse, O pure Birthgiver of God.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Ye spat upon the impious tyrant who commanded you to offer sacrifice to deaf 
idols, O maidens, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Illumined in mind with divine rays, O all-praised ones, ye darkened the gloom of 
the idols, chanting: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Neither the severing of their limbs, nor persecution, nor tribulation were in any 
wise able to separate Christ from the martyrs, who cried aloud: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: In a manner transcending nature, thou, O Virgin, wast deemed 
worthy to give birth through thy womb to the Creator Who fashioned mortals who 
chant with faith: Blessed art Thou, O God!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Thou who dost cover Thy chambers on high with the waters, * Thou 
Who hast set the sands to bound the sea * and Who upholdest all things: * the 
sun doth sing Thy praises, * the moon giveth Thee glory, * every creature 
offereth a hymn unto Thee, * as their Fashioner, throughout the ages. 
Thou, O holy God, Who wrought most glorious things through the barren womb, 
Who opened the childless womb of Anna and gave her fruit, and Thou, O Son of the 
Virgin, didst receive flesh from her, the ever-flourishing Virgin and Theotokos.  
Thou, O Lord, Who dost close the abyss and open it, Who dost raise water to the 
clouds and give rain, hast granted the holy Anna to bud forth and give birth unto the 
most pure fruit, the Theotokos, from a barren root.  
O Cultivator of our thoughts, Planter of our souls, Who hast shown forth the 
barren earth to be right fruitful, hast made the holy Anna, a field which before was 
barren, to become plentiful, right fertile and fruitful, giving rise to the Theotokos, the 
most pure fruit.  
Come ye all, let us gaze upon the city of God born as if from a little chamber, 
issuing forth from the gate of Anna’s womb, yet lacking in any knowledge of the path 
of intercourse, for the one God and Creator hath issued forth via this strange path.  
Triadicon: O transcendent Trinity, beginningless Unity, the multitude of angels 
hymneth and trembleth before Thee; heaven and earth are in awe of Thee; men bless 
Thee, and fire doth serve Thee in obedience. Everything in creation doth submit to 
Thee with fear, O holy Trinity.  
 
Theotokion:  O report most new! God hath become the Son of a woman! O 
seedless birthgiving! O Mother without a husband, O begotten God! O awesome 
sight! O, the strange conception of the Virgin! O the ineffable nativity, truly past all 
understanding and contemplation!  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
Sharpened by the love of the Creator, ye dulled the stings of the serpents, having 
taken up manly struggles in your feminine bodies; wherefore ye have been crowned 
with heavenly wreaths.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Locked together in the midst of the contest, the divinely wise maidens vanquished 
invisible and incorporeal foes with their flesh, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
Strengthened by God the Savior, made powerful by Christ Jesus, ye destroyed the 
feeble might of the enemy, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Covered with the embroidery of the wounds of your torments and adorned with 
comeliness, O right wondrous maidens, ye have received the kingdom on high, 
reigning with Christ Jesus.  
Theotokion: As the undefiled dwelling place of God, thou didst receive Him 
incarnate, known in two natures, O Maiden. To Him do we chant: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Virginity is alien to motherhood, * and childbearing is a thing strange 
to virgins: * yet in thee, O Theotokos, both have come to pass. * Therefore we, 
and all the nations of the earth, * without ceasing call thee blessed. 
Thou hast received a nativity worthy of thy purity, O Mother of God; for, 
according to the promise, thou wast given to the barren one as a fruit divinely 
springing forth. Wherefore, all we, the peoples of the earth, unceasingly magnify thee.  
I shall raise up the tabernacle of sacred David which hath fallen, which was a fore-
type of thee, O pure one, through whom the dust of all mankind hath been fashioned 
into a body for God.  
We venerate thy swaddling clothes, O Theotokos. We glorify Him Who gaveth 
fruit to her who before was barren, and Who most gloriously opened the womb of 
her who was unable to give birth. For as God, He doeth all things whatsoever He 
desireth with complete authority.  
To thee, O Theotokos who wast born of Anna, do we faithfully offer up hymnody 
as a gift, mothers and virgins glorifying thee as the only Mother and Virgin; and we 
bow down before thee and hymn and glorify thee.  
Triadicon: It is foreign for the iniquitous to glorify the beginningless Trinity: the 
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the uncreated omnipotent Principle, by Whom 
the whole world is held fast at the behest of His might.  
Theotokion: Within thy womb, O Mother, thou didst contain One of the Trinity: 
Christ the King, Whom all creation doth hymn and before Whom the ranks of 
heaven tremble. Him do thou entreat, O all-pure one, that our souls be saved.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Desiring to see the beauty of the Bridegroom, O God-bearers, as the ultimate 
gesture to Him ye received immortality in your mortal bodies. Wherefore, ye are 
worthily called blessed.  
O unblemished ewe-lambs, ye found yourselves among tormentors as among 
savage wolves; and overcoming their bestiality, ye offered yourselves to Christ as a 
right acceptable sacrifice.  
An unfading wreath of divine glory have ye woven together, O virgins, and as 
martyrs ye have been deemed worthy to receive the truly unshakable kingdom with 
the martyrs.  
O honored virgins, as ye have boldness before the Master, pray ye that those who 
keep your memory with love receive the glory of which ye have been deemed worthy 
and the exultation ye have received.  
Theotokion: Take pity on me, O Christ, when Thou comest to judge the world 
with glory. Dispel the gloom of my passions, through the prayers of her who hath 
given birth to Thee and of Thine honored martyrs, in that Thou art good and greatly 
merciful.  
Exapostilarion of the feast:  
Spec. Mel.: “O Light immutable ...”: 
She, from whom the noetic Sun hath come forth in the flesh, hath illumined the 
world today, shining forth from the womb of a barren woman. Wherefore, leaping 
up, we cry aloud: Rejoice, O Mary, thou deliverance of our forefathers!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
The only Theotokos, * the dwelling place of God, * cometh forth * from a barren 
and childless mother; ** and Adam, restored, rejoiceth.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
Today is joy born * of Anna, * heralding to the world * the abolition of the curse. 
** Rejoice ye all!  
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.  
Rejoice, O Joachim * and divinely wise Anna, * for she hath given birth * to the 
joy and gladness of the world ** and the mediatress of salvation.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV:  
The joy of the whole world hath shone forth upon us from the righteous Joachim 
and Anna: the most laudable Virgin who, because of her surpassing purity, hath 
become the animate temple of God and is known as the one true Theotokos. 
Through her prayers, O Christ God, send down peace upon the world and great 
mercy upon our souls.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia, 4 from ODE IV of the 1st canon of the feast, 
and 4 from ODE V of the 2nd canon of the feast.  
The Patriarch Jacob, clearly foreseeing the mighty works of Thy dispensation, O 
Savior, cried out in the Spirit, saying mystically to Judah: “From the tender plant thou 
art gone up, O my Son!”, referring to Thee, O God, Who wast born of the Virgin.  
Now the pure Virgin, the rod of Aaron which sprung forth from the root of 
David, cometh forth from Anna, and heaven and earth, and all the nations of the 
gentiles mystically join chorus together with Anna and Joachim.  
Let heaven now be glad; let the earth rejoice! And let Joachim and David join 
chorus: the one as the father of thee who truly hast given birth to God, and the other 
as thine ancestor who proclaimed thy mighty deeds, O pure one.  
The whole world rejoiceth with thee today, O divinely wise Anna; for thou hast 
budded forth the Mother of its Redeemer, she who from the root of David put forth 
for us the rod of strength which beareth Christ as a flower.  
Thy nativity is most pure, O immaculate Virgin, thy conception is ineffable, and 
thy birthgiving unutterable, O Bride unwedded; for God hath clothed Himself in all 
of me.  
Let the angelic ranks be glad; let the descendants of Adam join chorus; for the rod 
who alone budded forth the Flower Christ, our Redeemer, hath been born.  
Triadicon: Glory to Thee, O holy Father, unbegotten God! Glory to Thee, O 
timeless and only-begotten Son! Glory to Thee, O Spirit divine and co-enthroned, 
Who proceedest from the Father and restest in the Son!  
 
Theotokion: Thy womb became the chariot of the Sun; thy purity remained intact 
as before, O Virgin; for Christ the Sun hath appeared from thee like a Bridegroom 
from a bridal chamber.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Thy nativity, O Virgin Theotokos, * hath proclaimed joy to all the world; * for 
from thee hath shone forth Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, * Who, having 
annulled the curse, hath given His blessing, ** and having abolished death, hath 
granted us life everlasting.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Clad as sisters in the Spirit, * and having contended with endurance for the Trinity, 
* vanquished the greatly cunning enemy; * wherefore, ye have made your abode with 
the five virgins * in the heavenly bridal chamber, O passion-bearers, ** and with the 
angels ye stand in unceasing gladness before the King of all. 
  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
In thy holy nativity, O most pure one, * Joachim and Anna have been freed from 
the reproach of childlessness, * and Adam and Eve from mortal corruption. * And, 
delivered from the affliction of sin, * thy people celebrate it, crying out to thee: * A 
barren woman giveth birth to the Theotokos, * the nurturer of our Life!  
 
Prokeimenon of the feast in Tone III: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and 
my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Prokeimenon of the martyrs, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath 
the Lord been wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §233 (6: 10-17)  
Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Alleluia of the martyrs, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard 
them, and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §63 (12: 2-12)  
The Lord said: “There is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; neither hid, 
that shall not be known. Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be 
heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be 
proclaimed upon the housetops. And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of 
them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do. But I will 
forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which after he hath killed hath power to 

--- PAGE 15 ---
cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him. Are not five sparrows sold for two 
farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God? But even the very hairs of 
your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore: ye are of more value than many 
sparrows. Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the 
Son of man also confess before the angels of God: But he that denieth me before 
men shall be denied before the angels of God. And whosoever shall speak a word 
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth 
against the Holy Spirit it shall not be forgiven. And when they bring you unto the 
synagogues, and unto magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing 
ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: For the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same 
hour what ye ought to say.  
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most glorious nativity of the Mother of God!  
Irmos: Thee do we magnify, O blessed and all-pure Theotokos, * who through 
thy virginal womb ineffably brought forth * God incarnate, * the Luminary 
Who shone forth before the sun * and hath come to us in the flesh.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
Communion verse of the martyrs: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is 
meet for the upright.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
