--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 29th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER CYRIACUS THE ANCHORITE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: ‘What shall we call you ...”: 
Having curbed the passions with the bridle of abstinence, O wonderworker 
Cyriacus, thou didst robe thyself in the radiant garment of dispassion, and having laid 
bare all the malice of him who of old stripped our first parents naked; thou dost now 
make thine abode in paradise, ever rejoicing. Pray thou that our souls be saved. 
(Twice)  
Bearing the Cross upon thy shoulders, thou didst follow after Christ, scorning the 
pleasures of life with unrelenting contemplation, and having slain the passions of the 
flesh with intense vigils and prayers, thou hast been granted the grace to heal 
infirmities, O venerable one. Pray thou that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
Thou didst abide in the desert, O venerable Cyriacus, making bitter herbs thy 
food, thereby embittering thy senses, and uprooting the passions of thy soul, O 
blessed one. Wherefore, having lived angelically, thou wast granted heavenly delight 
after thy repose. Pray thou that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
We honor thee, O our father Cyriacus, instructor of a multitude of monks, for we 
have truly come to know the straight way by following thy steps. Blessed art thou; for, 
having labored for Christ, thou didst triumph over the power of the enemy, O thou 
who dost converse with angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. With 
them entreat thou the Lord to have mercy upon our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: The ewe-lamb, as she beheld the Lamb * stretched out of His 
own will upon the Tree of the Cross, * cried out maternally, * in pain with her 
weeping: * O my Son, what is this strange sight? * O Longsuffering One, how is it 
that Thou art slain, * Who, as Lord, bestoweth life upon all, * granting resurrection to 
mortals? ** I glorify Thy great condescension, O my God!  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O venerable father, report of thy corrections hath gone forth throughout all the 
earth. Wherefore, in the heavens hast thou found the reward of thy labors; having 
destroyed hordes of demons and attaining unto the ranks of the angels, whose life 
thou didst emulate blamelessly. As thou hast boldness before the Lord, beg thou 
peace for our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth birth to 
Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son How is it 
that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
A desert dweller, an angel in the flesh and a wonder-worker * wast thou revealed 
to be, O our God-bearing father Cyriacus * Receiving heavenly gifts through fasting, 
vigils and prayers, * thou healest the infirm and the souls of those who with faith 
have recourse unto thee. * Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! * Glory to 
Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him Who through thee worketh healings 
for all!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without the martyria; and the canon to the saint, in 
Tone VIII, with 6 Troparia, the composition of Stephen the Sabbaite, the acrostic 
whereof is: “O Cyriacus, be thou an intercessor before God!”  
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
Grant me grace and the glory of divine knowledge, O Christ, that by the prayers of 
the venerable Cyriacus I may fittingly hymn him, for Thou art the ineffable Treasury 
of wise teachings.  
O blessed Cyriacus, compassionately accepting me who now offers thee a hymn, 
entreat Christ, that I may partake of divine radiance and illumination and receive 
salvation.  
Firmly established by the power of the Master, and following in His footsteps, O 
father, thou didst vanquish the princes of darkness and attain unto the resting place 
on high, O all-blessed Cyriacus:  
Having subjected all the wisdom of thy flesh to the life-bearing Spirit, on earth 
thou didst show forth a life like unto that of the bodiless ones. Wherefore, with them 
thou dost now hold chorus in the courts of heaven, O God-bearer.  
Theotokion: With hymns, O ye faithful, let us praise the most pure Mary, the 
grace-endowed Mother of God, the divine shelter, the calm haven, the salvation of all 
the faithful  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as our God, 
* Whom the whole of creation doth hymn: * There is none more righteous 
than Thee, O Lord. 
Unceasingly traveling along the path of life, from childhood thou didst love thy 
Creator, O venerable one, and, thirsting for Him, thou didst run like a hart unto 
streams of water and find Him.  
O divinely eloquent one, having received, like a living book, texts on the tablet of 
thy heart, inscribed by the finger of the Spirit, thou didst verily preserve the living 
commandments of Christ.  
O venerable one, having restrained thy stomach in fasting, thou didst slay carnal 
pleasure and gluttonous desires, living all thy life in purity, O father.  
In gladness didst thou make thyself a rational temple for the Trinity, cleansing thy 
mind, body and soul, O thrice-blessed one; and thou didst become a receptacle of the 
light of the threefold Sun.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: O Mary Theotokos, O Virgin who knewest not wedlock, thou didst 
give birth, and, unwedded, remained a Virgin, O Mother. Entreat Christ our God that 
we be saved.  
 Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”:  
The sacred Lavra, ever honoring thee as a mighty champion and defender, * doth 
yearly celebrate thy commemoration. * But, as thou hast boldness before the Lord, * 
preserve us from assailing enemies, that we may cry aloud: ** Rejoice, O thrice-
blessed one!  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word...”:  
Thou didst adorn thy life with abstinence and, having slain thy members, didst 
vanquish the assaults of the enemy, O venerable father, and wast shown to be a 
desert dweller and a noetic beacon unto the world. Wherefore, beseech the Lord, that 
He have mercy on our souls. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V:  
Finding thee to be a haven, a bulwark, a refuge, our hope, protection and fervent 
help, we, the faithful, hasten to thee and cry out earnestly, exclaiming with faith: Have 
mercy upon those who place their trust in thee, O Theotokos, and deliver us from 
transgressions.  
Stavrotheotokion: Through the Cross of thy Son, * O thou who art full of the 
grace of God, * hath the deception of idolatry been utterly vanquished, * and the 
might of the demons hath fallen; * wherefore, we, the faithful, ever hymn and bless 
thee as is meet, ** confessing thee to be the true Theotokos.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
The sun shuddered at thine abstinence and strength, and was in no wise saw thee 
angered through many years, O venerable one, for thou didst not partake of food by 
day, but right mightily kept vigil, chanting: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Taught by the knowledge of men wise in the new, and the old covenant, O wise 
one, and acquiring the qualities of every virtue, and emulating the wise bee, thou didst 
become a chosen vessel, and cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
O Christ God, Thou art a wealth of sweetness, and the glory and joy of the 
venerable. Therefore, Cyriacus, loving Thee, reckoned all consolations in the world 
but dung. Therefore he lovingly delighted in Thy beauty, living in impassible deserts.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
I know of the most sweet waters of Marah of the prophet of old; and thou, O 
Cyriacus, who transformed the bitter poison of grasses into sweet food, hast 
manifestly shown similar boldness before the Lord, Who doth truly glorify His ser-
vants with divine power.  
As a disciple and emulator of Christ the Master, O father, thou didst heal the 
lunatic son of the slave with prayer, having received the grace to drive away infirmities 
and to cast down hordes of demons with the sign of the divine Cross.  
Theotokion: O unwedded one, thou art the boast of the faithful! Thou art our 
intercessor! Thou art the refuge, rampart and haven of Christians, for thou dost bear 
entreaty to thy Son, O all-immaculate one, and dost save from misfortunes those who 
with faith and love glorify thee as the pure Theotokos.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Receiving from Christ the invincible grace of the Spirit, thou didst mightily cast 
down the cruel ruler of this world, and, restraining the passions of thy soul, O 
Cyriacus, thou wast crowned with a crown of dispassion.  
Thou didst show thyself to be strong, steadfastly enduring the pangs of fasting, 
remaining unyielding even unto the most profound old age, living with much gladness 
in the deserts as if in the chamber of a royal palace, O venerable one.  
Keeping all-night vigils and approaching God lacking all pride, thou didst converse 
in prayer with the immaterial Mind, O Cyriacus, and received brilliant rays of light, 
being radiantly illumined in mind.  
Full of splendor and the gift of prophecy, O venerable one, thy pure tongue 
foretold of old the nearly complete destruction of the error of Origen, that deranged 
and soul-destroying man.  
Theotokion: The company of prophets came to know thy mysteries, O pure one, 
for the Master hath shown thee to be the portal of heaven; and the Sun of 
righteousness, Who was incarnate of thee, O Virgin, hath shone forth upon those 
who are in darkness.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Becoming a god by adoption through deification by Christ, Who is God in 
essence, O blessed one, thou didst set aright the sufferings of natural disability, 
healing infirmities and straightway curing the demonized with divine grace.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou didst flee the multitude of peoples who approached thee, and didst seek out 
yet more remote ravines, avoiding the empty praises of human glory.  
Looking upon all the glory of the corrupt world as a dream, thou didst love the 
better glories of the only living God, O wise one, and wast rightly deemed worthy to 
be a partaker thereof.  
Theotokion: As an animate ark thou didst receive the beginningless Word; as a 
holy sanctuary thou didst contain the Creator; as a fiery throne thou dost bear the 
Master of all creation, O Mother of God.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Having divinely armed thyself with spiritual purity * and having mightily taken up 
unceasing prayer as a spear, * thou didst mow down legions of demons, * O Cyriacus 
our father. ** Pray thou unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
Ikos: How shall I praise thy struggles, wretch that I am, O venerable father? How 
shall I pour forth a torrent of tears? For, soaring aloft in thy life, thou didst reach the 
choirs of angels. Truly thou didst slay all the passions by abstinence, O wise one, and, 
having enslaved thy flesh, subjected it to thy spirit. And, possessed of the sword of 
prayer, thou didst set at naught the prince of darkness. Pray thou unceasingly on 
behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Thy most faithful favorite delighted himself with the teaching of divinely inspired 
laws and words more than with honey, chanting: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, 
throughout the ages!  
O divinely eloquent and blessed one, thou dost lead to Christ those who hymn 
thee, O Cyriacus, and cleansed of the filth of the passions by thy prayers, they cry 
aloud saying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
Daniel, escaping the ferocity of the lions, was glorified; but Cyriacus, commanding 
them, had them as servants, and he cried to Thee: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, 
throughout the ages!  
All the grace of the Spirit didst thou cause to dwell in Cyriacus, for he became an 
adorer of Thy most pure beauty, crying out to Thee with all his soul: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
Trinitarian: Augmenting contemplation with action, thou didst preach the Essence 
in three Hypostases: the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, O God-pleasing 
Cyriacus, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: O Mother of God, quench the flame of my passions and subdue the 
tempest of heresies; for we Christians have thee as our intercessor and champion, and 
thee do we hymn with faith throughout the ages.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
With streams of tears didst thou water thy sacred soul, O blessed one, and didst 
show it forth as fertile, chanting: All ye works, bless the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout the ages!  
The Tishbite of old dried up the showers of rain with drought; but thou, O all-
blessed one, didst call down a downpour of rain for the growth of crops, chanting: 
All ye works, bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
The inglorious disciples of Origen, the trifler and recounter of fables, didst thou 
denounce by thy mighty struggles, chanting: Bless ye the Lord in Orthodox manner, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Trinitarian: O father, thou didst piously teach the one Essence of the Trinity in 
three Suns as a single ray and radiance, saying: Bless ye the Lord in an Orthodox 
manner, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou art shown to be a daughter of fallen Adam and the 
Mother of God, Who hath renewed my being. O all ye works hymn and supremely 
exalt Him as Lord throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
O wise one, a cave received thee, who had received the fountain of grace from the 
divine father Chariton, who of old worked wonders like Moses; and thou wast an 
immovable pillar and a most steadfast protector of thy flock.  
Verily taking the Cross upon thy shoulders with the love of the divine life, O 
Cyriacus, thou didst make life an exercise in dying. Wherefore, now, having passed on 
to the incorrupt delight that waneth not, thou dost ever hold chorus with the 
heavenly choirs in the light of God’s presence.  
Resplendent with brilliance kindled by the Spirit, thou wast revealed to be a 
luminary of the choirs on high. Illumine my mind with the noetic and thrice-radiant 
light of the Godhead by thy prayers, O blessed one, and save me from passions and 
transgressions.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Crowned with a diadem of victory, O divinely eloquent Chariton and blessed Cyri-
acus, ye stand in the highest before Christ. Paternally delivering us from misfortunes, 
mercifully regard your flock as it celebrates your memory.  
Theotokion: Draw Thy bow, and prosper, and reign, O Son of the Mother of 
God, subjecting the Ishmaelite foe, which doth battle against us, to all Christ-loving 
believers, we pray, through the prayers of her who gave birth to Thee without having 
known a man, in that Thou art God and the Lover of mankind.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
Having cleansed thy soul of the darkness of the passions by intense fasting and 
unceasing prayer, O father, thou didst become a mirror of divine splendors, sending 
exaltations upon us now, O God-bearing Cyriacus, beacon of monks.  
Theotokion: Saved by thee, O Lady, we confess thee to be truly the Theotokos, 
for thou didst give birth ineffably unto God, Who destroyed death by His Cross and 
hath drawn to Himself the assemblies of the venerable. With them do we praise thee, 
O Virgin.  
On the Aposticha: Glory ..., in Tone V: 
O venerable father, thou gavest neither sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine 
eyelids, until thou didst free soul and body from the passions and didst prepare 
thyself as a dwelling place for the Spirit. For, when Christ was come with the Father, 
He made of thee an abode. As thou wast a favorite of the Trinity, one in Essence, O 
great preacher, Cyriacus our father, pray thou on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
When she beheld the unplanted Cluster, which she had put forth as a Shoot, 
hanging upon the Tree, His divine side pierced by a spear, she said: “What is this, O 
my Son and God? How is it that Thou dost accept suffering, Who hast healed all 
infirmities and passions, being in Thy divinity dispassionate by nature? What have 
these ungrateful people rendered unto Thee, their Benefactor, for all the good Thou 
hast done them?” the most pure one cried aloud. But pray thou unceasingly that He 
deliver me from my passions by His sufferings, that I may glorify thee.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 4 Troparia from the Oktoechos; and 4 from ODE III of the 
canon of the venerable one.  
Unceasingly traveling along the path of life, from childhood thou didst love thy 
Creator, O venerable one, and, thirsting for Him, thou didst run like a hart unto 
streams of water and find Him.  
O divinely eloquent one, having received, like a living book, texts on the tablet of 
thy heart, inscribed by the finger of the Spirit, thou didst verily preserve the living 
commandments of Christ.  
O venerable one, having restrained thy stomach in fasting, thou didst slay carnal 
pleasure and gluttonous desires, living all thy life in purity, O father.  
Theotokion: O Mary Theotokos, O Virgin who knewest not wedlock, thou didst 
give birth, and, unwedded, remained a Virgin, O Mother. Entreat Christ our God that 
we be saved.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
A desert dweller, an angel in the flesh and a wonder-worker * wast thou revealed 
to be, O our God-bearing father Cyriacus * Receiving heavenly gifts through fasting, 
vigils and prayers, * thou healest the infirm and the souls of those who with faith 
have recourse unto thee. * Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! * Glory to 
Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him Who through thee worketh healings 
for all!  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Having divinely armed thyself with spiritual purity * and having mightily taken up 
unceasing prayer as a spear, * thou didst mow down legions of demons, * O Cyriacus 
our father. ** Pray thou unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE GALATIANS (5:22-6:2)  
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Alleluia, in tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
READING FROM THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (6:17-23)  
At that time: Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and 
Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that were 
vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to 
touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his 
eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. 
Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: 
for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall 
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as 
evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, 
your reward is great in heaven.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
