--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 28th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY PASSION-BEARER, THE RIGHT-BELIEVING 
PRINCE WENCESLAUS OF BOHEMIA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the passion-bearer: 3 in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
All-splendidly adorned more than the sun with thrice radiant beams, thou hast 
shone forth upon those in tribulations, O most wondrous Wenceslaus, releasing those 
unjustly bound and dispelling every illness from those who with faith cry out for thine 
aid and with love hymn thy most honored dormition. (Twice)  
Come, all ye faithful, and let us spiritually celebrate today the most wondrous 
memory of Wenceslaus, the servant of Christ; for, forsaking his corruptible earthly 
governance, he received the kingdom of heaven, and surrendered his most holy soul 
this day into the hands of the Master, glorifying the Lord Who hath made his memory 
wondrous.  
And 3 Stichera, in the same tone: 
 Spec. Mel.: “The paradise in Eden ...”: 
Led by love of the calling of the Most High, thou didst come to the Church of 
Christ, O most blessed one, from which thou didst receive a royal crown which is 
incorrupt and passeth not away; and thou wast illumined thereby like the setting of 
the sun, emitting rays of miracles upon the northern lands, which hymn thine all-
praised memory, O invincible and holy Wenceslaus. (Twice) 
With the shedding of thy most pure blood, O all-praised Wenceslaus, thou hast 
adorned the Church of Christ as with a robe of royal purple; and resplendent therein, 
it gathereth all lands into a choir to celebrate with splendor thy most holy memory, 
and to cry out with faith unto the Creator of all: Glory to Thee, O Christ, Who hath 
made wondrous the memory of Thy saint!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Assembling today, with joyful voices let us glorify the martyred Prince Wenceslaus, 
wondrous in piety, the tower of strength and foundation of the Church of Bohemia, 
who was treacherously slain for his love of the most holy Trinity; and, crowning him 
with hymns of praise, let us join chorus together, celebrating his sacred memory, and 
saying: O holy spiritual athlete of Christ, intercede before Him for thy much-suffering 
people, and for every nation that honoreth thee, that we all may be saved!  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the passion-bearer, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Assembling, let us praise the great helper of those in misfortune, for he hath 
received from Christ the Savior the gift of grace: to deliver the oppressed, to console 
the grieving, and to heal every infirmity of those who with faith cry out for aid and 
with love celebrate his most wondrous feast.  
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Unto God, Who is wondrous in His saints, let us render glory and thanks for 
bestowing upon His holy martyr Wenceslaus the gift of healings and divers miracles; 
for, though reigning over an earthly kingdom, he ever fixed the gaze of his soul upon 
the eternal kingdom of heaven. Wherefore, we honor his sacred memory with faith 
and venerate his precious relics.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, * in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
Raised in piety from infancy by thy grandmother, the holy martyr Lyudmila, thou 
didst grow in both wisdom and stature, dedicating thyself to the Holy Church of the 
Lord; and when thou didst come to thy throne, thou didst multiply and increase the 
temples and monasteries of thy realm, encouraging thy subjects to forsake their 
heathen beliefs and ways, and embrace the Holy Orthodox Faith, the path which 
leadeth to salvation.  
Glory ..., in Tone III:  
Striving to please God Who is wondrous in His saints, thou didst love the saints of 
God more than earthly riches and power. For when the emperor of Germany offered 
to grant thee whatsoever thou mightest desire, thou didst not ask for lands or castles, 
or for gold or jewels, O holy Wenceslaus, but didst humbly request a portion of the 
relics of the martyr Vitus, to serve as an ornament for the Church of Bohemia more 
precious than any gem. And unto God and His martyr thou didst erect in Prague a 
magnificent cathedral, where thine own holy remains also rest. Pray thou, O God-
pleasing Wenceslaus, that all who venerate them and flee to thine intercession may 
find mercy from the Lord.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
By the will of the Father and without seed * thou didst conceive through the 
divine Spirit the Son of God * Who hath existed from the Father without a mother 
from before the ages, * and Who for our sake came forth from Thee in the flesh 
without a father, * and Him hast thou suckled as a babe. * Wherefore, cease not to 
beseech Him, ** that our souls be delivered from tribulations. 
Troparion of the passion-bearer, in Tone IV:  
Today angels and men share a common joy. * Heaven and earth join together in 
splendid chorus for thy memorial, O holy one. * And we sinners earnestly cry aloud 
unto thee: * Pray thou to the Master on our behalf, * that from dangers and from 
visible and invisible foes, * He may deliver us ** who honor thine all-honored 
memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the passion-bearer, in Tone IV:  
Today angels and men share a common joy. * Heaven and earth join together in 
splendid chorus for thy memorial, O holy one. * And we sinners earnestly cry aloud 
unto thee: * Pray thou to the Master on our behalf, * that from dangers and from 
visible and invisible foes, * He may deliver us ** who honor thine all-honored 
memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Grounded firmly in Orthodox piety, thou didst reign with mercy and love for thy 
people, uprooting from among them crimes of murder, and moving them to forsake 
the madness of idolatry. Wherefore, thou hast received recompense in the heavens 
for thy works of love and devotion on earth.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
O most holy Virgin, thou hope of Christians, with the heavenly hosts unceasingly 
entreat God, to Whom thou hast given birth in a manner transcending understanding 
and all telling, that He grant the remission of all sins and amendment of life unto 
those who ever glorify thee with faith and love.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The, co-beginningless Word ...”: 
The malice of the enemy of the human race inspired thy jealous and ambitious 
brother to slay thee, O Wenceslaus. And, proffering a feigned hospitality, he invited 
thee to his home, where his accursed minions fall upon thee with knives. But Christ 
God hath glorified thee with miracles, O wondrous martyr.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
O pure Ever-virgin, thou fervent and invincible intercessor, excellent and 
unashamed hope, rampart, protection and refuge of those who have recourse unto 
thee: with the angels entreat thy Son and God, that He grant peace, salvation and 
great mercy to the world.  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without the Martyria; and this canon of the saint, 
with 6 Troparia, in Tone VI:  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
O ye faithful, with joy let us join chorus, hymning the Savior with radiant souls, on 
the most wondrous memorial of Wenceslaus, the servant of Christ!  
Slain unjustly like an innocent lamb, thou didst emulate the sufferings of the 
Master, O glorious one; wherefore, thou dost now rejoice with the choirs of the 
martyrs, O thou who art blessed of God.  
Receiving a death which won thee life, thou standest now in glory before the 
Master of all. Pray thou that we who keep thy most wondrous memory may also 
obtain it, O holy one.  
Who can tell of the countless wonders which thou workest in the world, O 
glorious one? For thou dost continually grant healing in abundance unto all the 
faithful.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, raise me up who have fallen among thieves 
through my soul-destroying deeds and am drowning in death. I pray thee: Entreat thy 
Son and God for me.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Thou didst ever burn with Christian love for the Holy Church, O most blessed 
one, where, like an innocent lamb, thou didst look forward to thine unjust slaughter.  
Adorned with thy most splendid blood, thy Church emitteth the radiant beams of 
miracles, hymning thy memory, O right glorious one.  
Enlightened from childhood by the rays of the Trinity, O venerable one, thou 
didst become an heir of Christ. Him do thou entreat, that He send peace unto our 
souls.  
Theotokion: Thy divine birthgiving doth transcend every other miracle, O pure 
one; for, having conceived in thy womb and given birth unto the transcendent God, 
thou didst remain Ever-virgin.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Seeking to prevent thee from ascending thy throne, the enemies of the Orthodox 
Faith murdered thy pious grandmother, the saintly Lyudmila, that she might no 
longer guide thee with Christian counsel; yet so well grounded wast thou by her in 

--- PAGE 6 ---
reverence for things divine and in love for Christ, that her martyrdom in nowise 
moved thee from thy sacred purpose, and the wiles of thine enemies served only to 
strengthen thee in thy resolve, and to gain for the Holy Church another martyr in 
heaven.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Lovingly raised in the pure Faith from childhood, by thy pure works thou didst 
lovingly follow the Master and put His false enemy to shame by thy hope.  
Shining with radiance, O holy Wenceslaus, by thy supplications enlighten those 
who are darkened by sins, for with the choirs of the martyrs thou hast boldness to 
pray for us.  
Cut down by the sword, O invincible saint, thou didst cut down the wicked foe 
with the sword of patience; wherefore, thou hast received a crown from the hand of 
the Almighty.  
Theotokion: Truly the mysteries of thy divine birthgiving are ineffable and 
unattainable for those on earth and those in heaven, O Ever-virgin Theotokos.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Having received through thy sufferings the life which is devoid of pain, O all-
praised and holy Wenceslaus, thou hast been shown to be a help for all who suffer 
and with faith call upon thee for aid.  
With the most radiant beams of thy miracles thou hast enlightened the north, the 
south and the west more than the sun, O blessed one; wherefore, illumine us who 
celebrate thy memory, O saint.  
Thou wast a helper of those amid misfortunes, the sustainer of the poor, and the 
comfort of the grieving; wherefore, even after thy death, O holy one, thou dost 
deliver all who with faith call upon thee for help.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: O good Sovereign Lady of creation, save those who with all their soul 
confess thee to be the Theotokos; for we have thee, who art truly the Theotokos, as 
our help, O immaculate one.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Having acquired a pure life through fasting, O most wondrous Wenceslaus, thou 
hast been revealed to be a fellow citizen with the angels. With them pray thou for the 
salvation of our souls.  
Forsaking a transitory earthly princedom, and receiving a royal adornment from 
the right hand of the Master, thou didst acquire through corruptible things that which 
is eternal, in that thou art wise.  
O holy one, accept praise from the accursed lips of one who is unable to fashion 
worthy praises for thee, and entreat the merciful God, that He grant us great mercy.  
Theotokion: O most pure Lady who for mortals gave birth to the Helmsman and 
Lord, confound my wicked lusts, and grant serenity unto my heart.  
Kontakion of the passion-bearer, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of the angels ...”: 
Standing with the choirs of the angels, * O blessed Prince Wenceslaus, * thou 
delightest in divine and ineffable goodness; * and drawing thence the goodly gifts of 
miracles, * thou pourest forth abundant cures upon all ** who with faith flee to thy 
holiness.  
Ikos: Great is the consternation of the enemy of our salvation! For, seeking to 
destroy the Christian Faith which was planted in Bohemia by the pious Borivoy and 
the holy Lyudmila, he instilled within the accursed Prince Boleslaus the treacherous 
intention to murder his godly brother, the holy Prince Wenceslaus, and thus unjustly 
to seize his throne. Yet the Savior bestowed upon His martyr so great an abundance 
of the grace of miracles that the people of Bohemia were amazed and hastened to be 
enlightened. Thus the machinations of the devil were utterly foiled, and the Holy 
Orthodox Church grew and thrived. And even to this day the precious relics of the 
martyr pour forth an abundance of cures upon all who with faith flee to his holiness.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
The ancient malefactor envied thy sacred life and incited the mindless brigand to 
slay thee; but with a pure conscience thou didst unceasingly cry out to thy Creator: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Prague, thy most glorious city, danceth with gladness today, honoring thy memory, 
and, radiantly emitting thy miracles, it calleth the whole land to cry aloud: Blessed is 
the God of our fathers!  
Through the deception of the wicked one, of old the ground was stained by the 
hand of Cain, who slew his own brother; but sprinkled now with blood, it offereth 
sacrifices of sweet savor unto Christ, crying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Through thee, O Virgin, Light hath shone forth upon those in 
darkness, for thou hast given birth to the Creator and God of all. Him do thou 
beseech, O most pure one, that He ever send down great mercy upon us, the faithful.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Sanctified from on high by rays of grace, O most glorious one, thou didst shine 
forth more brightly than the sun in the land of Bohemia with the beauties of gladness, 
supremely exalting Christ throughout the ages.  
Receiving thy holy body today, O blessed one, Prague, thine all-praised city, 
proclaimeth thy most wondrous miracles unto all the world, supremely exalting Christ 
throughout the ages.  
Adorned with meekness and illumined with a proper understanding of Orthodoxy, 
O most wondrous one, thou wast truly shown to be a herald of the most holy Trinity, 
supremely exalting Christ throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: Thou didst ineffably conceive and give birth unto the Transcendent 
One, the Word, the Bestower of light, Who is begotten of Light, O Virgin, for the 
Spirit of God made His abode within thee. Wherefore, we hymn thee, O pure one, 
throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Thou wast deemed worthy of great grace, O glorious one, and hast illumined the 
whole world, granting healings in abundance unto all.  
Accept the joy of the angels, O holy one, and, standing before thy Creator, pray for 
us who magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Thou hast now received blessed repose, O most glorious one. Cease thou never to 
pray that those who magnify thee may continually share in holy blessedness.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, who after the word of the archangel hast given 
birth to thy Creator in a manner beyond all telling, entreat Him, that our souls be 
saved.  
Exapostilarion of the passion-bearer:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
From the earth thou hast approached the Master, O most blessed Wenceslaus. 
Come thou now in spirit, and with thy mercy visit those who today chant thine 
honored celebration.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Virgin who hast given birth to the hypostatic Wisdom, the transcendent Word, 
the Physician of souls and bodies, heal thou the cruel and long-standing infection and 
wounds of my soul, and ease the pangs of my heart.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the passion-bearer, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Rejoicing, thou dwellest on high, having lived on earth for thy Lord alone, and 
thou joinest chorus with the incorporeal hosts before His awesome throne, praising 
Him as the almighty King of all, and interceding for us who honor thy memory and 
venerate thy precious relics with faith.  
Having loved the Lord thy God above all else, and thy neighbor as thyself, thou 
wast slaughtered by thine own brother, and hast joined thy pious grandmother in 
heaven, where with her thou prayest for thy native land, that all its people may find 
salvation in the Orthodox Faith.  
Emulating our merciful Savior, Who for our salvation deigned to be nailed to the 
Cross, with thy dying breath thou didst recall the words He uttered on the Tree, 
saying: “Brother, may God forgive thee!” Wherefore, reigning now with Christ in His 
kingdom on high, thou dost ever delight in the vision of the ineffable light of His 
countenance.  
Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel! Yea, precious is their death in 
His sight! For, slaughtered unjustly by the swords of thy brother’s ungodly minions, 
thou hast won eternal life; and, well-pleased by thy virtuous life and undeserved death 
for His sake, the Lord hath bestowed upon thee the grace of miracles.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
O marvelous wonder! The machinations of the evil one have been set at naught! 
For when the father of lies inspired the impious Boleslaus to murder his own brother, 
the godly Wenceslaus, he caused him to reign on high with the King of all, and 
provided for the faithful of the Church of Bohemia a heavenly intercessor and 

--- PAGE 10 ---
mediator, who with the holy martyr Vitus ever entreateth the Lord of hosts, that He 
take pity upon his people, and preserve them unshaken in the Orthodox Faith, and 
grant them His great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the passion-bearer.  
Thou didst ever burn with Christian love for the Holy Church, O most blessed 
one, where, like an innocent lamb, thou didst look forward to thine unjust slaughter. 
(Twice) 
Adorned with thy most splendid blood, thy Church emitteth the radiant beams of 
miracles, hymning thy memory, O right glorious one.  
Enlightened from childhood by the rays of the Trinity, O venerable one, thou 
didst become an heir of Christ. Him do thou entreat, that He send peace unto our 
souls.  
Having acquired a pure life through fasting, O most wondrous Wenceslaus, thou 
hast been revealed to be a fellow citizen with the angels. With them pray thou for the 
salvation of our souls.  
Forsaking a transitory earthly princedom, and receiving a royal adornment from 
the right hand of the Master, thou didst acquire through corruptible things that which 
is eternal, in that thou art wise.  
O holy one, accept praise from the accursed lips of one who is unable to fashion 
worthy praises for thee, and entreat the merciful God, that He grant us great mercy.  
Theotokion: O most pure Lady who for mortals gave birth to the Helmsman and 
Lord, confound my wicked lusts, and grant serenity unto my heart.  
Troparion of the passion-bearer, in Tone IV:  
Today angels and men share a common joy. * Heaven and earth join together in 
splendid chorus for thy memorial, O holy one. * And we sinners earnestly cry aloud 
unto thee: * Pray thou to the Master on our behalf, * that from dangers and from 
visible and invisible foes, * He may deliver us ** who honor thine all-honored 
memory.  
Kontakion of the passion-bearer, in Tone I:  
Standing with the choirs of the angels, * O blessed Prince Wenceslaus, * thou 
delightest in divine and ineffable goodness; * and drawing thence the goodly gifts of 
miracles, * thou pourest forth abundant cures upon all ** who with faith flee to thy 
holiness.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, § 17 (ACTS 6: 8-15; 7: 1-5,47-60) 
In those days, Stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles 
among the people. Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the 
synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia 
and of Asia, disputing with Stephen. And they were not able to resist the wisdom and 
the spirit by which he spake. Then they suborned men, who said: “We have heard 
him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and against God.” And they stirred up 
the people, and the elders, and the scribes, and came upon him, and caught him, and 
brought him to the council, and set up false witnesses, who said: “This man ceaseth 
not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and the law: for we have 
heard him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change 
the customs which Moses delivered us. And all who sat in the council, looking stead-
fastly on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an angel. Then said the high 
priest: “Are these things so?” And he said: “Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken; the 
God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, 
before he dwelt in Charran, and said unto him: ‘Get thee out of thy country, and from 
thy kindred, and come into the land which I shall shew thee.’ Then came he out of 
the land of the Chaldeans, and dwelt in Charran: and from thence, when his father 
was dead, he removed him into this land, wherein ye now dwell. And He gave him 
none inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on: Solomon built him a 
house. Howbeit the most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands; as saith the 
prophet: ‘Heaven is my throne, and earth is My footstool: what house will ye build 
Me?’ saith the Lord”: or “What is the place of My rest? Hath not my hand made all 
these things?” Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist 
the Holy Spirit: as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the prophets have; not your 
fathers persecuted? and they have slain those who showed before of the coming of 
the Just One; of Whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers: who have 
received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it.” When they heard 
these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their teeth. But 
he, being full of the Holy Spirit, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory 
of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, and said: “Behold, I see the 
heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God!” Then they 
cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one 
accord, and cast him out of the city, and stoned him: and the witnesses laid down 
their clothes at a young man’s feet, whose name was Saul. And they stoned Stephen, 
calling upon God, and saying: “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!” And he kneeled down, 
and cried with a loud voice: “Lord, lay not this sin to their charge!” And when he had 
said this, he fell asleep.  
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, and like 
a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our God 
they shall blossom forth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 52 (JN. 15: 17-16: 2)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “These things I command you, that ye love one 
another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated Me before it hated you. If ye 
were of the world, the world would love its own: but because ye are not of the world, 
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember 
the word that I said unto you: The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have 
persecuted Me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept My saying, they will 
keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for My name’s sake, 
because they know not Him Who sent me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, 
they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin. He that hateth me 
hateth My Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other 
man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both Me and 
My Father. But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in 
their law: They hated Me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, Whom I 
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, Who proceedeth from 
the Father, he shall testify of Me. And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been 
with Me from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye-should not 
be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that 
whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
