--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 21st DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, DEMETRIUS, 
METROPOLITAN OF ROSTOV, THE WONDERWORKER  
THE LEAVETAKING OF THE EXALTATION OF THE HOLY CROSS  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
As thou wast faithful in a little, O Demetrius, the Lord set thee over many; and 
thou hast entered into the joy of thy Lord, where, standing before Him, thou dost 
pray on behalf of our souls. (Twice)  
Thou didst dedicate thy childhood to learning, thy youth to the struggles of 
monasticism, and thy manhood to the benefit of all; wherefore we all now honor thee 
among the saints. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in the same tone  
As thou didst forsake the world and all the beautiful things in it, so didst thou 
forsake thy rule over the brethren, and didst make thine abode again in Kiev, nigh 
unto the cave, from whence by thy labors thou didst produce for us the pearl of the 
lives of the saints.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VI:  
Today, from the impenetrable bosom of the earth the shoot of life hath been put 
forth, and it announceth the Resurrection of Christ Who was nailed thereto; and, 
lifted up by priestly hands, it proclaimeth His ascension to Heaven, whereby our 
nature, which was bound to the earth by the fall, doth now dwell in the heavens. 
Wherefore, in thanksgiving we cry aloud: O Lord Who wast lifted up thereon and 
thereby raised us up with Thyself: grant us Thy heavenly joys, since Thou lovest 
mankind.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Come, ye children of the Church of Russia, let us bless our teacher, who instructed 
us during his lifetime and edifieth us after his death, for he is honored as the good 
shepherd of our souls.  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of heart shall be of 
understanding.  
The great hierarch Demetrius, the divinely inspired instrument of the all-holy 
Spirit, the denouncer of vain-minded schisms, who poureth forth a stream of the 
grace of God from his much-healing relics, and doth unceasingly mediate and pray to 
God for our souls.  
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Hearkening to the voice of the Lord calling thee to Himself, O Demetrius, thou 
wast prepared for thy departure from this life. Thou didst not slumber in the evening 
or at midnight, at daybreak or in the morning, waiting for the Lord to come to thee, 
until, meeting Him, thou didst enter unto Him in everlasting joy; and there, standing 
before Him, thou prayest that He grant unto us a life of holiness and a Christian end.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Rejoice, O Demetrius, thou boast of hierarchs, glory of priests, rule of monks and 
confirmation of the Church.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VI: 
Today the Tree hath appeared! Today the Jewish race hath perished! Today the 
Faith hath been revealed by faithful hierarchs. Adam fell because of a tree, but the 
demons are made to tremble again by the Tree; O almighty Lord, glory be to Thee!  
After “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...”;  
The Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O lover of Orthodoxy and uprooter of schisms, * healer of Russia and new 
advocate before God: * by thy writings thou didst heal the minds of the foolish. * O 
blessed Demetrius, thou harp of the Spirit, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls be 
saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 4 of the feast, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Raised on high, * the Cross exhorteth all creation * to hymn the most pure 
Passion * of Him who was lifted up thereon. * For thereon having slain him that slew 
us, * in that He is merciful, * He gave life unto the dead, * and in the exceeding 
greatness of His goodness * He hath made them beautiful and deemed them worthy 
to live in the heavens. * Wherefore, rejoicing, * we exalt His name, ** and magnify 
His extreme condescension. (Twice) 
Moses prefigured Thee, * stretching forth his arms on high, * and vanquished the 
tyrant Amalek, * O precious Cross, boast of the faithful, * confirmation of sufferers, 
* savior of all the venerable. * Wherefore, creation, * beholding thee lifted up, is 
gladdened, * and keepeth festival, glorifying Christ, * Who through thee * hath 
gathered the dispersed ** in His extreme goodness. 
O most precious Cross, * who art today exalted, * and about whom the ranks of 
angels stand in gladness, * by divine command thou dost uplift all * who for the 
stealing of the fruit * were driven out and were sunk in death. * Wherefore, we, the 
faithful, * venerating thee with hearts and lips, * derive from thee sanctification, * 
crying aloud: Exalt ye Christ, * the supremely good God, ** and worship His divine 
footstool. 
Two Stichera of the saint, in the same melody:  
On earth, O holy Demetrius, * thou didst strive to make that which is base * 
subject to that which is higher, * and to make the flesh * subject to the spirit; * 
wherefore, thou didst receive * the arch-pastoral staff, * wherewith thou didst 
shepherd well those * who were right submissive, * and didst drive far away the 
disobedient. * And now standing in the heavens as a priest, ** thou dost join chorus 
with the angels. 
During thy lifetime, * O holy hierarch Demetrius, * thou didst gird thy loins with 
love, * and, putting trust in Christ * on thy feet as though shoes, * thou didst adorn 
the lamp of faith * with the oil of good works; * wherefore with the wise, * thou hast 
entered into the bridal-chamber of heaven, * where, standing before Christ the 
Master, * do thou pray that, when the cry cometh at midnight, ** we may be ready to 
go forth to meet Him.  
Two Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Having adorned thy soul * with the virtues, * and finished the race of this 
transitory life * in the fear of God, * thou hast found grace before God, * O holy 
Demetrius; * and, standing now before the throne * of the Lord, ** pray thou that 
our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
O good shepherd, * fervent emulator of the Good Shepherd, the Son of God: * 
hearken unto us sinners, * who call thine unceasing mediation to our aid, * and 
entreat the all-merciful God on our behalf, * that we may escape all evils and perils, * 
and receive eternal blessedness, * O holy hierarch Demetrius, ** that with thee we 
may glorify and hymn the Holy Trinity.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
With praises let us bless the holy hierarch Demetrius, the great bishop, the 
Chrysostom of Russia, who, having been made a chosen vessel of the all-holy Spirit, 
hath been revealed to be a member of the choir of the friends of God! And he 
prayeth that peace and length of days be granted to all Orthodox Christians, victory 
and triumph over their enemies, might to their native lands, and great mercy to the 
world.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone II:  
Come, all ye nations, let us worship the blessed Tree whereby everlasting 
righteousness hath come to be; for he who by the tree deceived our forefather Adam, 
is himself deceived by the Cross, and he who by tyranny held fast the royal house, 
falleth, cast down by a strange fall. By the Blood of God the venom of the serpent is 
washed away, and the curse of the just condemnation was lifted by the Righteous 
One when He was condemned by an unjust sentence; for it was fitting that the tree be 
healed by a Tree, and that, by the sufferings of the Dispassionate One on the Tree, 
the sufferings of the condemned be loosed. Glory, O Christ our King, to Thy wise 
dispensation toward us, whereby Thou hast saved all, in that Thou art good and the 
Lover of mankind.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 

--- PAGE 5 ---
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace, but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON.  
When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is 
immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the 
Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. 
For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that 
ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of 
God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master 
of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is 
a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image 
of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more 
beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the 
light, she is found pre-eminent. She hath delivered from pain them that please her, 
and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them 
from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that 
godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall 

--- PAGE 6 ---
judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, 
reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his 
holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our 
strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing 
to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and 
denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have 
the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a 
reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like 
other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery 
and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. 
Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine 
him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his 
forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall 
he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wicked-
ness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither 
bethought they that Thou alone art God, who hast the power of lIfe and death, savest 
in time of tribulation and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and merciful, 
givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone VI: 
Come, ye councils of the Orthodox, let us hymn the holy hierarch who hath 
guided us to the knowledge of God by his teaching, the all wondrous well-spring of 
wonders, the most radiant beacon of the Church, the most wise teacher of Rostov, 
the most comely adornment of all Russia; for he delivereth us from all evil 
temptations and misfortunes, and prayeth for our souls.  
Thou didst well tend the flock of the reason endowed sheep of Christ on the 
pasture of piety, O hierarch; wherefore, forsake not the children of thy Church after 
thy repose, but visit them; and, standing with the hierarchs before the Holy Trinity, 
pray that all those who with love honor the uncovering of thy precious relics, may be 
saved, O all-famed Demetrius.  
The Lord hath glorified thee with signs and wonders, O holy hierarch Demetrius’ 
for thou dost drive away evil spirits, heal the passions, and enlighten the souls of the 
faithful who have recourse to thy holy reliquary, O thou who art a converser with the 
angels, a peer of the apostles, a champion of Orthodoxy, and co-enthroned with the 
hierarchs.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
The city hath been sanctified! The nations have been blessed! The Church of the 
firstborn joineth chorus in the spirit, O hierarch Demetrius, and the people cry out at 
the uncovering of thy precious relics: Thou art our confirmation, and in thee do we 
boast! Pray thou, that all who ever glorify the uncovering of thy holy relics with love 
may be saved.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Moses, prefiguring the activity of the precious Cross, O Christ, vanquished 
Amalek his adversary in the wilderness of Sinai; for when he stretched out his arms, 
forming the image of the Cross, he strengthened the people. And now these events 
have found their fulfillment in us: today the Cross is elevated and the demons flee; 
today all creation is freed from corruption, for gifts have shone forth upon us because 
of the Cross. Wherefore, rejoicing, we all fall down before it, saying: Glory to Thee, 
O Lord, for Thy works are magnified!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice thou Life-bearing Cross...”: 
Rejoice, thou Life-bearing Cross, invincible victory of piety, door to paradise, 
confirmation of the faithful, rampart of the Church, whereby corruption hath been 
utterly destroyed, the dominion of death trampled down, and we have been lifted up 
from earth to those who are in Heaven, invincible weapon, contender against the 
demons, glory of the martyrs, true adornment of the venerable, haven of salvation, 
which grantest the world great mercy.  
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet, * for 
He is holy.  
Rejoice, thou Cross of the Lord, whereby mankind hath been loosed from the 
curse, all-honorable standard of joy which disperseth the enemy in thine exaltation, 
our helper, might of kings, Strength of the righteous, splendor of priests; which, when 
traced, doth deliver from misfortune, staff of power whereby we are tended, weapon 
of peace which the angels surround with fear, divine glory of Christ Who granteth the 
world great mercy.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages; * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
Rejoice, thou guide of the blind, physician of the ailing, resurrection of all the 
dead, which hast raised us up who had fallen into corruption, O precious Cross, 
whereby the curse was annulled and incorruption budded forth, and the earthly have 
been deified, and the devil utterly cast down! Beholding thee raised on high today in 
the hands of the high priest, we exalt Him who was exalted in thy midst, and bow 
down before thee, plenteously drawing forth from thee great mercy.  
Glory ..., of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Let us rejoice, ye councils of Russia, rendering praise and blessing to Demetrius, 
the wonderworker of Rostov; for he labored greatly for us in the writing of spiritually 
profitable books, whereby those who have wandered from the true path of piety have 
been directed to the Truth, and the hearts of the Orthodox have been made steadfast 
in the right Faith. To him let us cry aloud: O most wise teacher, entreat Christ, that 
instructed by thy doctrines, we may receive everlasting life.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Both now ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII:  
That which Moses prefigured with his body of old cast down and vanquished 
Amalek; and David the psalmist, crying out, hath commanded us to bow down before 
Thy footstool, Thy precious Cross, O Christ God. Today we sinners also do homage 
with our unworthy lips to Thee Whose will it was to be nailed thereto; and, chanting, 
we pray: O Lord, grant that with the thief we may receive Thy kingdom!  
At the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O lover of Orthodoxy and uprooter of schism, * healer of Russia and new 
advocate before God, * by thy writings thou didst heal the minds of the foolish. * O 
blessed Demetrius, thou harp of the Spirit, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls may 
be saved. (Twice)  
And the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth. (Once) 
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O lover of Orthodoxy and uprooter of schism, * healer of Russia and new 
advocate before God, * by thy writings thou didst heal the minds of the foolish. * O 
blessed Demetrius, thou harp of the Spirit, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls may 
be saved. 
Both now ..., that of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone VI: 
No sooner was the tree of Thy Cross planted, O Christ our Lord, than the 
foundations of death were shaken. That which Hades swallowed greedily it spewed 
forth, trembling. Thou hast revealed to us Thy salvation, O Holy One, and we glorify 
Thee. O Son of God, have mercy upon us!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”: 
We bow down before the tree of Thy Cross, O Lover of mankind, for Thou wast 
nailed thereto, O Life of all. Thou didst Open paradise to the thief who approached 
Thee with faith, O Savior, and he was deemed worthy of sweetness for confessing 
Thee: “Remember me, O Lord!” Accept us like him, for we cry: We have all sinned! 
Disdain us not, for Thou art compassionate!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI:  
Today the words of the prophet have been fulfilled! For, behold! we bow down 
before the place where Thy feet stood, O Lord, and, receiving the Tree of salvation, 
we have achieved liberation from sinful passions through the supplications of the 
Theotokos, O Thou only Lover of mankind.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded ...”:  
Of old, Joshua, the son of Nun, mystically prefigured the image of the Cross when 
he stretched forth his arms in the form of the Cross, O my Savior; and the sun stood 
still until he had cast down all the enemy which was opposed to Thee, O God. And 
now Thou hast raised with Thee the whole world, which saw Thee set upon the 
Cross, destroying the might of death.  
Polyeleos, and this Magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch father 
Demetrius, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou entreatest Christ God for 
us.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
Like a palm-tree hast thou blossomed forth from the earth in incorruption, and 
like the cedar in Lebanon hast thou been multiplied in miracles; thou hast been 
exalted in revelation, standing like a city upon a mountaintop, and like a lamp thou 
hast shone forth in thy memory as from under a bushel. And all of us, beholding the 
things fulfilled in thee, glorify Him Who hath magnified thee among His saints. As 
thou hast boldness before Christ the Lord, pray thou, O Demetrius manifest in 
holiness, that He save and enlighten our souls.  
Glory ..., in the same tone:  
Thou didst shine forth in thy virtuous life, O holy hierarch Demetrius, adorning 
thy ways with beauty, abstinence and tender compassion, and adorning the Church of 
Christ with thy golden-worded teachings. Wherefore, standing before the throne of 
the Almighty, O ever-memorable one, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of 
sins unto those who with love celebrate thy most honored memory.  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded ...”:  
Of old, in paradise, a tree stripped me naked, the enemy bringing about mortality 
through eating; but the tree of the Cross, bearing on behalf of mankind the vesture of 
life, hath been planted in the ground, and the whole world hath been filled with all 
manner of joy. Beholding it uplifted, O ye people, let us cry aloud to God together: 
Fill Thou Thy house with glory!  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 35 (JN. 10: 1-8) 
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: Verily, verily, I say unto you: He that 
entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, 
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of 

--- PAGE 11 ---
strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things 
they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, 
verily, I say unto you: I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before Me are 
thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. 
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
O holy hierarch Demetrius, thou good and faithful servant, who increased the 
talant entrusted to thee by thy Master: grace hath poured forth in thy lips, for with thy 
teachings thou hast adorned the Church, and made plain the truth of Orthodoxy 
putting the surmising of schismatics to shame. Wherefore, after thy departure, as 
during thy lifetime, strive thou that, convinced by thy miracles, the vain-minded may 
come to their senses and with us glorify God in three Hypostases.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross upon the waters, * Moses 
marked a straight line before him with his staff * and divided the Red Sea, * 
opening a path for Israel who went over dry-shod. * Then he marked a second 
line across the waters * and united them in one, * overwhelming the chariots 
of Pharaoh. * Therefore let us sing to Christ our God, * for He hath been 
glorified. 
Of old, Moses, standing between the priests, prefigured in himself the image of 
Christ’s most pure sufferings; for, forming a cross with his outstretched arms, he 
raised up victory, vanquishing the might of the tyrant Amalek. Wherefore, let us 
hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
Upon a pole Moses set the cure of the deadly and venomous sting of the serpents, 
and the deliverance therefrom; for to the tree, in the image of the Cross, he bound a 
serpent which crawleth upon the ground, triumphing over the sinister bane therein. 
Wherefore, let us hymn Christ God, for He hath been glorified.  
The sky showed forth the victory of the Cross to the divinely wise Emperor 
Constantine, the pious ruler; and therein the audacity of the hostile foe was cast 
down, delusion was destroyed and the divine Faith spread to the ends of the earth. 
Wherefore let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
Canon of the holy hierarch, with 8 Troparia, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Standing before the Holy Trinity with the angelic ranks, O great hierarch 
Demetrius, pray for us sinners, that we may receive the remission of our sins.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Having enslaved thy body to thy spirit by all manner of asceticism and abstinence, 
and achieved incorruption in the body, imparting a healing power to its essential clay, 
O holy father, teach us also not to serve mammon.  
Tending the flock entrusted to thee by Christ, the Chief Shepherd, and driving the 
soul-destroying wolves away from the fold by thy divinely inspired teachings, O holy 
hierarch Demetrius, look down now and see that vain minded schisms in nowise 
disturb the tranquility of the Church. And entreat God, the Lover of mankind, that 
we may all, with one mouth and one heart, praise His loving-kindness.  
Theotokion: Understanding thee to be chosen and all-pure, O all-immaculate one, 
the Son of God became thy Son, and hath made children through the grace of 
adoption, those who honor thee as the Theotokos.  
Katavasia: Inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross ..., 
ODE III  
Irmos: The rod of Aaron is an image of this mystery, * for when it budded it 
showed who should be priest. * So in the Church, that once was barren, * the 
wood of the Cross hath now budded forth, * filling her with strength and 
steadfastness. 
The rough stone, struck, put forth water for a disobedient and hard-hearted 
people, and showed forth the mystery of the divinely elect Church, whereof the Cross 
is the might and confirmation.  
When Christ’s most pure side was pierced by the spear, blood and water flowed 
therefrom, renewing the covenant and washing sin away, for the Cross is the boast of 
the faithful, the might and confirmation of kings.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Established firmly upon the rock of the Faith of Christ, thou wast firm in the 
confession of Orthodoxy, and didst unceasingly denounce the ungodly.  
Thou didst not cease to call out for the lost sheep of the flock of Christ, reproving, 
entreating and counseling them, even though not all heeded thy voice.  
The children of the Church who had remained unshaken within its bosom, didst 
thou encourage; and we, attending to thy teachings with sweetness, cry aloud: There is 
none as holy as our God!  
Theotokion: O pure and all-immaculate one, thou hast given birth unto Him Who 
hath delivered mankind from disobedience and by His blood hath washed away the 
ancestral sin of Adam.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly upon the Cross, * bestow Thy mercies upon 
the new community named after Thee, * O Christ God; gladden with Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over enemies; ** may they have as Thy 
help the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace. 
Ikos: He who was caught up to the third heaven of paradise and heard 
unspeakable and divine words which the human tongue cannot utter, what writeth he 
to the Galatians, which, as lovers of the Scriptures, ye have both read and come to 
understand? God forbid, saith he, that I should glory, save only in the Cross of the 
Lord, whereon having suffered He slew the passions. Let us all then firmly hold this 
boast, the Cross of the Lord; for this Wood is our salvation, the invincible trophy, the 
weapon of peace.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Emulating the holiness of the fathers of old, when thou wast eight years of age 
thou didst dedicate thy life to the service of God; wherefore, thou didst become a 
great monk, priest, teacher, and hierarch, and now a wonderworker and advocate for 
our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Rejoicing in thee, O thrice blessed and life-bestowing Cross, the people celebrate 
together with the immaterial choirs, the ranks of hierarchs reverently hymn thee, 
multitudes of monastics and fasters bow down before thee in adoration, and we all 
glorify Christ Who was crucified on thee.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Of old, Moses transformed the bitter springs in the desert with a tree, showing 
forth the conversion of the gentiles to piety through the Cross.  
Jordan, having hidden in its depths an axe-head, gave it forth again through the 
power of a stick, signifying the cutting off of deception by the Cross and baptism.  
In a sacred manner the people encamped in four divisions; and preceding in this 
fashion the tabernacle of the witness, they were glorified in the cross-like formation 
of their ranks.  
Wondrously stretched forth, the Cross emitted rays like the sun’s, and the heavens 
declared the glory of our God.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Nurtured from childhood in proper learning, thou didst not turn the acuity of thy 
mind to vain-minded ideas, O holy hierarch Demetrius, but to the edification and 
confirmation of the Orthodox, and to the reproof and chastisement of the 
incorrigible. Wherefore, thou wast revealed to be a worthy successor of the throne of 
the apostles.  
The healing shrine of thy relics poureth forth inexhaustible healing, and those who 
have recourse unto them with faith find deliverance from evils.  
For the love which thou didst cherish for Christ and the saints thou hast been 
glorified with the gift of miracles and healings; wherefore, we bow down before thee 
and beseech thee as a favorite and friend of God, that thou remember us in thy holy 
prayers before Him.  
Theotokion: Entreat God, the Lover of mankind, for us, O most holy Lady, that 
He remember not our iniquities, but rather that He deal with us according to His 
mercy.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O thrice-blessed Tree, on which Christ the king and Lord was 
stretched! * Through thee the beguiler fell, * who tempted mankind with the 
tree. * He was caught in the trap set by God, * who was crucified upon thee in 
the flesh, * granting peace unto our souls. 
O ever-hymned Tree, whereon Christ was stretched: the whirling sword which 
guarded Eden stood in awe of thee, O Cross, and the dread cherubim withdrew, 
when Christ was nailed to thee, Who granteth peace unto our souls.  
The adverse powers of the nether world are stricken with fear when the sign of the 
Cross is traced in the air in which they live, as are the generations of the earthborn 
and the heavenly, who bend the knee to Christ, Who granteth peace unto our souls.  
Having shone forth a divine light and revealed itself in rays of incorruption unto 
the darkened gentiles astray in error, the divine Cross acquireth them for Christ Who 
was nailed thereto, and granteth peace unto our souls.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
O holy hierarch of Christ, preserve thy homeland un-assailed by the enemy, and 
grant victory and triumph over its adversaries to our civil authorities.  
O Demetrius, favorite of God, protect us from all the machinations of the wicked 
devil, that we may traverse the path of this life without stumbling, in fulfillment of the 
commandments of God.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
O father Demetrius, burn away the darkness of sin from the eyes of our souls, and 
enlighten us with the knowledge of the will of God, that we may finish our race well 
in the light of His commandments.  
Theotokion: O immaculate Virgin who gayest birth to the true Light, shine upon 
us the light of divine knowledge, for our salvation.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Jonah stretched out his hands in the form of a cross * within the belly 
of the sea monster, * plainly prefiguring the redeeming Passion. * Cast out 
from thence after three days, * he foreshadowed the marvelous Resurrection of 
Christ our God, * who was crucified in the flesh and enlightened the world * 
by His Rising on the third day. 
Bent with age and weighed down with infirmity, Jacob drew himself up when he 
crossed his arms, showing forth the power of the life-bearing Cross; for God Who 
was nailed in the flesh hath set aright the obsolescence of the law of the Scripture 
which was written in shadows, and dispelled the soul-destroying disease of deception.  
Divine Israel laid his hands cross-wise upon the heads of the youths, and insofar as 
those serving under the law give glory to the firstborn, he suspected he had erred in 
laying his hands thus, yet he did not alter the life-bearing image; wherefore crying 
aloud, raising the Cross on high, the newly established people of Christ God are 
protected thereby.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
With the eye of thy compassion look upon the billowing of sin which doth assail 
us, O holy hierarch of Christ, and guide our voyage to the calm haven of God’s 
loving-kindness.  
O father Demetrius, be thou for us a good helmsman, and leave us not to perish in 
our sins, but as thou thyself wast tempted therein as a man, help us who are tempted, 
O holy Demetrius, and be thou a helper and mediator for us before the greatly 
merciful God, that He lead our life up from corruption.  
Theotokion: With mouth and heart we magnify thee, the Mother of God. Do 
thou, who hast reconciled the whole of the human race with God, and deprive us not 
of thine aid.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Let us bless Demetrius, the golden-worded teacher, the radiant star of Russia, * 
who shone forth from Kiev, and through Novgorod and Seversky reached Rostov, * 
illumining the whole land with his teachings and miracles; * for he wrote down for 
posterity, those things which are for our edification, * that, like Paul, he might win all 
for Christ, ** and save our souls through the right Faith.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Ikos: Right it is for the righteous in heaven who rejoice over the repentant, and for 
us sinners on earth, to rejoice over thee, O righteous Demetrius; for we have acquired 
thee as a new advocate before God on our behalf. And blessing Him with fitting 
praises, in joy we cry aloud thus: Rejoice, O boast of Rostov and praise of all Russia!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The senseless decree of the wicked tyrant, * breathing forth threats and 
blasphemy hateful to God, * confused the people. * Yet neither the fury of the 
wild beast nor the roaring of the fire * could frighten the three Children: * but 
standing together in the flame, * fanned by the wind that brought refreshment 
as the dew, they sang: * ‘Blessed and supremely praised art Thou, * O our God 
and the God of our fathers.’ 
The first man, tasting of the tree, went to dwell in corruption; for, having 
condemned himself to a shameful banishment from life, he imparted corruption to 
the whole race of mankind. But we mortals, finding restoration through the tree of 
the Cross, cry aloud: O supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Breaking the commandment of God came about through disobedience, and the 
untimely partaking of the fruit of the tree brought death to mankind, but to preserve 
that which is most precious, access to the tree of life was forbidden, until God 
opened it to the suffering thief who with a proper understanding cried aloud: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Israel, foreseeing things to come, laid hold of the tip of Joseph’s staff, revealing 
beforehand that the most glorious Cross would seize the power of the kingdom, for it 
is the victorious boast of kings and a light for those who cry aloud with faith: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
For the sake of the humility of Christ, thou wast revealed to be a model of 
humility, O holy Demetrius. Grant that I may cry out, not in pride, but in humility: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Through abstinence thou didst make thy body subject to thy spirit, O holy 
hierarch Demetrius. Grant that I may live in abstinence, that I may cry aloud with 
undefiled lips: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
By thy teachings, O father Demetrius, thou dost direct our thoughts; and, 
emulating thee, we chant unto God: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, Thou didst conceive the beginningless God in 
thy womb, Whom we hymn, saying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: O children equal in number to the Trinity: * bless ye God, the Father 
and Creator; * hymn ye the Word Who came down * and transformed the fire 
into dew; * and supremely exalt ye Him Who giveth life unto all, * the most 
holy Spirit, * throughout the ages! 
O hosts of heaven, chant ye to the exalted Tree which was drenched in the blood 
of the incarnate Word of God, and celebrate the restoration of those born on earth. 
O Ye people, worship the Cross of Christ, by which the world hath been granted the 
resurrection throughout all ages!  
O ye mortal stewards of grace, with your hands reverently raise on high the Cross 
whereon Christ God stood and the spear which pierced the body of God the Word, 
that all the nations may see the salvation which is of God, glorifying Him throughout 
all ages!  
O faithful Christian kings, forechosen by divine decree, be ye glad! And having 
received from God the precious Cross, rejoice in it, the weapon of victory, for 
thereby tribes of enemy warriors seeking to make battle have been scattered 
throughout all ages.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thou art our good teacher, O father Demetrius, crying out to all who heed thy 
teaching: Exalt Christ supremely throughout all ages!  
O divinely wise hierarch, all-blessed Demetrius, by thy supplication and thy philan-
thropic love for us entreat God, the Lover of mankind, on our behalf, for we 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Thou didst overturn the wickedly harmful reasoning of the vain-minded, O holy 
Demetrius, and didst instruct the faithful to remain steadfast in the true Faith, crying 
out: Supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, we piously hymn thy supra-natural and wondrous 
birthgiving, supremely exalting Christ throughout the ages.  
We do not sing the Magnificat before ODE IX, but chant instead the refrain of 
the feast:  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the all-honored Cross of the Lord!  
Then we chant the Irmos of Canon I: “O Theotokos, thou art a mystical 
paradise ...” The second choir likewise chanteth the refrain and the Irmos. The 
refrain is chanted before each of the 6 Troparia of Canon I.  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought forth 
Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted upon 
the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the all-honored Cross of the Lord!  
Let all the trees of the forests rejoice, for their nature hath been sanctified by Him 
Who planted them in the beginning - Christ Who was stretched out upon the Tree. 
Wherefore, worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the all-honored Cross of the Lord!  
A sacred horn hath been lifted up, the chief horn for all the divinely wise: the 
Cross, whereby all the horns of the sinful are noetically broken asunder. Wherefore, 
worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
Then the refrain of Canon II:  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the exaltation of the life-creating Cross of the Lord!  
And the Irmos of Canon II: “Death, which came upon our race ...” The second 
choir likewise chanteth the refrain and the Irmos.  
The refrain is chanted before each of the 6 Troparia of Canon II.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Today the death that came to man through eating of the tree, * is made 
of no effect through the Cross. * For the curse of our Mother Eve * that fell on 
all mankind * is destroyed by the fruit of the pure Mother of God, * whom all 
the powers of heaven magnify. 
The refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the exaltation of the life-creating Cross of the 
Lord!  
Thou didst not permit the murderous bitterness of the tree to remain, O Lord, for 
thou didst utterly destroy it by the Cross. Wherefore, by a tree Thou didst once 
sweeten the bitterness of the waters of Marah, prefiguring the activity of the Cross, 
which all the hosts of heaven magnify.  
The refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the exaltation of the life-creating Cross of the 
Lord!  
 
Today Thou hast raised up by the Cross those who remain continually mired in 
the darkness of our forefather, O Lord; for though our nature was humbled through 
deceit and an exceeding lack of restraint, the light of Thy Cross hath again guided all 
of us aright, which we, the faithful magnify.  
The refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the exaltation of the life-creating Cross of the 
Lord!  

--- PAGE 19 ---
That Thou mightest reveal to the world the image of the Cross venerated among 
all, O Lord, Thou didst trace its outline in the heavens, in that it is most glorious, 
radiant with boundless light: the invincible weapon for the emperor. Wherefore, all 
the hosts of heaven magnify Thee.  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Enjoying the everlasting life for which thou didst diligently struggle, O father, pray 
thou that we also may attain unto it.  
Even though thou hast passed from us to the heavens, O holy hierarch Demetrius, 
yet abiding in spirit with those who call upon thee, thou dost ever teach and 
strengthen them, that they may tread the path of the saving commandments of God.  
Thou hast been revealed to be a most radiant beacon of piety, a most excellent 
rhetorician, and an adornment of Orthodox hierarchs. Wherefore, as is meet, we 
magnify thee with heartfelt love.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, with the holy hierarch Demetrius beseech God, 
the Lover of mankind, Whom thou didst bear, that He save our souls.  
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought 
forth Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted 
upon the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
Exapostilarion of the feast: Spec. Mel.: “When the disciples ...”: 
The Cross is the guardian of the whole world! The Cross is the beauty of the 
Church! The Cross is the dominion of kings! The Cross is the confirmation of the 
faithful! The Cross is the glory of the angels and the wounding of the demons! 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch: 
O our God, Who hath set the bounds of the nations according to the number of 
Thine angels, and Who hath assembled Thy Church from the scattered children of 
Adam, multiply therein Thy saints like the stars in heaven, among which the memory 
of Thy holy hierarch Demetrius hath shone forth. For his sake enlighten souls 
darkened by schismatic vain-mindedness, that together we may cry out to Thee the 
threefold hymn: Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia!  
Both now ..., another Exapostilarion of the feast: 
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken ye women ...”:  
Today is the Cross raised on high, and the world is sanctified; for He that sitteth 
with the Father and the Holy Spirit stretched out his arms thereon. It hath brought 
the whole world to the knowledge of Thee, O Christ. Therefore, to those who hope 
in Thee do Thou grant divine glory.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
On the Praises, 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! * the Life-bearing Tree, * the most holy Cross * is 
revealed today, lifted up on high. * All the ends of the earth glorify it, * and the 
hordes of the demons are affrighted. * O what a gift hath been given to mortals! * 
Thereby, O Christ, save Thou our souls, ** in that Thou alone art compassionate. 
O most glorious wonder! * The Cross which bore the Most High * like a cluster of 
grapes full of life * is seen today lifted up from the earth. * Thereby we have all been 
drawn to God, * and death hath been utterly slain. * O the most precious Tree * 
whereby we have received the food of immortality in Eden, ** glorifying Christ!  
O most glorious wonder! * The length and height of the Cross * is equal to 
heaven! * For it sanctifieth all things with divine grace. * In it are the barbarian 
nations vanquished. * In it are the scepters of kings made firm. * O divine ladder, * 
whereby we ascend to the heavens, ** exalting Christ the Lord in hymns!  
And 3 of the holy hierarch, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”:  
From thy youth thou didst wholly take upon thyself the search for wisdom and the 
fear of God, which having found thou didst not hide in the earth, like the slothful 
servant; but teaching and laboring for Him Who gave thee the talant, thou didst 
increase it an hundredfold, and didst become a great merchant, making clear the 
understanding of the Old and New Testaments, and disclosing the depths of the 
meaning of the divinely written books: and thou hast taught us also to conduct such 
goodly trade. Wherefore, O Demetrius, thou good and faithful servant of God, for 
such treasures which thou hast revealed unto us thou hast entered into the joy of thy 
Lord. (Twice)  
Thou didst bind thy holy mind to the obedience of faith, that thou mightest adorn 
it with good works; hence thou hast been shown to be a skillful husbandman of the 
vineyard of Christ. For every branch which did not produce fruit thou didst cut off by 
the fear of the Lord, and therein preserved piety alone, which thou didst hedge round 
about with the dogmas of the Church, and which thou didst strengthen within by the 
tower of Orthodoxy, wholly filling the wine-vats thereof with thy teachings. 
Wherefore, O holy Demetrius who loved the works of faith, visit now the vineyard 
which the right hand of the Most High hath planted, that it may produce the grapes 
of salvation.  
Glory ..., of the holy hierarch, in Tone VI: 
Sing unto the Lord a new song, O Russia! Praise thy God, O city of Rostov! For 
the Most High hath been well-pleased to give us the new wonderworker Demetrius, 
to whom witness hath been borne by all, as also by truth itself. And honoring his 
memory among the saints, let us, elders and the young, praise and magnify our God, 
Who hath granted His favored one to shine forth upon us in holy incorruption and 
the working of miracles.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Both now ..., of the feast, in the Tone VI:  
Today the Cross of the Lord cometh forth; and the faithful receive it with desire, 
and they derive healings of soul and body, and every pang. Let us venerate it with joy 
and fear: with fear, for we are unworthy because of our sins; and with joy, because of 
the salvation which is granted to the world by Christ God, Who hath great mercy, and 
Who was nailed to it.  
Great Doxology, Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O lover of Orthodoxy and uprooter of schism, * healer of Russia and new 
advocate before God, * by thy writings thou didst heal the minds of the foolish. * O 
blessed Demetrius, thou harp of the Spirit, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls may 
be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., that of the feast, in Tone I:  
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  
 Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE IX of the canon of the feast; and 4 
from ODE VI of the canon of the holy hierarch.  
Let all the trees of the forests rejoice, for their nature hath been sanctified by Him 
Who planted them in the beginning - Christ Who was stretched out upon the Tree. 
Wherefore, worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
A sacred horn hath been lifted up, the chief horn for all the divinely wise: the 
Cross, whereby all the horns of the sinful are noetically broken asunder. Wherefore, 
worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
That Thou mayest show the Cross, the invincible weapon, to the world, O adored 
Lord and King, in the sight of all Thou didst form its most glorious image in the 
skies, radiant with boundless light. Wherefore, all the powers of heaven magnify 
Thee.  
Thou didst not permit the murderous bitterness of the tree to remain, O Lord, for 
thou didst utterly destroy it by the Cross. Wherefore, by a tree Thou didst once 
sweeten the bitterness of the waters of Marah, prefiguring the activity of the Cross, 
which all the hosts of heaven magnify.  
With the eye of thy compassion look upon the billowing of sin which doth assail 
us, O holy hierarch of Christ, and guide our voyage to the calm haven of God’s 
loving-kindness. (Twice) 
O father Demetrius, be thou for us a good helmsman, and leave us not to perish in 
our sins, but as thou thyself wast tempted therein as a man, help us who are tempted, 
O holy Demetrius, and be thou a helper and mediator for us before the greatly 
merciful God, that He lead our life up from corruption.  
Theotokion: With mouth and heart we magnify thee, the Mother of God. Do 
thou, who hast reconciled the whole of the human race with God, and deprive us not 
of thine aid.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I:  
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O lover of Orthodoxy and uprooter of schism, * healer of Russia and new 
advocate before God, * by thy writings thou didst heal the minds of the foolish. * O 
blessed Demetrius, thou harp of the Spirit, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls may 
be saved.  

--- PAGE 23 ---
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Let us bless Demetrius, the golden-worded teacher, the radiant star of Russia, * 
who shone forth from Kiev, and through Novgorod and Seversky reached Rostov, * 
illumining the whole land with his teachings and miracles; * for he wrote down for 
posterity, those things which are for our edification, * that, like Paul, he might win all 
for Christ, ** and save our souls through the right Faith.  
Kontakion of the Cross, in Tone IV:  
O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly upon the Cross, * bestow Thy mercies upon 
the new community named after Thee, * O Christ God; gladden with Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over enemies; ** may they have as Thy 
help the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace. 
 
Prokeimenon of the feast in Tone VII (also until the Leave-taking): Exalt ye the 
Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; * for He is holy. 
Prokeimenon of the saint, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the 
meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 318 (HEB. 7: 27-8: 2) 
Brethren: Such a High Priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those 
high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people’s: for 
this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests 
which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the 
Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this 
is the sum: we have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of 
the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, 
which the Lord pitched, and not man.  
Alleluia of the feast in Tone IV: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast 
purchased from the beginning. 
Alleluia of the saint, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate 
wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 36 (JN. 10: 9-16)  
The Lord said unto the Jews who came to Him: I am the door: by Me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 

--- PAGE 24 ---
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 
know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one Shepherd.  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the all-honored Cross of the Lord!  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought forth 
Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted upon 
the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
 
Communion Verse: The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, hath been signed 
upon us.  
Communion verse of the saint: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous 
be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
