--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 25th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONGST THE SAINTS, SERGIUS THE 
WONDERWORKER OF RADONEZH 
AT GREAT VESPERS:  
On “O Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the venerable one, 4 in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”: 
Forsaking the tumult of the world O venerable father, * and taking up thy Cross, * 
thou didst follow after Christ, * leaving the world to dwell in the wilderness * without 
any thought of looking back. * Uprooting the passions of the soul by frequent vigils 
and prayers, * and mortifying the subtleties of the flesh, * thou wast deemed worthy 
of the grace to heal all manner of infirmities. * O thou fellow converser with the 
angels, * co-dweller with the saints, * do thou, O venerable father Sergius, beseech 
the Lord ** that our souls be granted great mercy. 
O venerable father, who can tell of thy labors and thy pains? * or what tongue can 
rightly speak of Thine eremitic life, * thy vigils and thy strict abstinence from food, * 
thy sleeping upon the cold earth, * the purity of thy soul and body, * the complete 
silence of thy lips and mind, * thy true humility and unceasing prayers * thy 
discerning Judgment, * the poverty of thine apparel * and thy never failing 
remembrance of death? * O Sergius, our Father, ** pray thou that our souls be saved. 
O venerable father Sergius, * thou hast been revealed to be a physician * of both 
our souls and bodies, * gushing forth streams of healing to the ailing; * and adorned 
with the gift of prophecy, * thou didst speak of future things as though they were in 
the present, * by thy prayer thou didst arm the Prince * such that he conquered the 
barbarians * those who boasted that they would destroy thy Fatherland, * but their 
own bodies fell dead near Hades, as was meet, * through a plague from God that 
struck them down, ** as narrated of old in the psalms, O venerable father Sergius.  
O divinely-wise Sergius, * having forsaken temporal glory * thou didst appear 
living in the wilderness and the hills, * and thou, O blessed one, wast made a pure 
dwelling-place of the Holy Trinity, * by whose strength thou didst raise up holy 
Churches, * and created an enclosure for the salvation * of those living the monastic 
life; * and Christ our God * Whom thou hast longed for from thy youth, * found a 
dwelling within thee. * O venerable father Sergius entreat Him ** that our souls be 
saved. 
And 4 Stichera (Repeating the first), in Tone II: 
Enduring with fortitude the things of the present, * and rejoicing over those of 
the future, * thou, O venerable Sergius, didst instruct all saying: * ‘If we now strive as 
if unrewarded * we remain with the hope of eternal life; * our afflictions here are 
grievous but paradise is sweet; * our labors here are painful but the undertaking is 
everlasting. * Be not slothful then, O ye who fast! * Let us bear a little here, that we 
may be crowned there with wreaths of incorruption ** by Christ our God and the 
Savior of our souls. (Twice) 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Looking upon afflictions as pleasure, * walking along the straight and narrow path, 
* thou, O most blessed Sergius, spake unto thy disciples saying: * ‘Be not afraid of 
the contest of abstinence, * that we may escape the fearful torments of Gehenna; * 
let our hands be folded, that they may be stretched out towards God, * and let our 
feet be established to stand before Him in prayer. * Let us not spare the corruptible 
nature, * let us give ourselves up willingly to the fight, ** that we may be crowned 
with wreaths of triumph by Christ our God. 
Setting aside corruptible clothing, * thou didst go about in winter as in summer * 
without warm clothing, O patient Sergius, saying: * ‘For the paradise that we have 
lost we shall now put away soft raiment; * as we once clothed ourselves in sin 
through transgression, * let us now for the sake of incorruptible garments strip 
ourselves, * let us pay no heed, O brethren, to the passing winter, * let us mortify the 
flesh ** that we may be clothed with crowns of triumph by Christ our God.’ 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O thou who preserved within thee the original image untainted, * and who, by 
fasting, set thy mind as master over the pernicious passions, * thou didst ascend as 
far as man is able unto heights of the divine likeness; * for having manfully restrained 
thy human nature, * taking care to subdue the lower unto the higher * thou didst 
subject the flesh to the spirit. * Wherefore thou appearest as the summit of those 
living the monastic life, * O thou inhabitant of the wilderness, * teacher of those who 
have recourse to thee for spiritual profit, * thou far-famed example of virtue; * And 
now, in the heavens, no longer ‘seeing through a glass, darkly’ * thou, O Father 
Sergius doth clearly behold the Holy Trinity, ** do thou ever entreat God, on behalf 
of those who in faith and love honor thee. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, Tone VI:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By 
nature he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into 
two Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance, The Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons: 
THE READING FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is 
more valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For 
length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are 
wealth and glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law 

--- PAGE 3 ---
and mercy upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn 
truths. Blessed is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the 
outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I 
exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon 
counsel, knowledge and understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; 
prudence is mine, and strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me 
shall find grace. O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe 
knowledge. Hearken unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat 
shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my 
mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all 
evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will 
instruct you in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the 
Spirit.  
THE READING FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS: 
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet. 
THE READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction, but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded, for 
God proved them and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 

--- PAGE 4 ---
He tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth; and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him; for grace and mercy is to His saints and 
visitation for His elect. 
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, then these Stichera, in Tone VI: 
Come, O ye who love to celebrate the feasts * and ye also, O company of monks, 
* gathered together by faith let us honor today Sergius, * the true Pastor, who 
followed with gladness in the footsteps of his Master, * whose way was narrow and 
whose life was free from passion, * and let us cry aloud with faith: * O all-blessed one 
who lived with the saints, * thou boast of those who fast, ** pray to the Lord for us 
that our souls be saved. 
O venerable father Sergius, and God-bearer, * for the sake of the love of Christ 
thou didst forsake all, * and left the world for the wilderness, * and in no way wast 
thou afraid of the cunning of the invisible enemies. * For although they often 
descended upon thee showing their wrath with gnashing of teeth, * by thy prayers 
thou didst make them, like smoke, vanish without a trace. * O thou undefiled soul * 
and Icon of steadfast patience! ** Pray Christ without ceasing that our souls be saved. 
The all-holy and great Church of Russia, * with Orthodox princes, monks and 
simple people, * watered by the streams flowing from the Gospel Sources, * 
spiritually rejoiceth on the occasion of this great feast; * and standing round the 
healing relics of the good pastor and teacher * we kiss them with love and we weave 
as with flowers songs and praises saying: * Rejoice! O blessed Sergius, heavenly man, 
and earthly angel, * dwelling place of the Holy Spirit! * Rejoice! for thou hast led 
many on the path of salvation: * Rejoice! thou boast and confirmation of the truly 
believing people, * O venerable father Sergius, rightly acceptable to God, ** 
exceedingly bright light of thy Fatherland and pleader for our souls 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O thou who preserved within thee the original image untainted, * and who, by 
fasting, set thy mind as master over the pernicious passions, * thou didst ascend as 
far as man is able unto heights of the divine likeness; * for having manfully restrained 
thy human nature, * taking care to subdue the lower unto the higher * thou didst 
subject the flesh to the spirit. * Wherefore thou appearest as the summit of those 
living the monastic life, * O thou inhabitant of the wilderness, * teacher of those who 
have recourse to thee for spiritual profit, * thou far-famed example of virtue; * And 
now, in the heavens, no longer ‘seeing through a glass, darkly’ * thou, O Father 
Sergius doth clearly behold the Holy Trinity, ** do thou ever entreat God, on behalf 
of those who in faith and love honor thee. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O all-
pure one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign 
Lady, ** the intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of Heaven ...”: 
O God-bearing Father, * the most radiant sun of thy feast hath risen upon us, * 
lighting up those coming to thee with faith * and immortality shedeth its fragrance 
around us. * And incorruption gusheth forth unto our souls from thy holy body, ** 
O venerable father Sergius, intercessor for our souls. 
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints. 
With the bridles of abstinence * thou hast conquered the sensual passions of the 
body, * O Wonderworking Sergius, * and on earth thou hast shown zeal for things 
outside the flesh, * and hast subjected to the spirit all fleshly desire. * Therefore now 
dwelling in the courts of heaven, ** pray thou for our souls. 
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight. 
Having laid the foundation of virtue, O blessed Sergius, * thou hast put off the 
old Adam with its lusts and passions * and put on Christ Who is Truth, * thereby O 
venerable father, thou hast disposed of a multitude of the enemy’s armies, * and 
revealed thyself to be a guide of monastics, ** pray thou that our souls be saved. 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
We honor thee as a teacher of monastics, * O Sergius our Father, * for from thee 
we have truly learned to walk the upon the straight and narrow path. * Blessed art 
thou who labored for Christ and hath laid to waste the might of the enemy; * O 
friend of the Angels and companion of the holy and just ones, ** do thou, with them, 
ever intercede before the Lord that our souls be saved. 
Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * Mother 
of God in the highest: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate 
one, * granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting now our 
supplications, ** pray thou that we all be saved. 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
At the blessing of the loaves, Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
As a virtuous ascetic athlete, * and true warrior of Christ God * fighting fiercely 
the good fight * against the passions during this earthly life, * laboring in hymnody, 
vigil and fasting * thou wast an example to thy disciples. * Wherefore, the Holy Spirit 
made His abode within thee, * Whose activity adorned thee with radiant beauty: * 
Since thou hast great boldness towards the Holy Trinity * remember thy flock wisely 
gathered by thee * and forget not as thou didst promise, * to visit thy children, ** O 
venerable father Sergius. (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and 
through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV. 
As a virtuous ascetic athlete, * and true warrior of Christ God * fighting fiercely 
the good fight * against the passions during this earthly life, * laboring in hymnody, 
vigil and fasting * thou wast an example to thy disciples. * Wherefore, the Holy Spirit 
made His abode within thee, * Whose activity adorned thee with radiant beauty: * 
Since thou hast great boldness towards the Holy Trinity * remember thy flock wisely 
gathered by thee * and forget not as thou didst promise, * to visit thy children, ** O 
venerable father Sergius. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and 
through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Revealed as wholly sanctified and a true God-bearer, * who, having despised the 
glitter of the world with its wealth, and all its visible good things * in so far as they 
are but fleeting, * followed Christ in humility and poverty. * Gathering a multitude of 
monks, thou didst enlighten them with the doctrines of pure Orthodoxy. * 
Wherefore, before thine end thou didst receive eternal grace, * and lying in the tomb, 
thou, O divinely blessed Sergius * hast remained without corruption. * Do thou pray 
Christ our God ** to grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy 
memory. (Twice). 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
As the all-immaculate Bride of the Creator, * Mother of the Redeemer, who 
knewest not a man, * and as the receptacle of the Comforter O all-hymned one, * 
hasten thou to deliver me, * the vile abode of iniquity and noetic plaything of the 
demons, * from their evil machinations; * and make me the bright dwelling-place of 
the virtues, * O thou incorrupt light-bearing one. * Drive away the clouds of the pas-
sions and grant that, * by thy supplications, * I may receive a portion on high ** and 
share in the never-waning light.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Possessed of a wisdom rising towards God on high, * thou, O Father, didst 
forsake all earthly things, * and through many pains made thy life radiant yet simple, 
* wherefore thou hast been shown forth as a dwelling-place of the divine virtues, * 
drawing near to the Lord in prayers and supplications. ** Do thou ever pray to God 
that our souls be saved. (Twice). 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III: 
As an uncultivated vine, O Virgin, * thou didst sprout forth the most comely 
Cluster of grapes * Which poureth forth upon us the wine of salvation * making glad 
the souls and bodies of all. * Wherefore, ever blessing thee as the cause of good 
things, * with the angel we cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We bless thee, O Venerable Father Sergius, 
and we honor thy holy memory, instructor of monks, and converser with the 
angels. 
The selected Psalm: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was 
attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
O blessed one, * when thy mind had winged its way unto its divine Desire, * thou 
didst forsake all the wisdom that draws one downwards, * and leaving all to dwell in 
the wilderness * thou didst issue forth like fragrant lilies the comely blossoms of thy 
virtues, * and having uprooted the thorns of the passions thou didst plant therein the 
fruitful seedlings of thy labors. * Wherefore thou didst reap a boundless wealth in 
heaven. * O venerable father Sergius pray to Christ our God * that those who honor 
with love thy holy memory ** be granted the remission of their sins. (Twice). 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
In Thee, O Full of grace, * doth all creation rejoice, * the ranks of Angels and the 
race of mankind; * O all-hallowed Temple and spiritual Paradise, * boast of Virgins. * 
For from thee God became incarnate * and He who is our God before the ages 
became a child. * He hath made thy womb a throne and rendered it wider than the 
heavens. * In thee, O Full of grace, doth all creation rejoice; ** glory be to thee. 
The Hymn of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that he hath rendered unto me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (MT. 11, 27-30) 
All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but 
the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and (he) to 
whomsoever the Son will reveal (him). Come unto me, all (ye) that labor and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I 
am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke (is) 
easy, and my burden is light. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
After the 50th Psalm, the Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
We honor Sergius the great one, * an Angel on earth, and man of God in heaven, 
* comely adornment of the world, * food for good men and virtuous boast of those 
who fast. * For planted in the house of the Lord, he rightly blossomed like a cedar in 
the wilderness, ** rendering the flock of Christ’s rational sheep enriched in sanctity 
and truth. 
The canon of the most holy Theotokos with 6 Troparia including the Irmos; and 
two Canons of the venerable one, with 8 Troparia: 
ODE I 
The canon of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VI:  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Eve who partook in the garden of the forbidden food brought about the curse: 
but thou who art pure hast done away with it by giving birth to Christ, the firstborn 
of the blessed. 
As a pearl coming forth from divine lightning, thou dost give birth to Christ. Do 
thou who art pure drive out by the light of thy radiance the darkness of my passions 
and the confusion of my sins. 
Jacob foresaw with the secret eyes of the mind the expectation of the nations, 
God incarnate of thee who has delivered us by thine intercessions. 
O Thou who art most pure, since the rulers of the tribe of Judah have failed, thy 
Son and God passed through thy womb and as a Divine Leader now truly reigns over 
the ends of the earth, 
The 1st Canon of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Refrain: Venerable Father Sergius pray to God for us.  
Emulating Christ who humbled Himself for our sakes, even taking the form of a 
servant, thou didst love humility and, mortifying the soul, destroyed the passions. By 
copious vigil and prayer, thou hast ascended the mountain of freedom from passion, 
O most noetically rich Sergius. 
Adorning thy soul with streams of tears as a lamp is adorned with light, thou hast 
offered up thyself as another Isaac, O venerable father, and sacrificed thine heart 
unto God. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
O most blessed Sergius, who from thy mother’s womb hast revealed thyself by thy 
threefold cry to be a servant of the Trinity and who, illuminated by the light of the 
threefold Sun, dashed the armies of demons as if destroying a spider’s web! 
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth outside the laws of nature to the Giver of the 
law. He Who was both God and man. As He is good, do thou who art all undefiled 
entreat Him to overlook our iniquities as we ever cry aloud: ‘Let us chant unto the 
Lord, for greatly hath He been glorified’ 
The 2nd Canon of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it shattered 
the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the deep.  
Thou, O venerable father, hast been established in thy love of Christ, and 
appeared as a stream abundantly watering the whole earth with the word of thy 
teachings, O Sergius, divinely blessed one. Therefore with love we bless thy memory. 
At a divine command, a blessing came forth from thine hand; for by thy prayer, O 
venerable father Sergius, thou didst make water gush forth from the dry earth, and 
we who now draw forth thereof, unfailingly receive healing. 
From thy youth thou wast entirely dedicated to God, drawing near Him by thy 
virtues, for leaving behind the corruptible things of this earth, thou hast acquired 
heavenly riches. 
Theotokion: Rejoice O Fount of grace. Rejoice! O Ladder and heavenly Gate, 
Rejoice! Candlestick and vessel of gold, the un-hewn mountain, O thou who hast 
borne for the world Christ the Giver of Life. 
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
ODE III 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * 
of Thy confession. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us 
O all-pure Theotokos, He who alone is good, transcending all telling, assumed my 
corruptible mortal flesh from thy womb and rendering it incorruptible He hath 
united it eternally to Himself. 
O Virgin, beholding God incarnate of thee, the choirs of angels were struck with 
fear and they honor thee with unceasing hymns as the Mother of God. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Daniel, the Prophet, was struck with fear as he saw thee, O living Mountain from 
whom the Stone was cut without the hand of man, and He destroyed with force the 
temples of devils. 
Neither speech nor the tongue of man can give thee worthy praise: for Christ the 
Giver of life was pleased without seed to take flesh of thee, who art most pure. 
Canon I 
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
In thyself, as an example of virtue to thy disciples, thou hast drawn to salvation 
many souls who, separated from worldly passions, have found comfort in the joy of 
paradise. 
O blessed venerable father, thou hast flowered like a fruitful olive-tree in the 
house of God, anointing with oil the souls of those who sing thy praises with love, O 
Sergius, and who cry aloud to Christ with faith: ‘There is none holy save Thee, O 
only Lover of mankind.’ 
O blessed venerable father, by watchful vigils thou didst put to sleep the soul-
corrupting passions: and thereby, O divinely-wise Sergius, ascended to dwell in the 
heavenly mansions, having received the grace of healing. 
Theotokion: O Theotokos , thou appearest higher the cherubim and seraphim, for 
Thou art undefiled, and thou alone hast received in thy womb the uncircumscribable 
God. Wherefore we the faithful bless thee, who art pure, with hymns. 
Canon II 
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
O blessed one, despising corruptible fame thou hast been deemed worthy of 
inheriting incorruptible and divine glory; for trampling underfoot all the beauty of 
this world thou rejoicest, with the angels on high, in the glory of God. 
Renewing the earth of thine heart, O venerable father, with the plough of prayer, 
thou hast shown thyself to be the comely corn of the Word and thou hast reached 
the dwelling-place of the never waning Light. 
Honored with the effulgence of the Holy Spirit, thou hast been adorned with a life 
that beareth the never-fading light, manifest in thy gifts to those who ask, receiving 
with love those in the monastic state, O venerable Father. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: A never-fading flower sprang forth from thee, O Pure one, making 
all mankind fragrant with the divine myrrh of His own nature. He Who, like the 
Father, is without beginning, became subject to time from thee, O all-immaculate 
Virgin.  
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * grant strength to 
those united in spiritual fellowship, * who sing hymns of praise to thee: * and 
in thy divine glory * grant unto them crowns of glory. 
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
O most blessed Sergius, * truly forsaking corruptible things that fade away, * thou 
didst follow Christ with all thy soul, * living in pangs, toil and great abstinence * as 
though without flesh. ** Pray to Christ our God that our souls be saved. 
Glory..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: O Theotokos thou art far higher than the cherubim and the 
seraphim, * for thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens and the earth, 
* more than visible and invisible creation * excelling them all by the admixture no 
vessel can contain; * for He Whom the heavens cannot contain, * O Pure one, was 
encompassed within Thy womb. ** Pray Him that Thy servants be saved. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
O most pure Lady, we who are saved by thee sing Thy praises and reverently 
extolling thee we cry aloud: Blessed art thou, O ever-Virgin, who hast given birth to 
God. 
Thou, O Virgin, hast borne the never-setting Light, He who shineth in the flesh 
unto those lying in the darkness of this life; and, O ever-Virgin, thou dost pour forth 
Joy unto all those who hymn thy praises. 
Through thee, O all-holy one, grace flowered and the law ceased, for thou who art 
pure, hast borne the Lord Who hath granted us remission of sins, O ever-Virgin.  
The eating of the tree showed me to be dead, however, when the Tree of life 
appeared from thee, O most pure one, He raised me and made me an heir of the 
sweetness of paradise. 
Canon I 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
O Father, thou art a temple of the most holy Spirit, a river full of living waters, an 
unshaken foundation of the Church, the confirmation of those living the monastic 
life, wherefore O Father Sergius, thou art a right wondrous. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
O glorious Sergius, as did the Prophet David, thou didst anoint thy bed each day 
with streams of tears, until thou didst dry completely the passions; wherefore we 
reverence thine ever honored and holy memory. 
O venerable father Sergius, thou wast deemed worthy to see Christ face to face, 
not ‘through a glass darkly’, but with the glass truly removed; and thus became 
separated from this world, souring aloft to thy beloved Desire. 
Theotokion: By the prayers of her who bore Thee O God, grant us, since Thou 
alone art without sin, the cleansing of our transgressions committed in ignorance, and 
grant peace to Thy world. 
Canon II 
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain overshadowed 
by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy One of Israel * 
would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and restoration. 
O wise and most blessed Sergius, enlightened by the bright effulgence of the 
divine light, rejoicing, thou didst receive the joys of heaven, since thou wast truly thy 
Creator’s most pure bread, wherefore thou dost aloud unto Him: Glory to Thy 
strength, O Lover of mankind. 
Traversing the mire of soul-destroying passions, thou pass over to the depths of 
silence, wherefore thou wast granted to raise up a dying youth before the parting of 
his soul from the body, rendering his mother glad beyond all hope. Wherefore, struck 
with wonder thou didst cry aloud to the Creator: Glory to Thy strength, O Lover of 
mankind. 
O wise and glorious venerable father, having raised on high the understanding of 
the soul, and subjected thy feelings to rational thought, thou didst announce to those 
on earth the holy tidings of godliness, which indicateth the way into heaven.  
Theotokion: The Archangel came from heaven bringing great Joy to thee, O pure 
one, bearing good tidings and saying: O most pure Virgin, God shall assume flesh 
and come forth from thee, for the salvation of all those who with love, hymn thy 
praises. Glory to Thy strength, O Thou helper of mankind. 
Katavasia: Seated in glory * upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus most 
divine is come on a swift cloud, * and with His incorrupt arm hath He saved 
those who cry aloud: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ! 
ODE V 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of 
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O 
Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Shining exceedingly with purity. Thou, O Lady, didst become a divine dwelling 
place for the Master, for thou alone hast been revealed to be the Theotokos, bearing 
Him as a Babe in thine arms. 
Thy most fair soul clothed in noetic beauty, O pure one, thou hast been revealed 
to be the Bride of God, sealed with virginity, illumining the world with the effulgence 
of thy purity. 
Let the company of those who do not manifestly proclaim thee to be the pure 
Theotokos, weep. For thou hast appeared unto us as the Gateway of the divine 
effulgence, banishing the darkness of transgressions. 
Canon I 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * 
and why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * 
But do Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the 
light of Thy commandments. 
O wise venerable father, thou didst unwaveringly dwell in the activities of 
asceticism, firmly adhering to them even to the time of thine own departure, 
wherefore thou hast been deemed worthy of incorruptible blessedness. 
Possessed of a mind sharpened to hearken unto God, thou didst subdue the soul-
destroying passions and reaped thereby fruitful sheaves, with which thou dost feed 
those who praise thee, O venerable father Sergius. 
Bright hath been thy life, O venerable father Sergius, renowned throughout all the 
earth, filled with divine comeliness, prayer and fasting, and love for Christ, the Lover 
of mankind. 
Theotokion: Having thee as rampart, and guarded by thy protection, we bless thee 
exulting in thy divine glory: For thou, O most pure one, dost ever pour forth delight 
and rejoicing upon our souls. 
Canon II 
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
Thou didst manifestly put off the old man, O Father, and turning away from him 
with his sinful passions, as from an all-defiled garment, thou didst put on the new 
man, who is in the likeness of Christ, O all-glorious venerable father. 
By thine exalted way of life, equal to that of the angels, thou didst tear apart the 
bonds of passion, and having now received from on high the gift of working 
miracles, do thou, O Sergius, beg the cleansing of our sins. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: By thy childbirth, O Virgin, thou hast done away with the curse of 
Eve, the mother of us all, through shining forth the blessing of Christ upon the 
world. Therefore, praising thee with both tongue and heart, and acknowledging thee 
to be in truth the Theotokos, we magnify thee. 
Katavasia: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin 
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, 
* and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn 
thee. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Moses, great among the Prophets, wrote beforehand concerning thee calling thee 
the Ark and Table, the Candlestick and Jar, thus prefiguring the Incarnation of the 
Most High that was to take place from thee, O Mother and Virgin. 
Death is put to death, and the corruption of Adam’s condemnation is abolished by 
the Fruit of Thy womb, O Lady, for thou hast given birth to life, delivering from 
corruption those who hymn thy praises. 
The law hath failed, and the shadow hath passed, for transcending mind and 
thought, O all-hymned Virgin, grace hath appeared from thee, by the birth of our 
God and Savior. 
Canon I 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Unceasingly beseech the Redeemer, to grant remission of sins unto those who 
celebrate thy holy memorial, O blessed Father, that they may receive the heavenly 
Kingdom, where the sounds of those who keep festival gladden all mankind. 
Made strong in Christ O Sergius, thou, by thy steadfast mind, didst rend to pieces 
all the machinations of the evil one, as though a spider’s web, and hast revealed 
thyself to the world, O Sergius, as a most radiant light. 
Effulgent with the divine light, and dwelling now with the incorporeal powers in 
heaven, do thou ever remember those who with faith honor thy memory, O 
venerable father, and ever-memorable Sergius. 
Theotokion: In truth thou hast raised on high the fallen nature of mankind, for 
thou hast seedlessly borne within thy womb, O Mother of God, Him Who without 
change is the visible Son, the divine and co-equal image of the Father. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Canon II 
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
O Father, thou dost mercifully shine forth from on high upon us thy flock, 
granting victory to our Fatherland by thy prayers, and raising on high the horn of the 
Orthodox; though it be humble, receive from us this prayer offered to thee. 
To thee hast been given the gift of healing diverse diseases, and from Christ thou 
hast been granted power over unclean spirits, wherefore thou hast received from 
Him Who reigneth over all, crowns of victory. 
Theotokion: Taught by God, all the choirs of Prophets proclaimed beforehand 
the untold mystery of the divine conception of the Word that was to take place from 
thee, O Mother and Virgin, for thou hast verily borne the true Primal Effulgence. 
Katavasia: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O 
ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Smitten with the love of Christ thou, O venerable father, hast followed Him 
without looking back, * hating all carnal pleasures and shining like the sun upon the 
land of thy birth: * wherefore Christ hath enriched thee with the gift of working 
miracles. * Remember us who honor thy radiant memory that we may cry out to 
thee: ** Rejoice! O Sergius thou Divinely-wise one. 
Ikos: Having heard the sound of the Gospel, thou didst set aside, O Father, all the 
carnal wisdom, and deemed wealth and glory to be but dust, fighting against the 
passions as though without flesh, thou hast been deemed worthy of the honor of 
standing with the choirs of the incorporeal powers. Receiving the gift of 
understanding which thou dost grant to those who sing unto thee thusly: Rejoice! O 
Sergius, venerable God-bearer; thou heavenly man and earthly angel: Rejoice! thou 
dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit; Rejoice! thou who by prayer hast received a gift 
bestowed by God; Rejoice! For before thy birth, thou didst cry out glorifying the 
Holy Trinity Who glorified thee in this life and after death. Rejoice! Pillar of chastity 
by whom every passion hath been vanquished. Rejoice! For from thine early 
childhood thou didst follow Christ. Rejoice! Intercessor for the salvation of those 
who run to thee; Rejoice! pride of the land of thy birth. Rejoice! thou who, adorned 
with prophecy, foretold the future as though it were the present. Rejoice! for by thy 
prayers the adversaries are conquered. Rejoice! pride and confirmation of truly 
believing people. Through thy prayers keep us unharmed by the enemy that we may 
cry to thee: Rejoice! O Sergius, Divinely-wise one. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
ODE VII  
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
The furnace burnt not the three children, who prefigured thy birth-giving: for the 
Fire of the Godhead descended and dwelt within thee without consuming thee, and 
taught all to cry aloud: ‘O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou’. 
As was foretold, the ends of the earth call thee blessed, O all-immaculate Mother, 
and enlightened by thy radiant effulgence, and by grace, chanting, they cry aloud: ‘O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou’. 
The all-evil serpent dug his pernicious teeth into me, but thy Son, O Theotokos, 
broke them and gave me strength to cry aloud: ‘O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou’. 
O thou who alone among woman art divinely blessed, the place in which human 
nature was cleansed; for bearing in thine arms God Who siteth upon the shoulders of 
the cherubim, thou dost cry aloud: ‘O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou’. 
Canon I 
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
In the flaming furnace of temptations divine grace bedewed thee, O venerable 
father, showing thee to be full of light in thy desire for the Trinity, crying aloud: ‘O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou’. 
O glorious Sergius, despising the world, thou didst live as an Angel on earth and 
wast thereby deemed worthy of a place in the angelic choir. Wherefore we venerate 
thee with faith, O right wondrous one. 
O divinely wise venerable father, traveling unto the calm haven, thou didst shun 
worldly distractions, being a saving pilot for those sailing upon the storm-tossed seas 
of this life, and who cry aloud: ‘O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou’.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, a rod hath sprung forth from the root of Jesse, O all-
blessed Fruit, that beareth the Flower of salvation for those who with faith cry aloud 
to thy Son: ‘O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou’. 
Canon II 
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; * 
for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so hath He 
wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou praised and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
O most blessed and divinely wise venerable father, by divine command thou hast 
revealed thyself on earth to be a second heaven, and living in the flesh like an angel, 
thou hast raised up thy rational flock. 
Having thee who art blessed, as a mighty supplicant before God, a comforter for 
those in affliction, a defender and advocate and mediator of Godliness, we thy 
children, O venerable father Sergius, are saved from all distress. 
Theotokion: Rejoice! O pure daughter of Adam; for the Shepherd verily clothing 
Himself in the full man that I am, came forth from thee. He, the God of our Fathers, 
is blessed and supremely exalted, for His boundless mercy. 
Katavasia: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do 
all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thy Son, having illumined Thee with the effulgence of the Spirit, hath clothed 
Thee like a Queen in a golden vestment and set Thee, O all-pure One, at His right 
hand, wherefore we supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
He who by His desire alone established the world, hath assumed flesh from Thy 
most pure womb, wishing to elevate it on high, wherefore we supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages, 
O Most pure Virgin, manifestly shining with the radiance of virginity. Thou didst 
become the divine habitation of the Word, uniting himself therein with my human 
nature, wherefore we supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Thou wast prefigured as a golden candlestick, receiving beyond all telling the 
unapproachable Light, Who enlighteneth everything by the knowledge of Himself. 
wherefore we supremely exalt thee O pure one throughout all ages 
Canon I 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
O most blessed Sergius, thy light bearing feast hath filled with joy and spiritual 
gladness, with fragrance and enlightenment, those who have thee as their defender 
and as their monastic rule.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
With unceasing prayer thou didst ascend upwards to God, and from there 
enlightened by the effulgence of the thrice-sunned Godhead, thou hast established a 
bastion of struggle against the enemy. Thou didst lead companies of monks towards 
a new life, crying aloud to Christ: ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, ye people, 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages’. 
O Sergius, strengthened in fasting, ever vigilant in prayer, on earth thou didst 
show patience in temptations, crying aloud: ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, ye 
people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages’. 
Theotokion: O pure Birthgiver of God, cleanse the sinful sores and temptations of 
my soul steeping them in the waters that copiously stream forth from the side of 
thine Offspring: for I cry unto thee and take refuge in thee, and call upon thee, who 
art full of the grace of God. 
Canon II 
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so the 
fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin’s womb * into which it had 
descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation bless the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Earnestly hymning, we entreat thee: pray, O venerable father, for the truly 
believing people, that they be granted victory over adversaries, that the Church be 
granted majesty, and that the world be granted peace. 
The grace of the Holy Spirit, descended and dwelt within thee making thee an 
exorcist of evil spirits and showing thee to be a guide of monks, who cry aloud: ‘Let 
the whole creation bless the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages’. 
Shining from afar with the light of the threefold Sun, do thou, O holy Father, 
grant unto those who sing thy praises in memory of thee, light and salvation, and 
unto the world peace, as they sing: ‘Let the whole creation bless the Lord, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages’. 
Theotokion: The Word Who is supremely rich and Who is glorified by the songs 
of angels, made beggared Himself; choosing thee, for His Mother, thou blessed 
excellence of Jacob. Therefore as we praise Him, we sing: ‘Let the whole creation 
bless the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages’. 
Katavasia: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and 
He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
ODE IX 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
A star, radiant with the effulgence of the Godhead shone forth from Jacob upon 
those held in darkness; for Christ, the Word of God, assumed flesh from thee, O all-
pure one. And enlightened by Him we join chorus with the angelic hosts blessing 
thee. 
Strengthened by thy might and grace, I have composed a song for thee with my 
whole heart, do thou accept it, O pure Virgin, granting in exchange from thine 
incorrupt treasures, thine abundantly light-filled grace, O divinely blessed One. 
Thou hast manifestly revealed thyself O Virgin to be like a divine loom with 
which the Word hath woven a garment of flesh, rendering my form godlike, and 
having clothed himself therein, He hath saved all those who magnify thee with pure 
hearts. 
O all-pure Theotokos, resurrection has now been granted to the dead by thy 
Childbirth which transcendeth all telling and speech. For having clothed Himself in 
the outward covering of the flesh from thee, He hath illumined all, manifestly 
destroying the bonds of death. 
Canon I 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Filled with the manifestation of spiritual radiance, thou hast appeared like a lamp 
illumining from afar, and beaming the light of reason upon us, revealing thyself to be 
a habitation of the supremely divine Trinity. 
Christ gave thee, O wise Sergius, to the land of Russia, as a great teacher, guiding 
the land of his birth along the right and proper path, pouring forth teachings sweeter 
than honey, from which we the faithful draw forth, as from a vessel. 
Having conquered the soul-destroying passions, thou, like a true shepherd, hast 
tended the reason-endowed flock of Christ, ever nourishing it like flowers from 
paradise, with the grace of the Spirit. 
Theotokion: O thou divinely joyous one, we sing thy praises in psalms and with 
never-silent voices cry aloud to thee: ‘Thou hast poured forth joy for all’. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Canon II 
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy pure 
birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * quench the 
raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may unceasingly 
magnify Thee. 
Enlightened by the love of Christ and shining with virtues, thou didst not defile 
the beauty of thy soul, and having departed to the Father at a venerable age, thou, O 
Sergius, standest now before God together with the angels. 
Cleanse our transgressions, O Word, and enlighten the eyes of our heart, enabling 
us to see in purity from the outpouring of Thy divine light Thy brightness, by the 
prayers of venerable father Sergius, that we may all magnify Thee. 
Theotokion: O strange is thy wonder, for thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast 
ineffably appeared giving birth to God the Word, the mystery from before all ages, 
hidden in God; Who hath created all things. 
Katavasia: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap 
for joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Exapostilarion of the venerable one.  
Thou hast flourished, O Father, like the fig tree of David, * and hast appeared as 
the dwelling-place of the all-holy Spirit, * Who showed thee forth to the inhabited 
earth as glorious. * Do thou O venerable father Sergius, pray to Christ without 
ceasing ** for us who venerate with faith thy most venerable memory. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
We ever bless thee in song, O Virgin, * for thou O Theotokos hast, * given birth 
to One of the Trinity, * and didst bear in thy divine arms the abundantly rich Word, 
** unchangeable and immutable. 
On the Praises, the Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
When the call of God descended upon thee, * O most noetically rich father, * 
thou didst subject all the wisdom of the flesh * to the spirit, * having strengthened 
thyself with the pangs of fasting, * and like gold purified in the forge, * thou wast 
revealed to be an exceedingly radiant receptacle of the Holy Spirit. * Gathering 
together a multitude of monastics, * through thine instructions raising them on high, 
* unto the pinnacle of virtues, * as with a ladder leading unto heaven. * Remember 
us, who honor thy sacred memory, ** and ever supplicate that our souls be saved. 
(Twice) 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Today shineth forth * thy most illustrious and all-festive memory, * O most 
glorious Sergius * which hath gathered together a multitude of assemblies of fasters * 
and choirs of monastics, * both truly Angels and men, * unto the praise of Christ, 
our God adored in the Trinity. * Wherefore, approaching the sacred shrine of thy 
relics, * we abundantly receive the gifts of healing * and glorify Christ, the Savior of 
our souls, ** Who hath crowned thee. 
O most blessed God-bearer, Father Sergius * As did the Prophet of old, * thou 
hast covered the earth with thy tears * and never gave sleep unto thine eyes * nor 
allowed thine eyelids to close in slumber * thus manifesting the yearning of thy heart 
after Christ, * Whom thou didst exceedingly love; * wherefore, thou wast an example 
unto all monastics * elevating the understanding of every virtue; * wherefore, we also 
bless thee, ** magnifying Him Who hath glorified thee.  
Glory..., in Tone II: 
O holy Father! * Having from thy childhood fervently studied virtue, * thou wast 
a receptacle of the Holy Spirit, * and having obtained from Him the gift of working 
miracles, * thou didst admonish thy people to shun the sweet things of this life. * 
Being now most clearly illumined with the ineffable divine light, * enlighten also our 
thoughts ** by thy generosity, O thou wise Sergius. 
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II: 
All my trust I place in thee, * O Mother of God, * do thou preserve me ** under 
thy protection. 
The Doxology : If the service is not a Resurrection service,  
the Troparion is chanted after the Doxology : 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
As a virtuous ascetic athlete, * and true warrior of Christ God * fighting fiercely 
the good fight * against the passions during this earthly life, * laboring in hymnody, 
vigil and fasting * thou wast an example to thy disciples. * Wherefore, the Holy Spirit 
made His abode within thee, * Whose activity adorned thee with radiant beauty: * 
Since thou hast great boldness towards the Holy Trinity * remember thy flock wisely 
gathered by thee * and forget not as thou didst promise, * to visit thy children, ** O 
venerable father Sergius. 
Glory..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and 
through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
 
AT THE LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canons of the venerable father.  
In thyself, as an example of virtue to thy disciples, thou hast drawn to salvation 
many souls who, separated from worldly passions, have found comfort in the joy of 
paradise. (Twice) 
O blessed venerable father, thou hast flowered like a fruitful olive-tree in the 
house of God, anointing with oil the souls of those who sing thy praises with love, O 
Sergius, and who cry aloud to Christ with faith: ‘There is none holy save Thee, O 
only Lover of mankind.’ 
O blessed venerable father, by watchful vigils thou didst put to sleep the soul-
corrupting passions: and thereby, O divinely-wise Sergius, ascended to dwell in the 
heavenly mansions, having received the grace of healing. 
O Father, thou dost mercifully shine forth from on high upon us thy flock, 
granting victory to our Fatherland by thy prayers, and raising on high the horn of the 
Orthodox; though it be humble, receive from us this prayer offered to thee. (Twice) 
To thee hast been given the gift of healing diverse diseases, and from Christ thou 
hast been granted power over unclean spirits, wherefore thou hast received from 
Him Who reigneth over all, crowns of victory. 
Theotokion: Taught by God, all the choirs of Prophets proclaimed beforehand 
the untold mystery of the divine conception of the Word that was to take place from 
thee, O Mother and Virgin, for thou hast verily borne the true Primal Effulgence. 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone 4:  
As a virtuous ascetic athlete, * and true warrior of Christ God * fighting fiercely 
the good fight * against the passions during this earthly life, * laboring in hymnody, 
vigil and fasting * thou wast an example to thy disciples. * Wherefore, the Holy Spirit 
made His abode within thee, * Whose activity adorned thee with radiant beauty: * 
Since thou hast great boldness towards the Holy Trinity * remember thy flock wisely 
gathered by thee * and forget not as thou didst promise, * to visit thy children, ** O 
venerable father Sergius. 
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone 8: 
Smitten with the love of Christ thou, O venerable father, hast followed Him 
without looking back, * hating all carnal pleasures and shining like the sun upon the 
land of thy birth: * wherefore Christ hath enriched thee with the gift of working 
miracles. * Remember us who honor thy radiant memory that we may cry out to 
thee: ** Rejoice! O Sergius thou Divinely-wise one. 
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
The Prokeimenon in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death 
of His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that he hath rendered unto me? 
THE EPISTLE OF PAUL UNTO THE GALATIONS (GAL. 5: 22-26, 6:1-2) 
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, Meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that 
are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the 
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking 
one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye 
which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, 
lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of 
Christ. 
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight. 
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (LK. 6: 17-23) 
At that time, Jesus came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the 
company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judaea and 
Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to 
be healed of their diseases; And they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they 
were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out 
of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, 
Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: 
for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, 
when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and 
shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice 
ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in the heavens. 
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be, he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
