--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 27th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR CALLISTRATUS & HIS COMPANIONS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O martyred spiritual athlete Callistratus, * with thy mind illumined * by the light of 
piety, * thou didst unwaveringly tread the path * which leadeth to heavenly 
blessedness, * having vanquished all the wiles of the adversary. * Wherefore, we 
praise thee, * honoring thy sacred memory, ** O most blessed one.  
O divinely wise martyr Callistratus, * enriched by the words of life, * thou didst 
guide unto life * those who before were dead in accursedness through ignorance; * 
and, thou didst die with great zeal, O glorious one, * for they who believe in Christ, 
Who is the resurrection of us all, * most truly dwell in Him. * With them remember 
us ** to the supremely good Lord.  
O sacred martyr Gymnasius, * beheaded by the sword, * thou didst truly drown 
the Pharaoh of delusion * in the torrent of thy blood; * and now thou pourest forth 
healings upon all * who have recourse to thy temple with faith, * and therein praise 
thy struggles, * and celebrate thine honored memory, ** O blessed one.  
Glory ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone IV:  
Before Thy precious Cross, death was terrifying to mortals; but after Thy glorious 
Passion, mortals were terrifying to death. Thus the spiritual athlete was able to abolish 
all the power of the enemy: Through his supplications save our souls, O Christ.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, with 8 Troparia; and that of the martyrs, with 4 
Troparia, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
Walking the path of suffering without faltering, for the lost thou didst become a 
path leading to places of divine repose, O blessed one; wherefore, having assembled, 
we praise thee with faith, O Callistratus.  
Shining forth like a most radiant star, thou hast illumined the Church of Christ 
with the light of divine knowledge; and driving away the darkness of ignorance, O 
martyr, thou didst topple the ruined temples of falsehood.  
Patiently enduring every trial, O Callistratus, thou didst not refuse to die for the 
Life of all; wherefore, rejoicing, thou hast passed over to immortal rest, and dwellest 
with the angelic choirs.  
The sacred Gymnasius was shown to be an ember burning with the fire of the 
divine Spirit; utterly consuming the dross of falsehood, and bedewing with miracles 
those burning with the heat of the passions.  
Theotokion: Alone among women, thou didst supra-naturally give birth to One of 
the Trinity, O all-immaculate one, not having known man; wherefore, we glorify thee 
and Him Who was born of thee in a manner transcending all cause and all telling.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Thou Who established the heavens by Thy word * and founded the 
earth upon the multitude of waters, * establish me unto the hymning of * Thy 
glorification O Lord.  
Refusing to offer any sacrifice unto graven deities, thou didst offer thyself as a 
pure sacrifice to the God of all Who was sacrificed for us, O martyred spiritual athlete 
Callistratus.  
Arrayed in a purple robe dyed with thy truly sacred blood, O blessed martyr, thou 
standest, crowned, before the King of ages.  
The enemy was shown to be stripped naked by the divine glory of thee and the 
spiritual athletes who with thee were clothed from on high, O valiant minded martyr 
Gymnasius.  
Theotokion: Earnestly make supplication to thy Son, O Virgin, that He save us 
from the coming tribulations and from everlasting torment.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
The Church, making every effort today, * doth offer up mystic praise for those 
who suffered for her, ** O holy and divine martyrs, right victorious and all-wise.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:  
O ye faithful, let us praise the sufferings of Callistratus, let us hymn the pangs of 
Gymnasius, and with love let us bless those who suffered patiently with them; and let 
us cry out to them: O warriors of piety, ask that we be given peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Quickly heal my much suffering soul of the passions, * and my flesh of its 
infirmities. * Establish my mind in firmness, O most immaculate one, * and grant me 
quietude of thought, * that I may offer pure prayers to the King of all O Theotokos, 
** and ask for the remission of sins. 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee suspended on the Cross between two thieves 
of Thine own will, O Christ, Thy Mother, her womb rent asunder maternally, said: 
“O my sinless Son, how is it that Thou art unjustly nailed to the Cross like a 
malefactor, desiring to give life to the human race, in that Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Arming thyself against the persecutor like a most excellent commander, O martyr, 
thou didst lure to divine life those made captive of old, and didst capture them.  
With the showers of thy words thou hast watered the hearts of all, and guided 
them to the water of everlasting life, O right wondrous spiritual athlete of the Lord.  
The ever-memorable Callistratus is slaughtered like a lamb, his most zealous 
soldiers having been slain like lambs before him.  
Like a vine, O martyr Gymnasius, through the account of thy suffering thou didst 
produce ripe grapes, pouring forth the wine of piety.  
Theotokion: O Maiden, cleanse thou my heart which hath been defiled by the 
passions, and make it a receptacle of the pure and divine radiance.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
Loving Christ our God most ardently, O martyr, thou didst suffer, and destroyed 
the feeble strength of the enemy.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thou wast shown to be the leader of divine recruits, O martyr Callistratus, and, 
rejoicing, hast now been enlisted in the armies of the angels.  
Adorned with the glory of the splendor of martyrdom, O Gymnasius, rejoicing, 
thou hast now passed over to the splendors of the angels.  
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be the east of the Sun of righteousness, O all-
immaculate one. Him do thou entreat, that He save those who glorify thee in purity.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Thou didst break the jaws of invisible lions, O wise one, and didst show those 
who were devoured by the enemy to be partakers of immaterial sweetness, O martyr 
Callistratus.  
Delivering a beautiful and divine discourse concerning God, O most glorious 
Callistratus, thou didst reveal those who before had wretchedly worshiped inanimate 
gods, to be divine, and didst suffer with them.  
Bowing your necks before Christ, O martyrs, ye accepted slaughter and offered 
yourselves to God as perfect sacrifices; and ye have adorned the Church of the 
firstborn.  
Theotokion: Sanctify my mind and illumine my heart, O pure Mother of God, and 
deliver me from the evils which beset me, that I may glorify thee, O Ever-virgin 
Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up on the Cross ...”:  
Having endured multifarious wounds * and manifestly received crowns from God, 
* pray to Christ for us who celebrate your most festive memorial, * O great 
Callistratus * and ye blessed ones who suffered with him, * that He may grant peace 
to His flock and people; ** for He is the confirmation of the faithful.  
Ikos: Gazing upon the shrine of thy relics, O Callistratus, I hymn and magnify the 
pangs and sufferings which thou didst suffer. Wherefore, I beseech thee: Render 
Christ, the Judge of thy contest, merciful to me, that by grace He grant me utterance 
with divine words, that I may be able to praise thy struggles; for no man is able to 
recount thy mighty deeds; how thou didst manfully enter the tribunal, denouncing the 
wicked thoughts of the tyrants. Christ is the confirmation of the faithful!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Made lustrous as gold by the fire of torments, thou wast shown to be a symbol of 
the sufferings of Christ, O glorious one, and hast now been laid up in the treasury of 
God, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Strengthened by sufferings, thou didst show thyself to be a heaven-forged sword, 
O Callistratus, cutting down hordes of invisible demons and crying aloud: O God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou wast revealed as strong against impiety by the might of the Trinity, O 
Callistratus; and, illumined with the effulgence thereof, thou dost now cry aloud: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Loving Christ with a steadfast mind, O divinely inspired martyr Gymnasius, thou 
wast slain with all thy fellow zealots, chanting in thanksgiving: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O divinely joyous one, entreat Him Who was incarnate of thee in a 
manner past understanding and all telling, that we be saved who honor thee with love 
and cry out together: O God of .our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * ‘Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord’. 
Uprooting the thorns of falsehood, thou didst show thyself to be a most comely 
garden of paradise, O martyr, producing fruits of piety through divine grace.  
Looking to the expectations to come in perfect hope, thou didst set thyself apart 
for struggles, and, emerging triumphant, wast lawfully crowned, O Callistratus.  
Acquiring the healing of thy temple, O glorious Gymnasius, those who piously 
have recourse to it are delivered from evils, praising thee with faith.  
Theotokion: In that thou art more exalted than all creatures, O divinely joyous and 
all-immaculate Maiden, exalt my mind above the temptations of the deceiver.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
The shrine of thy relics poureth forth healing upon all in need, O martyr 
Callistratus: truly halting illnesses difficult to cure, and dispelling the darkness of evil 
spirits through the activity, power and grace of the Spirit.  
Bound one to another by grace, O martyrs of Christ, ye were shown to be like a 
divinely fashioned chain leading up on high and sanctifying the earth with the 
shedding of your blood. Wherefore, we faithfully celebrate your memory in gladness.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
With those who suffered with thee thou hast manifestly received an imperishable 
crown, everlasting glory and gladness, never-ending joy and the heavenly kingdom, O 
divinely wise Callistratus. With them remember us to the Lord.  
Shining forth today more brightly than the sun, the divine memory of the wise 
Callistratus, Gymnasius and those who suffered with them illumineth the ends of the 
earth with radiant brilliance. Through their supplications, O Christ, free us from 
condemnation.  
Theotokion: With gladsome mind we cry out to thee with the voice of Gabriel: 
Rejoice, O joy of the faithful! Rejoice, O golden lampstand, table, mountain and 
noetic gate! Rejoice, O divine chariot of Christ the King! Rejoice, O all-blessed one, 
thou loosing of the curse!  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
O the wonder! How have those who are clay by nature been shown to be golden? 
For neither fire, nor the sword, nor the teeth of wild beasts, nor tortures, nor wounds 
destroyed them; and, having cast down the incorporeal one with their flesh, they pray 
for us to the Lord.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O palace of God! Rejoice, O mountain densely wooded! 
Rejoice, O divine table! Rejoice, bush unburnt! Rejoice, throne of glory! Rejoice, 
golden jar! Rejoice, most radiant lamp! Rejoice, O Mary, Virgin Mother, thou light 
cloud!  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
ODE III, Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
The Church, making every effort today, * doth offer up mystic praise for those 
who suffered for her, ** O holy and divine martyrs, right victorious and all-wise.  
ODE VI, Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Having endured multifarious wounds * and manifestly received crowns from God, 
* pray to Christ for us who celebrate your most festive memorial, * O great 
Callistratus * and ye blessed ones who suffered with him, * that He may grant peace 
to His flock and people; ** for He is the confirmation of the faithful.  
 
