--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 20th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER  
 
AFTERFEAST OF THE EXALTATION OF THE CROSS,  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY GREATMARTYR EUSTATHIUS  
& THOSE WITH HIM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Today Thy precious Cross * hath shone forth radiantly like the sun, O Savior 
Christ, * set up and elevated * on the most glorious place of the skull, * on Thy most 
holy mountain, * showing forth most manifestly * that it is thereby, O Omnipotent 
One, * that Thou hast raised our nature up to the heavens, ** in that Thou lovest 
mankind.  
Today, O Unapproachable One, * the heavens have declared Thy glory unto 
mankind; * for the image of the Cross, * shining forth in radiance * with 
unapproachable light, * hath denounced the savage and cruel nature * of those who 
slew God. * Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving dispensation, ** O almighty Jesus, 
Savior of our souls.  
By stretching forth his arms * Moses vanquished Amalek, * prefiguring the image 
of the Cross; * and we now, bowing down before the tree of the Cross, * trample 
underfoot the wiles and machinations of the enemy, * having Christ as our champion, 
* Who was lifted up upon it in the flesh, * slaying the serpent ** and saving mankind.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy great-martyr, in the same melody: 
Thy calling was from on high, * and not from men, O Eustathius; * for Christ, the 
Lover of mankind, * Himself appeared to thee and ensnared thee, O blessed one, * in 
the nets of faith, * washing away thy sins * with thy baptism and the trials of life, * 
and, as Master, He extended patience to thee ** and showed thee to be a renowned 
victor.  
Rejoicing, O Eustathius, * in thy youth thou didst receive instruction in the 
virtues, * and, bereft of thy children and thy spouse, * thou didst valiantly endure 
captivity, * suffering ignominious slavery. * But thy courage in battle * made thee 
loving * and rendered thee radiant, ** O ever-memorable one.  
Thou didst offer thyself to God as divine incense * rendered most fragrant in the 
fire, * as a beautiful holocaust, * a right acceptable sacrifice, * and a living and most 
perfect offering, * with all thy household, most fruitful. * Wherefore, the mansions of 
heaven and the armies of the saints * have now received thee and thy family, ** O 
right wondrous Eustathius.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., of the martyrs, the composition of Ephraim of Karyes, in Tone II:  
Eustathius hath placed himself before us as a second Job in life, in his sufferings 
and struggles, being a model of the virtues and a tower of patience, truly surpassing 
Job in that virtue, with his spouse and children, faithful in life and unshaken amid 
trials, a victor amid sufferings. Him do we set forth as a supplicant before Christ, that 
He grant unto our souls enlightenment and the cleansing of transgressions.  
Both now ..., of the feast, the composition of Cyprian, in Tone II: 
When the hands of the Patriarch Jacob were crossed at the blessing of Joseph’s 
children, the sign of Thy Cross was prefigured, and holding it as our steadfast 
protector, we mightily drive away the hordes of the demons and cast down the pride 
of Belial, in that which vanquished the pernicious power of the most malicious 
Amalek. With a right honorable mind, O ye pious faithful, let us reverently bear it 
forth, and uplift it now for the cleansing of our sins, and let us cry aloud with raised 
voices: Have mercy, O Lord! O Good One Who wast incarnate of the Virgin, have 
pity on the wise creation of Thy hands!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
With Thy divinely created water * and Thy blood, O Word * is the Church * 
splendidly adorned like a bride, ** and it hymneth the glory of the Cross.   
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God; and worship the footstool of His feet, * for 
He is holy.  
  
Lifting high the spear and the Cross, * the nails and the other sacred things * 
wherewith the life-bearing body * of Christ was pierced, ** let us bow down before 
them.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages; * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
When Moses * lifted up his arms * in the form of the Cross, * and vanquished 
Amalek, * he portrayed the most pure suffering of Christ.  
Glory ..., of the holy great-martyr, by Ephraim of Karyes, in Tone VI: 
O thou who art adamantly firm in soul, how can we praise thee as is meet? For, 
deprived of thy spouse, thou didst transcend nature, possessions and children, and 
didst utter the blessed and ever-memorable cry of Job: “The Lord hath given, and the 
Lord hath taken away! As the Lord hath willed, so hath it been!” But God whom thou 
didst love and Whom thou didst fervently desire again gave thee most cherished 
things, O thou who took thought beforehand concerning those who suffered with 
thee. And having reached the end of divers torments with them, and receiving them 
as thy fellow supplicants, O blessed Eustathius, patient of soul, pray thou, that we be 
delivered from our iniquities.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VI: 
O Cross of Christ, hope of Christians, guide of the lost, haven of the tempest-
tossed, victory amid battles, confirmation of the whole world, physician of the ill, 
resurrection of the dead: Have mercy upon us!  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth. (Twice) 
Glory ..., that of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Both now ..., that of the feast. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Stretching forth his hands toward the heights of heaven, Moses prefigured the 
Cross, the divine weapon of the faithful, to which Christ nailed our sins. Wherefore, 
the enemy wept, suffering pain in his senses, and he said: “A wooden shaft hath 
pierced me through my heart: Christ hath released all from the bonds of Hades!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “He arose from the dead ...”: 
In the midst of Eden a tree put forth death, but in the midst of all the earth a tree 
hath caused life to bud forth; for those who tasted of the former had been incorrupt 
but became corrupt, but those who received the latter have inherited incorruption. 
For as God Thou savest the human race by the Cross.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
 Canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos;  
And that of the holy martyrs, with 6 Troparia.  
ODE I 
Canon of the Feast  
Irmos: Inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross upon the waters, * Moses 
marked a straight line before him with his staff * and divided the Red Sea, * 
opening a path for Israel who went over dry-shod. * Then he marked a second 
line across the waters * and united them in one, * overwhelming the chariots 
of Pharaoh. * Therefore let us sing to Christ our God, * for He hath been 
glorified. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Of old, Moses, standing between the priests, prefigured in himself the image of 
Christ’s most pure sufferings; for, forming a cross with his outstretched arms, he 
raised up victory, vanquishing the might of the tyrant Amalek. Wherefore, let us 
hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
Upon a pole Moses set the cure of the deadly and venomous sting of the serpents, 
and the deliverance therefrom; for to the tree, in the image of the Cross, he bound a 
serpent which crawleth upon the ground, triumphing over the sinister bane therein. 
Wherefore, let us hymn Christ God, for He hath been glorified.  
The sky showed forth the victory of the Cross to the divinely wise Emperor 
Constantine, the pious ruler; and therein the audacity of the hostile foe was cast 
down, delusion was destroyed and the divine Faith spread to the ends of the earth. 
Wherefore let us hymn Christ our God, for He hath been glorified.  
Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is:  
“Praise be to the namesake of goodly estate”;  
The composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Subduing the uprising of my passions by thine entreaties, O martyr of Christ, by 
thy discourse may I be disposed to praise well the sacred celebration of thy struggles, 
O all-blessed one.  
Thy name was not given thee by men, O most excellent one, but from the 
heavens, for Christ called thee as before He had called Paul, appearing like a hart and 
freeing thee from venomous serpents.  
Full of heavenly wisdom, O martyr, crowned with all thy household thou didst 
most piously prefer the delight of heaven to corruptible riches and pleasures.  
Theotokion: God, the Creator of all, found thee to be more pure than all creation, 
O all-pure one, and, intending to take the form of man in the flesh through thee, He 
was well-pleased to become incarnate.  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The rod of Aaron is an image of this mystery, * for when it budded it 
showed who should be priest. * So in the Church, that once was barren, * the 
wood of the Cross hath now budded forth, * filling her with strength and 
steadfastness. 
The rough stone, struck, put forth water for a disobedient and hard-hearted 
people, and showed forth the mystery of the divinely elect Church, whereof the Cross 
is the might and confirmation.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
When Christ’s most pure side was pierced by the spear, blood and water flowed 
therefrom, renewing the covenant and washing sin away, for the Cross is the boast of 
the faithful, the might and confirmation of kings.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Deprived of, thy children and wife, thou didst mightily endure the threefold 
billows of perils, O glorious Eustathius, martyr of Christ.  
Thy children, saved by God from the attacks of wild beasts, O Eustathius martyr 
of Christ, they vanquished also the noetic beasts.  
Passing over life as though it were a river, O glorious one, by thy trials thou didst 
preserve unshaken the divine aspect of thy soul.  
Theotokion: Come, ye faithful, and with songs of joy let us hymn the pure and 
honored habitation of purity and virginity.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly upon the Cross, * bestow Thy mercies upon 
the new community named after Thee, * O Christ God; gladden with Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over enemies; ** may they have as Thy 
help the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace. 
Ikos: He who was caught up to the third heaven of paradise and heard 
unspeakable and divine words which the human tongue cannot utter, what writeth he 
to the Galatians, which, as lovers of the Scriptures, ye have both read and come to 
understand? God forbid, saith he, that I should glory, save only in the Cross of the 
Lord, whereon having suffered He slew the passions. Let us all then firmly hold this 
boast, the Cross of the Lord; for this Wood is our salvation, the invincible trophy, the 
weapon of peace.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Above the hart thou didst see the image of the Cross, and thereon the image of 
Jesus; and falling prostrate thou didst marvel at this vision and with all thy household, 
came to divine baptism; and becoming poor, thou wast shown to be like a second 
Job. Wherefore, deprived of spouse and sons, thou didst cry aloud: “The Lord hath 
given, and the Lord hath taken away!” O Eustathius, commander of warriors, entreat 
Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who celebrate thy holy 
memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in the same melody:  
The honored one removed the Cross of the Savior, which had been hidden in the 
earth, and thereby filled the world with joy, and in the divine temple proclaimed that 
it is to be elevated in the Spirit, and bore it as a scepter into the royal chambers. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Wherefore, Helena cried out to her son: “Reach out, O wise master, and take in thy 
hands dominion and victory, and teach the nations to reverently worship the Cross 
and the sufferings of Christ!”  
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Of old, Moses transformed the bitter springs in the desert with a tree, showing 
forth the conversion of the gentiles to piety through the Cross.  
Jordan, having hidden in its depths an axe-head, gave it forth again through the 
power of a stick, signifying the cutting off of deception by the Cross and baptism.  
In a sacred manner the people encamped in four divisions; and preceding in this 
fashion the tabernacle of the witness, they were glorified in the cross-like formation 
of their ranks.  
Wondrously stretched forth, the Cross emitted rays like the sun’s, and the heavens 
declared the glory of our God.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Thou wast protected against the tyranny of the enemy by the hand of God, and 
thy spouse, preserving her chastity, cried out: glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Placed in peril and subjected to divers trials, O Eustathius, martyr of Christ, thou 
didst hasten to the arena to bear witness, crying out to thy Master: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
Guided by the precepts of the Master, O ever-memorable and glorious Eustathius, 
thou and thy wife and children were shown to be adorned with the blood of 
martyrdom.  
Theotokion: Without knowing wedlock, O Virgin, thou hast given birth, and even 
after birthgiving thou wast revealed to remain a virgin. Wherefore, with steadfast faith 
and unceasing voices we cry “Rejoice!” to thee, O Lady.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O thrice-blessed Tree, on which Christ the king and Lord was 
stretched! * Through thee the beguiler fell, * who tempted mankind with the 
tree. * He was caught in the trap set by God, * who was crucified upon thee in 
the flesh, * granting peace unto our souls. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
O ever-hymned Tree, whereon Christ was stretched: the whirling sword which 
guarded Eden stood in awe of thee, O Cross, and the dread cherubim withdrew, 
when Christ was nailed to thee, Who granteth peace unto our souls.  
The adverse powers of the nether world are stricken with fear when the sign of the 
Cross is traced in the air in which they live, as are the generations of the earthborn 
and the heavenly, who bend the knee to Christ, Who granteth peace unto our souls.  
Having shone forth a divine light and revealed itself in rays of incorruption unto 
the darkened gentiles astray in error, the divine Cross acquireth them for Christ Who 
was nailed thereto, and granteth peace unto our souls.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Thou didst show thyself to be like Job; for, blameless and pious, thou wast found 
to sail through life with long-suffering. (Twice)  
Who can hymn the pangs which thou didst endure, O blessed martyr, deprived of 
spouse and children? 
 Theotokion: O Mother of God, who hast given birth to the supremely good 
Word Who is the Benefactor of all: heal thou the affliction of my soul.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Jonah stretched out his hands in the form of a cross * within the belly 
of the sea monster, * plainly prefiguring the redeeming Passion. * Cast out 
from thence after three days, * he foreshadowed the marvelous Resurrection of 
Christ our God, * who was crucified in the flesh and enlightened the world * 
by His Rising on the third day. 
Bent with age and weighed down with infirmity, Jacob drew himself up when he 
crossed his arms, showing forth the power of the life-bearing Cross; for God Who 
was nailed in the flesh hath set aright the obsolescence of the law of the Scripture 
which was written in shadows, and dispelled the soul-destroying disease of deception.  
Divine Israel laid his hands cross-wise upon the heads of the youths, and insofar as 
those serving under the law give glory to the firstborn, he suspected he had erred in 
laying his hands thus, yet he did not alter the life-bearing image; wherefore crying 
aloud, raising the Cross on high, the newly established people of Christ God are 
protected thereby.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Thou didst desire Christ Who had appeared to Thee, O glorious one, and didst 
unite thyself to Him with love; for thou wast shown to be adorned, clad in the purple 
robe of thy blood. (Twice)  
Thou didst make haste to follow the divine steps of Christ, and, crowned with all 
thy household, O martyr, wast most perfectly shown to share in His sufferings and 
kingdom.  
Theotokion: Using now the words of Gabriel, O all-immaculate Virgin, we cry out: 
Rejoice, O only blessed Mother! Rejoice, O thou who didst have within thee the Sun 
of righteousness!  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Manifestly emulating the sufferings of Christ, * and having drained His cup with 
fervor, * O Eustathius, thou wast a partaker and fellow heir of glory, * receiving 
divine remission of sins from on high ** from the God of all Himself.  
Ikos: Grant me the gift of hymnody, O Lord my God, that I may now hymn and 
speak of the struggles of Thy spiritual athlete, that in good order I may praise 
Eustathius, who was valiant in sufferings, who was ever the victor in battle against the 
enemy, who was great in piety, and who hath shone forth among the choir of the 
martyrs. For together with them and the angels, he chanteth unceasingly to thee, O 
all-wise One, receiving divine remission from on high.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the Feast  
Irmos: The senseless decree of the wicked tyrant, * breathing forth threats and 
blasphemy hateful to God, * confused the people. * Yet neither the fury of the 
wild beast nor the roaring of the fire * could frighten the three Children: * but 
standing together in the flame, * fanned by the wind that brought refreshment 
as the dew, they sang: * ‘Blessed and supremely praised art Thou, * O our God 
and the God of our fathers.’ 
The first man, tasting of the tree, went to dwell in corruption; for, having 
condemned himself to a shameful banishment from life, he imparted corruption to 
the whole race of mankind. But we mortals, finding restoration through the tree of 
the Cross, cry aloud: O supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Breaking the commandment of God came about through disobedience, and the 
untimely partaking of the fruit of the tree brought death to mankind, but to preserve 
that which is most precious, access to the tree of life was forbidden, until God 
opened it to the suffering thief who with a proper understanding cried aloud: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Israel, foreseeing things to come, laid hold of the tip of Joseph’s staff, revealing 
beforehand that the most glorious Cross would seize the power of the kingdom, for it 
is the victorious boast of kings and a light for those who cry aloud with faith: O 
supremely hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Imprisoned within a brass bull glowing red hot with heat, as in a furnace, O 
martyrs of Christ, ye cried out in thanksgiving: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, O Lord! (Twice)  
United by the law of love and nature, O right glorious martyrs, suffering ye 
showed forth a single endurance, chanting: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Thou alone art truly more exalted than the heavens of God from all 
ages; for thou hast given birth ineffably to their Creator, O all-pure Lady, Birthgiver 
of God.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O children equal in number to the Trinity: * bless ye God, the Father 
and Creator; * hymn ye the Word Who came down * and transformed the fire 
into dew; * and supremely exalt ye Him Who giveth life unto all, * the most 
holy Spirit, * throughout the ages! 
O hosts of heaven, chant ye to the exalted Tree which was drenched in the blood 
of the incarnate Word of God, and celebrate the restoration of those born on earth. 
O Ye people, worship the Cross of Christ, by which the world hath been granted the 
resurrection throughout all ages!  
O ye mortal stewards of grace, with your hands reverently raise on high the Cross 
whereon Christ God stood and the spear which pierced the body of God the Word, 
that all the nations may see the salvation which is of God, glorifying Him throughout 
all ages!  
O faithful Christian kings, forechosen by divine decree, be ye glad! And having 
received from God the precious Cross, rejoice in it, the weapon of victory, for 
thereby tribes of enemy warriors seeking to make battle have been scattered 
throughout all ages.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
The choir of true witnesses, united in splendor by the laws of nature and the word 
of the Faith, let us all now piously praise as zealots of piety; and with faith let us sing: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Ye were beautifully united, O honored ones, having been separated before by 
supreme providence; and having dyed the purple robe of betrothal in your blood, ye 
hastened ardently to the heavenly bridal chamber, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works 
of the Lord!  
O blessed Eustathius, thou didst offer to God the fruit of thy loins and thy spouse 
who rejoiced; for thou didst receive them as partakers of suffering by nature, chanting 
to Christ: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Thou wast a rod of the root of Jesse, O Virgin, who didst cause the 
almighty Lord to blossom forth. He Who perfumeth us and imparteth His sweet 
fragrance unto all who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought forth 
Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted upon 
the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
Let all the trees of the forests rejoice, for their nature hath been sanctified by Him 
Who planted them in the beginning - Christ Who was stretched out upon the Tree. 
Wherefore, worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
A sacred horn hath been lifted up, the chief horn for all the divinely wise: the 
Cross, whereby all the horns of the sinful are noetically broken asunder. Wherefore, 
worshiping it as it is now raised aloft, we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
That Thou mayest show the Cross, the invincible weapon, to the world, O adored 
Lord and King, in the sight of all Thou didst form its most glorious image in the 
skies, radiant with boundless light. Wherefore, all the powers of heaven magnify 
Thee.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
With gladness thou didst wholly pass over to the light of the Trinity and now 
rejoicest with the angelic army, O martyr Eustathius. With them pray thou 
unceasingly, that all who hymn thee be saved.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Thy struggles and divers tribulations on earth have now won for thee gladness in 
the heavens with the righteous. And enjoying it, O glorious one, grant it also unto 
those who hymn thee.  
I offer myself wholly unto thee with fervor, O martyr Eustathius, that I may be 
enriched by thee, mine intercessor before the Master and mediator of divine salvation, 
who art able to help me out of every evil circumstance.  
Theotokion: Confessing thee to be the Theotokos, O Virgin Mother, we all 
earnestly entreat thee, who without knowing a man hast given birth to the Savior, the 
Bestower of life, that through thy supplications we may be delivered from all sorrow.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
With thy divinely wise children and Thine all-blessed wife thou hast received the 
glory of immortality and never-ending life, O blessed Eustathius, having abandoned 
the pleasures of the world. Wherefore, with love we celebrate thy most sacred and 
divine memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the feast: 
Placing our hope on thee, O Theotokos, we win a most perfect victory over 
twofold foes, having the Cross of thy Son as our weapon and trophy, our shield, 
sword, spear and arrow against Belial.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy martyrs, by Andrew Pyrrhus:  
In Tone IV: Who will not bless thy most blessed character, O Eustathius? For 
thou didst valiantly undergo assault by the enemy, the author of evil, yet didst not 
despair at the loss of thy spouse and children, but didst cried aloud the cry of Job’s 
thanksgiving: “Naked came I forth from my mother’s womb; and naked shall I depart 
to the only Creator, the Savior of our souls!” (Twice)  
In Tone VI: As a habitation of the incorrupt Offspring of Mary, O martyr, abiding 
unceasingly in immaterial light, thou dost render the uncreated Trinity right merciful 
unto us.  
In Tone VIII: Entering into the impenetrable cloud and uniting thyself to the Sun 
of righteousness Who appeared to thee noetically from on high, and having come in 
contact with the image of God through the imagery of a living creature, thou didst 
become an inspired image, O all-blessed Eustathius. Wherefore, having been 
enlightened by water and the Spirit and having been washed by thine activity and the 
blood of martyrdom, thou hast been deemed worthy to join chorus with the 
assemblies of the angels in heaven, wherein do thou also unite us to Christ our God 
and Savior.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone VIII: 
Having resigned thy military commission in a kingdom here below when our 
Savior appeared to thee in an image above a wild creature, thou, together with thy 
wife and children, dost now join chorus with the inhabitants of heaven, O all-blessed 
Eustathius. Wherefore, we entreat thee: Beseech the Lord on behalf of our souls!  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VIII: 
Today is the Cross raised on high, and the world is sanctified; for He that sitteth 
with the Father and the Holy Spirit stretched out his arms thereon. It hath brought 
the whole world to the knowledge of Thee, O Christ. Therefore, to those who hope 
in Thee do Thou grant divine glory.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Today is exalted * the Cross of Christ, * the life-bearing Tree, * whereon He was 
nailed ** in the flesh.  
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; * for 
He is holy.  
Rejoice, divine preservation * of the faithful, * unassailable rampart, * thou Cross 
of the Lord, ** whereby we are exalted above the earth.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
Come ye, in gladness * let us all venerate * the life-bearing Tree * whereon was 
stretched ** Christ our deliverance.  
Glory ..., of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Having like Paul received thy calling not from men, O martyr Eustathius, and 
growing in God through thy trust in the Cross, thou didst manfully put to shame the 
ungodliness of the tyrants and the cruelty of tortures. Wherefore, even before 
shedding thy blood thou didst oppose sin, fighting against the invisible foe, and now 
praying unceasingly to God the King, ask that He grant peace unto all the world and 
great mercy to our souls.  
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VIII:  
That which Moses prefigured with his body of old cast down and vanquished 
Amalek; and David the psalmist, crying out, hath commanded us to bow down before 
Thy footstool, Thy precious Cross, O Christ God. Today we sinners also do homage 
with our unworthy lips to Thee Whose will it was to be nailed thereto; and, chanting, 
we pray: O Lord, grant that with the thief we may receive Thy kingdom!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia; 4 from ODE VIII of the canon of the feast, and 
4 from ODE VI of the canon of the holy martyrs.  
O hosts of heaven, chant ye to the exalted Tree which was drenched in the blood 
of the incarnate Word of God, and celebrate the restoration of those born on earth. 
O Ye people, worship the Cross of Christ, by which the world hath been granted the 
resurrection throughout all ages! (Twice) 
O ye mortal stewards of grace, with your hands reverently raise on high the Cross 
whereon Christ God stood and the spear which pierced the body of God the Word, 
that all the nations may see the salvation which is of God, glorifying Him throughout 
all ages!  
O faithful Christian kings, forechosen by divine decree, be ye glad! And having 
received from God the precious Cross, rejoice in it, the weapon of victory, for 
thereby tribes of enemy warriors seeking to make battle have been scattered 
throughout all ages.  
Thou didst desire Christ Who had appeared to Thee, O glorious one, and didst 
unite thyself to Him with love; for thou wast shown to be adorned, clad in the purple 
robe of thy blood. (Twice)  
Thou didst make haste to follow the divine steps of Christ, and, crowned with all 
thy household, O martyr, wast most perfectly shown to share in His sufferings and 
kingdom.  
Theotokion: Using now the words of Gabriel, O all-immaculate Virgin, we cry out: 
Rejoice, O only blessed Mother! Rejoice, O thou who didst have within thee the Sun 
of righteousness!  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone I: 
Save O Lord Thy people, * and bless Thine inheritance. * Grant now unto the 
faithful * victory over adversaries, * and by the power of Thy Cross ** do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth. 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II: 
Manifestly emulating the sufferings of Christ, * and having drained His cup with 
fervor, * O Eustathius, thou wast a partaker and fellow heir of glory, * receiving 
divine remission of sins from on high ** from the God of all Himself.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
 
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
O Thou Who wast lifted up willingly upon the Cross, * bestow Thy mercies upon 
the new community named after Thee, * O Christ God; gladden with Thy power 
Orthodox Christians, * granting them victory over enemies; ** may they have as Thy 
help the invincible trophy, the weapon of peace. 
 
Prokeimenon of the feast in Tone VII (also until the Leave-taking): Exalt ye the 
Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; * for He is holy. 
Prokeimenon of the saint, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath 
the Lord been wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §233 (6: 10-17)  
Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.  
Alleluia of the feast, in Tone IV: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast 
purchased from the beginning.  
Alleluia of the saint, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, 
and He delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §106 (LK.21:12-19)  
The Lord said to His disciples: Beware of men. They shall lay their hands on you, 
and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being 
brought before kings and rulers for my name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a 
testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall 
answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not 

--- PAGE 16 ---
be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, 
and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye 
shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your head 
perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the all-honored Cross of the Lord!  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou art a mystical Paradise, * who untilled brought forth 
Christ. * by Whom the life-giving Tree of the Cross hath been planted upon 
the earth: * Therefore celebrating its exaltation on this day, * Him do we 
worship * and thee do we magnify. 
 
Communion Verse: The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, hath been signed 
upon us.  
Communion Verse of the saints: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is 
meet for the upright.  
 
