--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER  
COMMEMORATION OF THE REPOSE OF THE HOLY APOSTLE & EVANGELIST 
JOHN THE THEOLOGIAN  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy evangelist, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Come, ye faithful, * and with divine hymns let us crown today * the glorious John 
the beloved, * the abyss of wisdom and recorder of Orthodox dogmas; * for he hath 
thundered forth: * In the beginning was the Word. * Hence, the ever-memorable one 
hath been shown forth * as having a voice of thunder, ** shining forth glad tidings 
for the world with great wisdom. (Twice)  
Truly thou hast been revealed to be * a true friend and great intimate of Christ the 
Teacher; * for, reclining against His breast, * thou didst draw forth from thence the 
dogmas of wisdom, * wherewith as a divine herald of God * thou dost enrich all the 
world round about. * Wherefore, the comely Church of Christ, * cherishing these 
things, ** rejoiceth in gladness.  
Rejoice truly, O theologian! * Rejoice, beloved son of the Mother of the Lord! * 
For, standing before the Cross of Christ, * thou didst hear the voice of the Master, * 
Who cried out to thee: * “Behold now thy Mother!” * Hence, as is meet, * we all bless 
thee ** as the great and beloved apostle of Christ.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Come, O ye faithful, and let us bless the ever-memorable John, the foremost of 
the apostles, the trumpet of theology, the spiritual general who hath subdued all the 
world under God, and who hath now passed from the earth, yet doth continue to 
remain with the earth, who liveth and awaiteth the awesome second coming of the 
Master. O beloved intimate of Christ and initiate of His mysteries, beg thou that we 
who celebrate thy memory with love may greet it uncondemned.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy evangelist, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
O glorious theologian, * with thy divine teachings * and the manifestations of thy 
miracles * thou hast driven away all the darkness of delusion * and hast enlightened 
the people, * that they might know the true Faith. * Pray thou now, * that peace and 
great mercy ** be granted to our souls.  
Verse. Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world  
O all-wise John, * faithful beloved friend of Christ, * delivering me from love for 
the flesh, * by thy divine entreaties * and works of piety * cause me to cleave unto the 
Master of all * And pray thou, that He grant me * remission of transgressions ** and 
great mercy.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
O most sacred beholder of God, * from sufferings and tribulations, * from 
afflictions and sorrows * deliver those who praise thee, * who honor thee with love, * 
who ever hasten to thee * and have recourse to thy divine protection; * and make 
thou supplication, that peace and great mercy ** be granted to our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
O virgin theologian, beloved disciple of the Savior, by thy supplications save us 
from all harm, we pray, for we are thy flock.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
All my hope do I place in thee, * O Mother of God. ** Keep me beneath the 
shelter of thy wings.  
Troparion of the holy evangelist, in Tone II:  
O beloved apostle of Christ God, * hasten thou to deliver a defenseless people. * 
He Who permitted thee to recline against His breast receiveth thee, * prostrate in 
supplication. * Him do thou beseech, O theologian, * that He dispel the gloom of the 
nations which doth beset us, ** asking for us peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone II:  
All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, O Theotokos; * for, 
thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, * thou art known to be a true Mother, having 
given birth unto God. ** Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first Antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy evangelist, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
The beholder of ineffable revelations * and extoller of the highest mysteries of 
God, * the son of Zebedee, * who set down in writing the Gospel of Christ, * hath 
taught us to theologize ** concerning the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. 
(Thrice)  
The harp of heavenly hymns played by God, * the recorder of mysteries, the 
divinely eloquent mouth, * doth beautifully chant the hymn of hymns; * for, moving 
his lips as though they were strings, * and using his tongue as a plectrum, ** he 
prayeth that we be saved. (Thrice)  
Proclaiming with thy thunderous tongue * the hidden words of divine wisdom, O 
beloved of God, * thou ever criest aloud, continually moving thy lips: * In the 
beginning was the Word! * And thereby instructest every man ** in the knowledge of 
God. (Twice) 
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
O ye of the race of mortals, let us offer goodly praise as is meet to the beloved and 
virginal John, the sun of thunder, the foundation of the words of God, the author of 
theology, the first preacher of the truth of the dogmas of the wisdom of God; for 
having the divine continually within him, he said: In the beginning was the Word, 
Who is inseparable from the Father and of the same essence with the Father, re-
vealing to us through himself the Orthodoxy of the Holy Trinity. And he hath 
likewise shown us that He createth with the Father and beareth life and the light of 
truth. O awesome wonder! O uttermost wisdom! For, full of love, he was also filled 
with theology through glory, honor and faith, as a founder of our pure Faith. 
Wherefore, we shall receive everlasting blessings on the day of judgment.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone II:  
The shadow of the law hath passed now that grace hath come, * for as the Bush 
wrapped in flame was not consumed, * so didst thou bear a Child O Virgin * and 
remained a Virgin; * in place of a pillar of fire, the Sun of righteousness hath dawned, 
* instead of Moses, Christ is come, ** the salvation of our souls. 
 Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JOHN (I JN. 3: 21-4: 6)  
Beloved: if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. And 
whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do 
those things that are pleasing in his sight. And this is his commandment, that we 
should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave 
us commandment. And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he 

--- PAGE 4 ---
in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given 
us. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: 
because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit 
of God: Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: 
And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of 
God: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; 
and even now already is it in the world. Ye are of God, little children, and have 
overcome them: because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. They 
are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them. We 
are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us.  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JOHN (I JN. 4: 11-16)  
Beloved: if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. No man hath seen 
God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected 
in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us 
of his Spirit. And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the 
Savior of the world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God 
dwelleth in him, and he in God. And we have known and believed the love that God 
hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in 
him.  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JOHN (I JN. 4: 20-5: 5)  
Beloved: If a man saith: “I Love God,” and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he 
that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God Whom he hath 
not seen? And this commandment have we from Him, That he who loveth God love 
his brother also. Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and 
every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him. By this 
we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep His 
commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep His commandments: and 
His commandments are not grievous. For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the 
world: and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. Who is he 
that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera of the apostle, in Tone I:  
The composition of Germanus: Rivers of theology poured forth from thine 
honored mouth, O apostle, and the Church of God, watered thereby, doth worship 
the consubstantial Trinity in Orthodoxy. Pray now to the Trinity, O theologian John, 
that our souls be made steadfast and saved.  
The composition of Andrew Pyrrhus: The garden of purity hath emitted for us the 
myrrh of sweet fragrance on this present feast, that we may cry out to him: O Apostle 
John, who reclined against the Master’s breast, who hast rained down discourse upon 
the world and preserved the Virgin as the apple of thine eye, beseech Christ, that He 
grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
O disciple of the Savior, virgin and theologian, when Christ God was crucified He 
committed the Virgin Theotokos to thy care, in that thou art virginal; and thou didst 
preserve her as the apple of thine eye. Wherefore, pray thou, that our souls be saved.  
As an eyewitness to ineffable mysteries, thou didst cry out, exclaiming: “In the 
beginning the pre-eternal Word was with God, and He was God!”, O Apostle John, 
intimate and faithful friend of Christ, sweetness of the Trinity, unshakable 
confirmation of Ephesus and Patmos, our help. Pray thou, O all-blessed theologian, 
that the people who ever celebrate thy memory with faith be delivered from wicked 
enemies, material and noetic.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
Reclining against the breast of Christ the Teacher at the Lord’s supper, O beloved 
disciple, thou didst thereby come to know ineffable things, and hast thundered forth 
thy heavenly voice unto all, saying; “In the beginning was the Word and the Word 
was with God, and the Word was God” - Christ God, the Savior of our souls the 
Light of truth Who enlighteneth every man who cometh into the world.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The Son who together with the Father and the Spirit * is glorified in the highest by 
the Seraphim, * wishing to refashion the First-formed man, * ineffably emptied His 
entire being into thy womb, * O all-praised Theotokos. * Dawning forth from thee * 
He hath enlightened the whole world by His Godhead, * delivering it from the 
deception of idolatry, * and by this He hath rendered the race of mankind divine, * 
having raising it on high to the heavens; ** Christ God the Savior of our souls. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy evangelist, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
Theologizing concerning the Son of the Most High * Who with the Father is 
equally everlasting and of the same essence, * immutable Light from Light, * the 
impress of the hypostasis of the Father, * Who shone forth timelessly and 
dispassionately from Him, * the Creator and Lord of all the ages, * Christ our God, * 
didst thou preach to the world, O beloved one, * as He Who brought light forth out 
of darkness. * Him do thou entreat, ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  
Receiving the light of the Comforter, * and, illumined therewith, thou didst 
theologize * and proclaim unto all, O beloved one, * that He proceedeth from the 
Father * and through the Son is revealed to mankind, * equal in honor, co-enthroned 
and of the same essence * with the beginningless Father and God the Word. * Where-
fore, we honor thee in hymns * as the foundation of the divine Faith, * which do 
thou preserve unshaken ** through thy supplications to the Lord.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having ascended to the summit of theology, * thou didst learn the ineffable 
mysteries of God: * the single essence of the Godhead, * His single glory, * kingdom 
and dominion, * ever distinct in three Hypostases, * yet essentially indivisible and 
united in an uncommingled divine unity. * And, rendering glory, O theologian, * thou 
didst preach the indivisible Trinity. * Him do thou entreat, ** that He save and 
enlighten our souls.  
Glory ..., the composition of John the monk, in Tone VI:  
O apostle of Christ, evangelist and theologian, as an initiate of ineffable mysteries 
thou hast thundered forth upon us the ineffable doctrines of wisdom, explaining to 
the faithful that He was in the beginning, and discounting that there was a time when 
He did not exist, thus rejecting the notions of the heretics. And as thou wast shown 
to be the beloved intimate and friend of Christ, like the eloquent Isaiah and Moses 
the God-seer, pray thou earnestly for our souls, in that thou hast boldness before 
God.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O all-pure 
one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign Lady, ** 
the intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 
After the Blessing of the Loaves: the Troparion of the holy evangelist, in Tone II: 
O beloved apostle of Christ God, * hasten thou to deliver a defenseless people. * 
He Who permitted thee to recline against His breast receiveth thee, * prostrate in 
supplication. * Him do thou beseech, O theologian, * that He dispel the gloom of the 
nations which doth beset us, ** asking for us peace and great mercy. (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, * O Theotokos; * 
for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, * thou art known to be a true Mother, 
having given birth unto God. ** Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy evangelist, in Tone II: 
O beloved apostle of Christ God, * hasten thou to deliver a defenseless people. * 
He Who permitted thee to recline against His breast receiveth thee, * prostrate in 
supplication. * Him do thou beseech, O theologian, * that He dispel the gloom of the 
nations which doth beset us, ** asking for us peace and great mercy. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone II:  
All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, * O Theotokos; * 
for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, * thou art known to be a true Mother, 
having given birth unto God. ** Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Thou wast called the son of the thunder of God, to deafen the ears of the ungodly, 
O all-wise one, while most sweetly trumpeting forth the incarnation of the Word into 
upright hearts; and as a true friend thou didst recline against the breast of Christ, 
from whence thou didst draw forth the revelation of understanding; and preached 
unto all Him Who is co-beginningless with the Father. O Apostle John, entreat Christ 
God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who celebrate thy holy memory with 
love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Having conceived the Wisdom and Word in thy womb without being consumed, 
O Mother of God, thou hast given birth for the world unto the Nourisher of all and 
Fashioner of creation; and thou didst bear in thine arms Him Who holdeth all things. 
Wherefore, I beseech thee, O all-holy Virgin, and glorify thee with faith: May I be 
delivered from transgressions, and, on the day of judgment when I shall stand before 
the face of my Creator, O pure Virgin Sovereign Lady, grant me thine aid; for thou 
canst do all things whatsoever thou dost will, O thou who art all-hymned.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Abandoning thy fishing of the deep, with the rod of the Cross thou didst 
manifestly draw all the nations to the Faith like fish, for as Christ said to thee, thou 
wast shown to be a fisher of men, bringing them to piety; wherefore, thou didst sow 
the understanding of the Word throughout Patmos, and didst win Ephesus over with 
thy discourses, O theologian and apostle. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission 
of transgressions unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory. (Twice)  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O most pure Virgin Mother of God, heal thou the grievous passions of my soul, I 
pray, and grant me forgiveness of the transgressions which I have committed, defiling 
my soul and body, wretch that I am. Woe is me! What shall I do at that hour when 
the angel will separate my soul from my passion-plagued body? Then be thou my 
helper and most fervent intercessor; for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O apostle of Christ and 
evangelist John the theologian, and we honor thy pangs and labors, wherewith 
thou didst struggle in the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the 
work of His hands.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Reclining against the breast of Jesus, thou hast received boldness, asking, as a 
disciple: “Who is Thy betrayer, Lord?” And since thou wast exceedingly beloved, O 
all-praised one, He manifestly indicated the traitor to thee with a sop of bread. 
Wherefore, as an initiate of ineffable mysteries, thou teachest the incarnation of the 
Word unto the ends of the earth. O apostle and theologian, entreat Christ God, that 
He grant remission of offenses unto those who celebrate thy holy memory with love. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Let us hymn the heavenly gate and ark, * the all-holy mountain, the cloud of light, 
the heavenly ladder, * the spiritual Paradise, the redemption of Eve, * the great 
treasure of the world; * because salvation for the world and forgiveness of ancient 
offences were wrought in her. * Therefore we cry unto her: * Intercede with thine 
own Son and God to grant forgiveness of offences ** to those who devoutly worship 
thine all-holy Offspring. 
Hymn of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and 
their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN §67 (21 :15-23)  
At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the 
dead, and saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou me more than these? 
He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed 
my lambs. He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou 
me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, 
Feed my sheep. He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou 
me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? And 
he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus 
saith unto him, Feed my sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, when thou wast young, 
thou girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, 
thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither 
thou wouldest not. This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. 
And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, follow me. Then Peter, turning 
about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast 
at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee? Peter seeing him saith to 
Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do ? Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry 
till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. Then went this saying abroad among 
the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall 
not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone II:  
O virgin theologian, beloved disciple of the Savior, by thy supplications save us 
from all harm, we pray, for we are thy flock.  
Canon of the Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and two canons of the 
evangelist, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the Theotokos, in Tone II: 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Choosing thee as one beautiful, all-comely and immaculate among women, God 
made His abode within thine immaculate womb. Him do thou beseech, O all-
immaculate one, that He deliver all who hymn thee from the reproach of sins.  
As saith the psalm, thou didst stand as Queen at the right hand of the King Who 
shone forth from thy womb. Him do thou beseech, O all-immaculate Bride of God, 
that He show me as standing on His right side on the day of retribution.  
O thou who hast given birth to the Rain of heaven, which reneweth all of human 
nature, which hath withered utterly away through all manner of unseemly deeds, pray 
thou, O Bride of God, that the dry furrow of my soul may be shown forth as fertile.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Slain by the tree of knowledge, O pure one, we have been restored to everlasting 
life by the Tree of life, Christ God, Who, through thee, O Theotokos, blossomed 
forth in a manner past understanding. Him do thou entreat with bodiless powers, that 
our souls be saved.  
Canon I of the holy evangelist, the acrostic whereof is:  
“With Christian beauty I hymn the son of thunder”, by Theophanes, in Tone II:  
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Having received the kingdom of heaven which thou didst preach, O blessed one, 
and as a converser with the Word of heaven, by thy supplications preserve those who 
believe in thine honored preaching and theology.  
Exhibiting a mighty mind, thou didst spurn all things on earth and the bonds of 
nature, O all-wise one, and abiding noetically and spiritually with the Word thou hast 
freed from irrationality those who live senselessly.  
Receiving a most theological understanding of heavenly things, thou didst preach 
God the Word; and, proclaiming the glad tidings, taught all: In the beginning was the 
Word, and the Word was with His Father, and the Word was God!  
Theotokion: The choir of divine maidens divinely hymn thee, O Lady Theotokos, 
who art comely among women and adorned with the beauties of divinity; for in a 
manner past all telling thou hast given birth to the Word and Benefactor.  
Canon II of the holy evangelist, the acrostic whereof is: “I bear entreaties to the 
divine initiate of the mysteries”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Illumined in mind, thou didst penetrate the depths of the Spirit, O theologian, and 
manifestly told us of the awesome begetting, crying out: In the beginning was the 
Word of God!  
Crushed beneath a multitude of temptations and sufferings, tribulations and 
grievous assaults, we flee with faith to thee. O theologian, be thou a helper to thy 
servants!  
Healing the cruel sufferings of our souls thou art an excellent physician for us, O 
wise one, deliver us from everlasting condemnation and fire through thy mediation.  
Theotokion: O pure one who didst conceive God Who became man for our sake, 
entreat Him, that on the day of judgment He take pity upon us who have committed 
many sins against Him.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth ..., 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE III 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a lily * 
at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established 
Issuing forth from thy womb, O all-immaculate one, the Creator clothed Himself 
in me, a man, granting the vesture of incorruption unto one stripped naked by many 
unseemly deeds.  
O Lady, thou hast given birth to God, the supremely honored Word, Him do thou 
earnestly beseech, that He have pity on my lowly soul, which is downcast because of 
the indignities of pleasures.  
O most pure one, heal thou the wounds of my soul and my lowly heart, which 
have been poisoned by the venom of the serpent, and cure them with the medicine of 
thy mystical activity.  
As thou hast boldness before thy Son, in that thou art His Mother, O Lady, ask 
thou help for the oppressed people, and cast down the arrogance of the iniquitous.  
Canon I of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a lily * 
at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established 
With the tongue of thy theology thou didst reveal the mystery of the Trinity which 
passeth understanding, O divinely blessed John; and therein hath my heart been 
established.  
Thy tongue became the scribe’s pen of the all-holy Spirit, recording thy precious 
and divine Gospel with godly script.  
Reclining against the Well-spring of wisdom with divinely wise boldness, O all-
wise one, thou didst draw forth an abyss of wisdom; and became His godly herald.  
Theotokion: We honor thee as the only Virgin Mother who hast been for us the 
mediatress of salvation, delivering the world by thy supplications.  
Canon II of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Conversing with the Word with a radiant and pure mind, O thrice-blessed 
theologian, thou wast taught mysteries by Him which clearly transcend human 
speech, and enlighten all creation.  
Deliver me from the cruel bonds of sin, O thrice-blessed one, binding me with 
love to God the Master, Whom thou didst fervently love, for thou hast been called 
His theologian.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Thou hast been given to us as a defender, a mediator and deliverer, an intercessor 
before the Lord, a worker of miracles and a source of healings, O theologian. 
Wherefore, we honor thee.  
Theotokion: When the Word Who was ineffably incarnate from thee was lifted up 
upon the tree of the Cross, O Theotokos, He entrusted thee, as a Virgin Maiden, to 
the virginal disciple.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy evangelist, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having reclined against the breast of Wisdom and learned to understand spiritual 
things, thou didst thunder forth divinely: “In the beginning was the Word!”, being the 
first to record the beginningless begetting, proclaiming to all the incarnation of the 
Word. Wherefore, fishing for the nations, using thy tongue as a net, thou hast taught 
the ends of the earth through the grace of the Spirit, enlightening them with miracles. 
O theologian and apostle, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto 
those who with love celebrate thy holy memory. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, * we have been overcome by the 
storms of our uncountable sins, * and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, * we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. * Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee * to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O most pure one, * 
unto Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, * that those who worthily 
hymn thee ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
ODE IV  
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Rain down drops of compunction upon me, O Lady, removing the burning heat 
from my heart, and driving away my grief and the assaults of vexation.  
Disdain me not, O most pure one, for I have been pierced by the sword of 
sweetness and lie in my wounds, but heal me with the spear and blood of thy 
crucified Son, our God.  
O thou who hast been enriched by dominion over every created thing, deem me 
worthy of divine grace, for I have been reduced to grievous beggary, that I may 
magnify thee as my good intercessor, O all-immaculate one.  
Christ, the effulgence of the Father, shone forth from thy womb, O Maiden who 
knew not wedlock, and, crucified, hath illumined the world, destroying the darkness 
of the demons.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Canon I of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Having taught thee most excellently the mysteries of His divinity and instructed 
thee in His ineffable dispensation for mankind, as is meet the Word showed thee to 
be His theologian.  
Thou didst acquire a godly mind and a virginal body, O glorious one, and didst 
become the living and animate temple and most sacred dwelling-place of the all-
hymned Trinity.  
O blessed virgin apostle, thou wast honored by being appointed the son of the 
most pure Virgin, and wast thereby shown to be the brother of Him Who chose thee 
and made of thee His disciple and theologian. 
Theotokion: Healing the ancient crime of Eve, the supremely divine One made 
His abode within thee, the all-immaculate and most pure one, to restore me, the fallen 
man.  
Canon II of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
With the Word, as with drops of rain, thou didst water the whole earth, O glorious 
one, and piously dried up the turbid waters of impiety; wherefore, we honor thee.  
With strength and might, O all-wise one, gird thou my soul, which hath been 
paralyzed by many assaults of the unclean enemies, and hath recourse to thy 
protection, I pray.  
As thou art the temple of the divine Spirit, O theologian, by thy mediation show 
forth as temples of God those who present themselves with faith in thy divine 
temple.  
Theotokion: Let us hymn the divine temple of God, and, deified and delivered 
from evils, let us all manifestly bless the holy Virgin.  
ODE V  
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: O Christ God Thou art a mediator between God and man; * for by 
Thee, O Master, * we have been led from the night of ignorance, * to Thy 
Father, the Source of light.  
O most pure one who hast given birth to the Path of light, guide me now to the 
straight path, for I have irrationally fallen among trackless wastes and defilement.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Mindlessly estranging myself from the understanding of God, I have prodigally 
squandered my substance in a strange land, straying far through the passions; but 
return and save me through thy consolations, O pure Virgin.  
With thy life-giving waters drench me, thy servant, who am burning with the flame 
of sins and am set afire by the assaults of the demons, O most pure Virgin Mother.  
Behold! in a manner beyond all telling, O most pure Theotokos, thou didst contain 
Christ God within thy womb, as Isaiah proclaimed beforehand, and thou hast given 
birth to Him supra-naturally, O Birthgiver of God.  
Canon I of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: O Christ God Thou art a mediator between God and man; * for by 
Thee, O Master, * we have been led from the night of ignorance, * to Thy 
Father, the Source of light.  
Through grace thou wast shown to be a heavenly mind, O theologian, becoming 
wholly light by drawing nigh unto the Origin of light, deified by the pure sight of 
Him.  
Thou didst preach thy Gospel with a pure mind, holy lips and a most pure mouth, 
O divinely inspired one, and thou hast set forth universal salvation before all the 
faithful  
Living with Christ from thy childhood, instructed in theology and having learned 
the glory of the Trinity which transcendeth nature, thou didst become an instrument 
of grace set forth by Him.  
Theotokion: Mindful of thy words, we now call thee blessed; for through thee, O 
all-immaculate one, we have truly received ineffable blessedness and the never-aging 
life.  
Canon II of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Thou didst shine forth like the dawn upon those on earth, manifestly proclaiming 
to the world the noetic Orient Who came in the flesh, destroying the darkness of 
polytheism.  
With thy sacred theology thou hast given drink to every soul, O sacred herald and 
apostle; wherefore, I cry to thee: Water my whole heart, which hath been withered by 
sins.  
I have been wounded by the darts of the enemy. By thine intercession, O wise one, 
heal me wholly, I pray, and guide me to the path of God for I have gone astray in 
iniquities.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: When thou didst stand with the beloved disciple at the Cross of thy 
Son, O all-immaculate one, thou didst sigh, weeping, and marveling at His surpassing 
sympathy for mankind.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
O Lady, show me not to be a joy to the demons at the coming judgment, but 
lifting thy gaze kindly upon me, entreat the Judge, thy Son.  
By my wicked and iniquitous thoughts and acts I have angered Thee, O Lord. Yet 
I set Thy Mother before Thee to intercede on my behalf. Spare and save me!  
In that thou hast given birth to the Judge, the God of all, O all-hymned Lady, 
deliver me from condemnation, for I have condemned myself through my 
transgressions.  
Entreat Jesus the Savior, to Whom thou didst supra-naturally give birth in the 
flesh, O most pure Virgin Mother, that thy servants may be delivered from 
tribulations.  
Canon I of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
 Jesus, my God and Lord, accepting thy purity and most perfect holiness, received 
thee as His brother, O theologian.  
Having crowned thy life with holiness, and trusting therein, O glorious one, thou 
didst recline against the breast of Wisdom, and didst draw forth grace there-from.  
The great and divine radiance of thy theology hath enlightened the whole world, O 
glorious one, illumining it with the light of the threefold Sun.  
Theotokion: He Who stretched forth heaven, O pure Mother of God, hath 
stretched thee forth as another, earthly heaven, and, shining forth from thee, hath 
revealed Himself.  
Canon II of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Thy tongue of theology was truly like a writer’s pen, inscribing on the tablets of 
our hearts true understanding and the truly new law, O theologian.  
O glorious one who, like a most excellent husbandman, caused the offshoots of 
impiety to wither at the root, plant thou the fear of God in my soul, that it may 
blossom forth with the fruitfulness of the virtues.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
He Who most manifestly issued forth from the Virgin, called thee her son. With 
her make thou entreaty, that those who do that which is well-pleasing unto Him 
become children of God by adoption, O ever all-memorable one. 
 Theotokion: Through thee, O all-immaculate one, God appeared to mankind in 
the flesh. Him do thou ever entreat, that He slay the pernicious wisdom of our flesh, 
O all-pure one.  
Kontakion of the holy evangelist, in Tone II: 
Who can recount thy mighty works, O virgin apostle? * For thou pourest out 
miracles, causing healings to flow forth; * and thou prayest for our souls, * in that 
thou art a theologian ** and the friend of Christ.  
Ikos: It is a bold and unattainable thing to study the heights of heaven and to 
plumb the depths of the sea; for as it is impossible to calculate the number of the 
stars and the sands of the shore, so is it impossible to speak sufficiently of the 
theologian, whom Christ loved and crowned with so many crowns. For, reclining 
against His breast, he ate with Him at the mystical supper, in that he is a theologian 
and friend of Christ.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
As thou art my strength and song, my salvation and steadfast aid, and an invincible 
rampart, O Lady, do battle with the demons who make war upon me and ever seek to 
slay me.  
Having given flesh to God, O Virgin, thou hast deified mankind by thy virginal 
blood. Wherefore, I beseech thee: By thy supplications deliver me, who have been 
defiled by the passions and ruined by the wiles of the enemy.  
The furnace prefigured thy birthgiving, O all-immaculate one; for it did not 
consume the youths, just as the unbearable Fire did not consume thy womb. 
Wherefore, we beseech thee: Deliver thy servants from the everlasting fire.  
Thou alone didst show forth thy conceiving as most pure and thy birth-giving as 
incorrupt, remaining a virgin; for thou didst conceive God Who is over all and Who 
became a man, O pure one, thou salvation and deliverance of the faithful.  
Canon I of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Shining with divine effulgence, thou didst manifestly theologize concerning the 
Holy Spirit Who proceedeth from the beginningless Father and resteth inseparably in 
the Son, in that He is consubstantial with them.  
In thee, O blessed one, Christ, the supremely glorious Sun of righteousness 
appointed His dwelling, Who hath made thee an ever-active heaven, and is 
proclaimed by the tongue of thy theology.  
The power of thy words hath sent forth a divine sound, O all-blessed and right 
wondrous one, and thy universal Gospel hath embraced the whole earth with the 
magnificence of thy dogmas.  
  
Theotokion: Thou alone didst show forth thy conceiving as most pure and thy 
birthgiving as incorrupt, remaining a virgin; for thou didst conceive God Who is over 
all and Who became a man, O pure one, thou salvation and deliverance of the 
faithful.  
Canon II of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Let us hymn the theologian, the thunder which hath resounded unto all the ends 
of the earth, whereby every ear is truly raised up from the earth, and Christ, the 
Creator of all, is magnified.  
The manifest splendor of thy house illumines every mind; and, ever assembling 
therein, we hymn the Creator of all in a godly manner, and with faith praise thee, who 
art our intercessor.  
We know thee to be a star of radiant light, O disciple of Christ, and we pray that 
we be enlightened by thy luminous radiance, and delivered from the darkness of the 
passions and all manner of perils by thy mediation.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, we bless thee who hast given birth to the 
blessed Lord, Who with divine blessings annulled the curse on human nature, thereby 
renewing us, who had grown old through corruption.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Be zealous for the good, avoiding what is evil, by taking care to do godly works, O 
my soul, having the Mother of God praying for thee, the unashamed intercessor for 
all, before Him Who is merciful and the Lover of mankind.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Thou hast released mankind from the bonds of the ancient condemnation, O 
Birthgiver of God. Wherefore, I pray thee: Loose every evil bond of my heart, O 
most pure one, binding me with the divine love of the Creator.  
Having given birth to the Effulgence of the Father’s glory, O Theotokos, illumine 
my heart, which is weighed down by the disgrace of transgressions; and show me to 
be a partaker of everlasting glory, that I may glorify thee with love.  
The Most High, the true Sun of righteousness, hath appeared to us incarnate of 
thee, O Birthgiver of God, illumining all things with the rays of His divinity. To Him 
do we chant hymns.  
Canon I of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Issuing forth like blazing lightning, thou wast revealed to the whole world in the 
radiance of the purity and brilliance of thy virginity, O beloved of Christ God, 
illumining the world with the dogmas of piety.  
Having purified body, soul and mind, thou didst proclaim the glad tidings of the 
heavenly Gospel of Christ; and, dwelling with the angels in the heavens, thou dost 
now cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thou wast a pillar of light, a divine oblation of the heavenly temple, a throne of 
perception, a receptacle of wisdom and an instrument of theology, chanting: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: That Thou mightest annul the primal curse and the ancient 
condemnation of our first mother to death, O Word of God, thou wast born of the 
Virgin Mother of God, granting indestructible immortality unto all.  
Canon II of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thou didst bring forth goodly abundance through the speech of thy tongue, O 
blessed one, bringing life to those who are dead through evil, and who embrace thy 
sacred preaching. Wherefore, we honor thee as an initiate of ineffable mysteries.  
Thy temple, O apostle, hath been shown to be another divine garden of paradise, 
gladdening the souls of all with miracles, as with flowers, and dispelling the fetor of 
the passions.  
O God, my God, hearken unto me and deliver me from the enemies who assail me 
every day and crush my humbled heart, for I have Thy divine disciple praying on my 
behalf to Thee.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Theotokion: O divinely joyous one, beseech Jesus the Savior, Who became 
incarnate from thy pure blood, that He spare us, thy servants, and rescue us from 
everlasting torment.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Tasting of the forbidden fruit of the tree, Adam found bitter death through the 
tree; but thy Son, Who was nailed to the Tree, O most pure one, hath poured forth 
the sweetness of immortality. Wherefore, we honor thee.  
Thou art a Queen, having in a manner past all telling given birth to Christ the 
King and Lord Who hath destroyed the kingdom of Hades, Him do thou earnestly 
entreat, O Maiden, that He deem those who honor thee worthy of the heavenly on 
high.  
O Lady, in that thou hast given birth to the Good One, and art thyself good, make 
my humbled heart good, for it hath been vexed by the inundation of pleasures, and 
do thou open unto me the doors of goodness, that I may repent.  
He Who was lifted up, dead, upon the Cross hath thereby slain the serpent; 
wherefore, I cry out to Thee: Have mercy on my soul, which hath been slain by 
wicked deeds, O Word, and bring it to life through the supplications of her who gave 
birth to Thee.  
Canon I of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Thou hast now been deemed worthy to behold the Torrent of sweetness, the 
River of peace and the Well-spring of immortality, not in indistinct images, but face 
to face; and, watered thereby, thou dost now enjoy deification.  
Thou didst ask Christ for a throne on earth, but He gave thee His breast instead; 
and, reclining against it, thou wast enriched with a steadfast, abiding and goodly seat, 
O theologian, thou adornment of the apostles. 
Thou didst burn up the ungodliness of pagan wisdom, O wise one, proclaiming: 
“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was 
truly God, through Whom all things came into being, visible and invisible!”  
Theotokion: Amid the night of life thou wast found to be like the break of dawn, 
O all-pure Mother of God, shining forth with rays of virginity and revealing to us the 
Orient of the noetic Sun of righteousness.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Canon II of the holy evangelist 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
As the Lord of times and seasons, the Redeemer hung upon the Cross at 
noontime, and entrusted the Ever-virgin to thee, O blessed one, in that thou art 
virginal, granting immutable glory to those who magnify thee.  
Dwelling with the hosts of God on high, and giving utterance with them in divine 
hymnody, O apostle of Christ, by thine honored mediations save those who chant 
and hymn the Supremely good One in thy holy temple.  
From all misfortunes save us who entreat thee with faith, O blessed theologian, 
directing our steps to the Lord through the Spirit and guiding us to the path of peace 
by the commandments of the Almighty.  
Theotokion: With splendor we offer a cry of thanksgiving to thee, the Mother of 
God, and we cry aloud: Rejoice, O most exalted throne of God! Rejoice, cloud of 
Light! Rejoice garden of paradise, whereby we have been deemed worthy of the 
sweetness of paradise!  
Exapostilarion of the holy evangelist: 
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
O blessed virgin theologian, the Word chose thee as one virginal in soul and body, 
and showed thee to be a wondrous recorder and servant of His divinity; and when 
thou didst pass away from the earth, thou didst not die but dost ever live in God, 
remaining immortal.  
Glory ..., another Exapostilarion: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
As a son of thunder thou didst proclaim theology unto all, saying: “In the 
beginning was the Word”, O Apostle John; for, reclining against the breast of thy 
Master with faith and drawing forth there-from streams of theology, thou dost water 
all creation.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Standing before the Cross of thy Son and God with the virginal disciple, the all-
pure one heard the Creator say: “Behold thy son!” And He said to the disciple: 
“Behold thy Mother!” With him we all hymn thee, O Virgin Birthgiver of God.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy evangelist, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Illumined with the beauties of purity and virginity, * O all-wise and blessed John, * 
of all the disciples * thou wast the one most loved * with the abundant ardor of the 
love of Christ * by the Word Who seeth all things * and judgeth the whole world * 
with the scales of justice, ** O divinely blessed one.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
With spiritual songs let us now praise * the most honored John * as the servant of 
Christ, * the flowering of virginity, * the pleasing habitation of precious virtues, * the 
instrument of wisdom, * the temple of the Spirit, * the light-bearing mouth of grace, 
** the most radiant eye of the Church.  
Reclining against the breast of Christ, * thou didst draw forth wisdom, * O most 
excellent John, * irrigating the world * with the waters of theology, * and drying up 
the sea of ungodliness * with the knowledge of the Trinity, * and guiding us to our 
heavenly inheritance ** like an animate pillar and cloud.  
O blessed evangelist, son of thunder, * proclaiming the glad tidings, * thou hast 
revealed to the world * the well-spring of blessings, * the unshakable kingdom, * life 
everlasting and indescribable joy, * the delight of divine vision, * the plentiful gifts of 
Christ, ** and understanding which transcendeth the mind of mortals.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
O evangelist John, peer of the angels, virgin theologian instructed by God, in 
Orthodox manner thou didst preach to the world the most pure side which poured 
forth blood and water, whereby we obtain life everlasting for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  
Great Doxology. After the Trisagion prayers,  
The Troparion of the holy evangelist, in Tone II:  
O beloved apostle of Christ God, * hasten thou to deliver a defenseless people. * 
He Who permitted thee to recline against His breast receiveth thee, * prostrate in 
supplication. * Him do thou beseech, O theologian, * that He dispel the gloom of the 
nations which doth beset us, ** asking for us peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, * O Theotokos; * 
for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, * thou art known to be a true Mother, 
having given birth unto God. ** Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved. 
Litanies. Dismissal.  
 
The following anointing, at the discretion of the Presbyter, may take place 
whenever there are feasts of major saints whose services merit the holding of vigil. 
We chant whichever Idiomelon Sticheron of the saint the ecclesiarch desireth. And 
the priest goeth forth with the censer, preceded by a candle-bearer, and censeth the 
icon of the saint on the analogion; and when he hath set aside the censer, he standeth 
to the right of the analogion. Then the superior approacheth the analogion and 
maketh two prostrations, and kisseth the icon; and after he has venerated it, he 
maketh another prostration and, taking the wand reserved for such use, he anointeth 
himself with holy oil from the lamp, making the sign of the Cross therewith on his 
forehead. And the faithful likewise venerate the icon of the saint. The superior 

--- PAGE 22 ---
anointeth the priest and the faithful with the oil. After the anointing with holy oil, the 
First Hour is chanted. At the First Hour, the Troparion and Kontakion of the saint 
are read. Then cometh the final dismissal.  

--- PAGE 23 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the first canon of the holy 
evangelist, and 4 from ODE VI of the second canon of the holy evangelist.  
With the tongue of thy theology thou didst reveal the mystery of the Trinity which 
passeth understanding, O divinely blessed John; and therein hath my heart been 
established. (Twice) 
Thy tongue became the scribe’s pen of the all-holy Spirit, recording thy precious 
and divine Gospel with godly script.  
Reclining against the Well-spring of wisdom with divinely wise boldness, O all-
wise one, thou didst draw forth an abyss of wisdom; and became His godly herald.  
Thy tongue of theology was truly like a writer’s pen, inscribing on the tablets of 
our hearts true understanding and the truly new law, O theologian.  
O glorious one who, like a most excellent husbandman, caused the offshoots of 
impiety to wither at the root, plant thou the fear of God in my soul, that it may 
blossom forth with the fruitfulness of the virtues.  
He Who most manifestly issued forth from the Virgin, called thee her son. With 
her make thou entreaty, that those who do that which is well-pleasing unto Him 
become children of God by adoption, O ever all-memorable one. 
 Theotokion: Through thee, O all-immaculate one, God appeared to mankind in 
the flesh. Him do thou ever entreat, that He slay the pernicious wisdom of our flesh, 
O all-pure one.  
After the entrance, the Troparion of the temple, if such be dedicated to either the 
Lord or the Theotokos, then that of the apostle. (The Troparion and Kontakion of 
the temple, if it be dedicated to a saint, are not chanted.) Then, Glory ..., the 
Kontakion of the apostle; Both now ..., the Kontakion of the temple, if dedicated to 
the Theotokos. But if the temple be not dedicated to the Theotokos, then Both now 
..., the Kontakion of the temple, if it be dedicated to Christ. But if the temple is 
dedicated neither to Christ nor to the Theotokos, the hymns are chanted as follows: 
Troparion of the apostle, Glory ..., Kontakion of the apostle; Both now ..., O 
intercession for Christians ...  
Troparion of the holy evangelist, in Tone II:  
O beloved apostle of Christ God, * hasten thou to deliver a defenseless people. * 
He Who permitted thee to recline against His breast receiveth thee, * prostrate in 
supplication. * Him do thou beseech, O theologian, * that He dispel the gloom of the 
nations which doth beset us, ** asking for us peace and great mercy.  
Kontakion of the holy evangelist, in Tone II: 
Who can recount thy mighty works, O virgin apostle? * For thou pourest out 
miracles, causing healings to flow forth; * and thou prayest for our souls, * in that 
thou art a theologian ** and the friend of Christ.  

--- PAGE 24 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JOHN, §73, (1 IN. 4: 12-19)  
Beloved: No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God 
dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, 
and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit. And we have seen and do testify 
that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world. Whosoever shall confess 
that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him and he in God. And we have 
known and believed the love that God hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in 
love dwelleth in God, and God in him. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may 
have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world. There 
is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear; because fear hath torment. He that 
feareth is not made perfect in love. We love him, because he first loved us.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints. 
 
 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, §61 (IN. 19: 25-27, 21: 24-25)  
At that time, there stood by the Cross of Jesus His Mother, and His Mother’s 
sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus therefore saw 
His Mother, and the disciple standing by, whom He loved, He saith to His Mother: 
“Woman, behold thy son!” Then saith He to the disciple: “Behold thy Mother!” And 
from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home. This is the disciple who 
testifieth of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is 
true. And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should 
be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books 
that should be written. Amen  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
