--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF SEPTEMBER AND THE 10th DAY OF OCTOBER 
SERVICE TO THE TWENTY-SIX MARTYRED MONKS OF ZOGRAPHOU  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the venerable martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”:  
Illumined in heart and soul by divine grace, O blessed fathers, and having accepted 
in your mind that transitory things are vanity, with goodly courage ye forsook the 
world and came lovingly to the Monastery of Zographou; and having exercised 
yourselves in the struggles of asceticism, ye received the crown of confession, 
steadfastly denouncing from the tower the Latin-minded transgressors, being burned 
alive by them, O venerable martyrs. (Twice)  
Established firmly upon the rock of the Faith like towers, O most venerable ones, 
and denouncing from the tower the enemies of the Faith as heretics, ye endured a 
cruel and painful death by fire, offering yourselves to Jesus as wholeburnt sacrifices, 
and filling the celestial beings with a sweet savor. Wherefore, we celebrate your 
memory with love, O ye saints, who praying, ever offer entreaties on behalf of those 
who honor you.  
Let Thomas the abbot and Parthenius, the glorious Barsanuphius and Cyril, 
Simon, Micah and Sabbas, Job, Cosmas and Hilarion, Cyprian and Menas, Joseph and 
James, Paul and Sergius now be honored with divine hymns as is meet, together with 
Anthony, the godly Joannicius and the glorious Euthymius, Martinian and Dometian, 
with the four others whose memory we now venerate.  
Glory ..., Idiomelon, in Tone IV:  
Your life hath been truly shown to be blessed, and your death honorable; for 
having for piety’s sake treated your lives as of no account, like the three youths ye 
were surrounded by material fire. And now your lot is with the saints, where ye have 
made your abode in the eternal mansions. Pray ye for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Thee have we obtained as a rampart, * O most pure Theotokos, * a favorably calm 
harbor and confirmation. * Wherefore, I who am tempest-tossed in this life beseech 
thee: ** do thou guide me and save me!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the venerable martyrs, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Together let us praise the divinely elect twenty and six, the protectors of the 
Monastery of Zographou, the steadfast venerable spiritual athletes, the demolishers of 
falsehood and champions of Orthodoxy.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Wielding divine discourse like a spiritual sword, O thrice-blessed ones, ye severed 
the heads of the Latin-minded enemies; and having been utterly consumed, ye offer 
up sweet savor unto the Lord.  
Verse: We went through fire and water, * and Thou didst bring us out into 
refreshment.  
Abiding with the angelic choirs, and standing before the throne of the Master, O 
God-bearers, with them do ye earnestly make entreaty, that those who honor your 
memory may be saved from misfortunes.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
O Trinity infinite in power, Unity in three Hypostases: through the supplications 
of Thy steadfast spiritual athletes and of the only Ever-virgin Theotokos, save us who 
hymn Thee.  
Troparion of the venerable martyrs, in Tone I:  
Having honorably passed your life in asceticism at the Monastery of Zographou, * 
O venerable regiment, ye twenty-six valiant fathers, * ye offered yourselves as 
sacrifices to God in the fire * with the steadfast resolve of piety. * Wherefore, ye have 
received a twofold wreath from the Lord God, ** sending up glory unto Him Who 
hath crowned you.  
Glory ..., Another Troparion, in Tone IV:  
Rendering honor today as is meet, O venerable martyrs, * we offer up praise at 
your annual feast, * for it is the cause of good things for us; * and celebrating the all-
night vigil we chant: * O proclaimers of the Spirit, * faithful servants of the Trinity, ** 
pray ye fervently to the Lord on our behalf!  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the venerable martyrs: 4 in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
O ye assemblies of those who love the feasts of the Church, and ye company of 
monastics, rejoicing, let us celebrate the feast of the venerable passion-bearers, and let 
us send up hymnody to Christ Who strengthened them to denounce the mindlessness 
of the cruel Emperor Michael and Beccus the Patriarch, who raged insanely in heresy 
against the flock of the Mother of God.  
With divine hymns let us honor the most honored favorites of the most pure 
Mother of God, twenty-six in number, the light-bearing trees of the Monastery of 
Zographou, its most fragrant roses and honored guardians, who denounced the 
deception of the heretics and, tried by fire, were shown to be most pure.  
As is meet, let the most glorious Thomas and the godly Parthenius, Simon, 
Barsanuphius and Job, Cyril, Micah and Sabbas, James, Cosmas, Hilarion and 
Dometian, Menas, Paul, Sergius and Anthony, Martinian and Joannicius, with the 
other eight, be praised with hymns.  
O ye twenty-six steadfast venerable spiritual athletes, divine regiment of the King 
of all: undaunted by the fire, and crowned by God most gloriously, ye join chorus in 
the bridal-chambers of heaven, and protect from all misfortunes the most glorious 
Monastery of Zographou, which doth celebrate your holy memory, having acquired 
you as its foremost guardians.  
And 4 Stichera in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “With what crowns of praise ...”: 
With what hymns of praise shall we extol today the venerable martyrs, the twenty-
six confessors, as champions of piety? For some were leaders of the Monastery of 
Zographou, and others, having labored with the others, suffered with them, 
wherefore the Lord Who hath great mercy, hath crowned them.  
With what spiritual words shall we praise the twenty-six venerable and God-
bearing martyrs, dying martyrs’ deaths, consumed by fire in the tower: Thomas, who 
was the abbot of the Monastery of Zographou, Job, Barsanuphius, James, Sabbas, 
Parthenius, Cosmas, and the rest, who denounced the delusion of the minions of the 
pope and have received heavenly crowns, as is meet, from the hand of God?  
With what gladsome songs shall we hymn the choir of the venerable ones who 
were gathered together by grace into a single company of faith: the steadfast ramparts 
of the Faith, the champions and servants of the Trinity, the luminaries enlightening 
the whole world, the pillars of the Church, whom the Trinity hath crowned with 
wreaths of glory, as proclaimers of the Spirit and denouncers of those who waged war 
against the Spirit?  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Setting at naught every threat of the heretics, ye denounced their rank falsehood, 
taking your stand upon the tower, O ye twenty-six steadfast fathers, confessing that 
the Spirit proceedeth from the Father, as the Savior saith, O wise ones; and receiving 
a blessed end through fire, O glorious crown-bearers, ye have gone up into the 
heavens, where ye now pray for all.  
Glory ..., of the venerable martyrs, in Tone VI: 
Come ye today, and, forming a spiritual choir with the Monastery of Zographou, 
let us piously hold festival, and gloriously honor the venerable triumph of the twenty-
six, saying: Rejoice, divinely assembled regiment who feared not the roaring fire and 
consumed the tinder of the heretics! Rejoice, ye who in the midst of the fire, like the 
youths in Babylon, reduced the error of the pope to ashes and proclaimed the equality 
of honor of the Hypostases of the Trinity! Rejoice, ye who clearly explained the 
divine Spirit, O teachers of pure Orthodoxy! Angels arrayed in white crowned your 
heads, and the faithful have been gladdened, established firmly upon the foundation 
of the Truth. O valiant warriors of Christ, intercessors for the Monastery of 
Zographou and its vigilant guardians: pray ye for us who celebrate your memory.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in the same tone:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: all the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be 
gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will declare to you things 
from the beginning? Let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let 
them hear, and declare the truth. Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith 
the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, 
and understand that I am He; before Me there was no other God, and after Me there 
shall be none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have 
saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My 
witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning; and there is none that 
can deliver out of My hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus saith the 
Lord God Who redeemeth you, the Holy One of Israel.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 

--- PAGE 5 ---
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall he cover them, 
and with his arm shall he protect them. He shall take to him his jealousy for complete 
armor, and make the creature his weapon for the revenge of his enemies. He shall put 
on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of an helmet. He shall 
take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall he sharpen for a sword, 
and the world shall fight with him against the unwise. Then shall the right aiming 
thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, shall they fly 
to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone bow, and the 
water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, 
a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow them away: 
thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill-dealing shall overthrow the 
thrones of the mighty. Hear therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be 
judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the 
multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the 
Highest, who shall try your works, and search out your counsels.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera:  
In Tone I: Today the Church of Christ is gladdened, resplendent in grace, and the 
famed Monastery of Zographou faithfully holdeth festival in glorious memory of the 
twenty-six venerable fathers who suffered: for, patient of soul, they laid down their 
lives for piety, their bodies utterly consumed by fire, that they might preserve the 
Faith committed to them by the fathers of the Church. Wherefore, having denounced 
the most wicked delusion of the minions of the pope, they became most worthy 
comforters of their monastery, confirming the faithful to abide in piety; and 
illumining their monastery, they pray for our souls.  
O venerable fathers, having yearned for the angelic life, ye shone forth in 
asceticism on Mount Athos, and, dwelling in the sacred Monastery of Zographou in a 
manner transcending the ways of mortals, ye unceasingly offered up hymns to the 
Master. But the enemy who hateth the good, the emperor of ill repute and the eunuch 
of the Latin-minded opponents of the Spirit, rose up against you, striving to weaken 

--- PAGE 6 ---
your might; yet, manfully opposing them, ye did not submit to deception, accepting 
death by fire. And Christ, accepting your pangs, hath given you rest in the mansions 
of heaven. Wherefore, in that ye possess boldness before Him, be ye mindful of us 
who with faith and love celebrate your memory.  
In Tone II: Who doth not glorify, who doth not fittingly praise the opposition of 
the valiant venerable spiritual athletes to innovation? And who doth not bless the 
emulators of the martyrs, the single-minded fathers, who cut off heresy at the root 
and planted piety, the guides of the lost, our leaders and protectors, who, as is meet, 
have received in the heavens the reward for their struggles, in that they suffered 
together for Christ, and who render glory in gladness, joining chorus before God in 
endless jubilation, asking remission of sins for those who with love celebrate their 
sacred suffering?  
In Tone III: Having lived an angelic life on earth, O thrice-blessed fathers, ye have 
shone forth like the sun upon the ends of the earth; for having elevated your minds 
above earthly attachments, ye soared aloft with divine love; and having first offered to 
Christ the sweat of your ascetic endeavors like myrrh, afterwards, when ye were 
tortured by the innovators, ye were shown to be higher in purity than any gold, in that 
ye were lovers of piety and ones who opposed the heretics. Be ye mindful also of us 
who with love celebrate your honored festival.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
Come, all ye choirs of monastics, and let us hasten to the memorial of the 
wondrous fathers; for their splendid virtues and martyric death have shone forth like 
the sun in heaven and on earth, where the ever-memorable shine forth as ones who 
have confirmed the dogmas of the fathers by their fearless opposition, and, having 
put off corruption through the fire, have soared aloft to God, receiving rewards for 
their sufferings. And now, standing with the incorporeal beings before the 
unapproachable throne, they send up endless hymnody to the Trinity, unceasingly 
praying for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Preserve thy servants from all misfortunes, O blessed Theotokos, that we may all 
glorify thee, the hope of our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the venerable martyrs, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Rejoice, O divine regiment of the Monastery of Zographou, victorious company, 
pillars of piety, and steadfast, unyielding and undaunted contenders against the 
enemy; who, taking your stand upon the tower, did most boldly condemn the 
delusion of the Latins, of Michael, the vainglorious emperor of Byzantium, and with 
him the mindless Beccus, denouncing them all exceedingly, in that they had cast the 
flock of Christ to the lions. Wherefore, entreat ye the Savior, that He grant us great 
mercy.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Rejoice, ye victorious multitude who prevailed in the sacred battle and have 
joyfully received a crown from the Lord! And now, gazing upon the ineffable glory of 
the blessed, deified by communion with God, emulating the singing of the immaterial 
seraphim, and offering up spontaneous entreaty for the world, in that ye made 
yourselves temples of the Holy Spirit, ye behold the mysteries of the exalted wisdom 
of God. Beseech Christ, that He send down great mercy upon our souls.  
Verse: Sing unto the Lord a new song; * His praise is in the Church of the 
saints.  
Rejoice, O Thomas, pastor of the honored Monastery of Zographou, O 
Barsanuphius, Cyril, Micah, Simon and Sabbas, Hilarion and Job, Martinian and 
James, Cosmas and Anthony, Joseph and Euthymius, Menas and Paul, Joannicius and 
Sergius, Dometian, Parthenius and Cyprian, and the other James, with four others: ye 
twenty-six valiant and glorious venerable martyrs! Praising you as is meet, we pray 
that ye offer supplication on our behalf.  
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
Today the Church of Christ is glad, adorned by the goodly valor of the venerable 
martyrs, and it summoneth all who struggle in stillness and the common life, saying: 
Come, rejoice ye all with me, O chosen Israel, for the Lord hath made my glory 
resplendent, exposing the blasphemy of the heretics against the most holy Spirit, for 
these venerable spiritual athletes, standing upon the summit of the tower, boldly 
denounced it. Wherefore let us cry to them in thanksgiving: As ye have boldness 
before Christ Who hath glorified you, O saints, cease ye never to pray for your 
monastery, wherein ye took up your ascetic struggles and finished the course of 
martyrdom, that He grant it peace and save our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V:  
We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, * and we, the faithful, glorify thee as is meet, * 
thou unassailable city, * impregnable rampart, ** and steadfast intercession and refuge 
of our souls.  
At the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the venerable martyrs, in Tone I:  
Having honorably passed your life in asceticism at the Monastery of Zographou, * 
O venerable regiment, ye twenty-six valiant fathers, * ye offered yourselves as 
sacrifices to God in the fire * with the steadfast resolve of piety. * Wherefore, ye have 
received a twofold wreath from the Lord God, ** sending up glory unto Him Who 
hath crowned you.  
Then another Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Rendering honor today as is meet, O venerable martyrs, * we offer up praise at 
your annual feast, * for it is the cause of good things for us; * and celebrating the all-
night vigil we chant: * O proclaimers of the Spirit, * faithful servants of the Trinity, ** 
pray ye fervently to the Lord on our behalf!  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...,” (Once).  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the first Troparion, in Tone I:  
Having honorably passed your life in asceticism at the Monastery of Zographou, * 
O venerable regiment, ye twenty-six valiant fathers, * ye offered yourselves as 
sacrifices to God in the fire * with the steadfast resolve of piety. * Wherefore, ye have 
received a twofold wreath from the Lord God, ** sending up glory unto Him Who 
hath crowned you.  
Glory ..., Another Troparion, in Tone IV:  
Rendering honor today as is meet, O venerable martyrs, * we offer up praise at 
your annual feast, * for it is the cause of good things for us; * and celebrating the all-
night vigil we chant: * O proclaimers of the Spirit, * faithful servants of the Trinity, ** 
pray ye fervently to the Lord on our behalf!  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, these Sessional Hymns, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
With veneration let us honor the martyrs of Christ, the venerable fathers, as our 
tireless intercessors and preservers; for having courageously denounced the delusion 
of the Latin-minded, they were deemed well worthy of a godly end.  
Glory ..., O wise ones, ye have been shown to be radiant stars of the Church of 
Christ, illumining it with the beams of your teachings and the splendors of your 
sufferings; for ye made plain the doctrines of the fathers. Wherefore, with faith we 
celebrate your sacred memory today.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou wast a true virgin before giving birth, O Virgin; 
thou wast a true virgin in giving birth, O Virgin; and after giving birth thou didst 
remain a virgin, O Ever-virgin. Wherefore, I beseech thee, in that thou art the Virgin 
Mother: Strengthen me, O Virgin Maiden, that I may remain virginal in soul and 
body.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, these Sessional Hymns, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
The army of the angels truly marveled at the courage of the wise fathers who 
suffered venerably: how, standing upon the tower, they denounced the iniquitous 
emperor, the cruel Beccus and the cardinals, and valiantly endured being reduced to 
ashes, as though it were someone else who was suffering. Wherefore, Christ hath 
crowned them with never-fading wreaths.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., the steadfastness of your courage doth amaze every mind, O venerable 
spiritual athletes of Christ, ye adornment of the Monastery of Zographou, who with 
valor of mind vanquished the minions of the pope, who reviled the arrogance and 
vain counsels, and in goodly fashion formed a divine regiment; wherefore, celebrating 
your sacred memory, we have you as fervent intercessors, O all-praised ones.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou alone art the joy of the angels, the 
adornment of the incorporeal ones, the salvation of mortals and the effulgence of the 
faithful. Wherefore, we bless thee with faith, honoring thee as the divine Maiden, O 
pure one. From all need deliver thou thy servants, O blessed Bride of God, 
vouchsafing them the eternal good things of heaven.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify you, O holy and venerable 
martyrs of Zographou, and we reverence your honored sufferings, which ye 
endured for Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Our God is refuge and strength. A helper in afflictions which mightily befall us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, these Sessional Hymns, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Let the brilliant diamonds of Orthodoxy, who were patiently tried in the temporal 
fire, be praised today, for they were proclaimers of the Trinity.  
Glory ..., Today the Monastery of Zographou doth celebrate the honored solem-
nity of its venerable martyrs; for they proclaimed the divine dogmas of Orthodoxy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: O invincible intercessor for the oppressed and fervent 
aid of those who trust in thee: Deliver me from misfortunes, for thou art the helper 
of all.  
Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (LK. 6: 17-23)  
At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre 
and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who 
were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude 
sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He 
lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the 

--- PAGE 10 ---
kingdom of God. Blessed are ye who hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye 
who weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when 
they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your 
name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, 
behold, your reward is great in heaven.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone II:  
Loving that which is incorrupt and abiding, instead of that which is corrupt and 
transitory, and honoring the things of heaven over those of earth, O venerable fathers 
who suffered: From barbarian invasions, and from the assaults and incursions of 
brigands deliver those who honor you, we pray, that we may ever honor your most 
honorable memory.  
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos (the Paraclysis), with 6 Troparia, 
including the Irmos, and two canons of the venerable martyrs, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon I of the venerable martyrs, the acrostic whereof is “I praise the beauteous 
regiment of the venerable ones”, the composition of James, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye 
Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the Lord, * 
and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
Rejoicing, the monks of the Monastery of Zographou celebrate the festival of the 
honored venerable martyrs today, and earnestly entreat the Lord, that, through their 
supplications, we all may be deemed worthy of the joy of heaven.  
Through communion ye became sons of God, O steadfast venerable spiritual 
athletes, and having denounced the vile delusion of the heresy of the Latins and been 
reduced to ashes by the fire, ye have been crowned by Christ with a twofold wreath.  
Confessing with steadfastness of mind the Spirit Who proceedeth from the Father, 
as the Savior said, ye denounced and put the papists to shame as innovators, O wise 
ones.  
Theotokion: We honor as the cause of our correction the true Mother of God, the 
mountain of God from whence was cut the Chief Cornerstone Who bringeth into 
ineffable unity those who before were separated.  
Canon II of the venerable martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
Intending to praise the godly company of the venerable spiritual athletes of Christ, 
even though my lips are defiled, I beseech Thee, O Savior: Grant me discourse and 
grace, that I may fashion praise for them.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Let us praise today the assembly of the twenty-six venerable spiritual athletes, the 
steadfast diamonds who denounced the ungodliness of the Latins and endured an 
unjust death.  
Let Thomas, the most excellent shepherd, be honored today as is meet, and let the 
godly James and Barsanuphius, Simon, Cyril, Menas and Cyprian be praised, with all 
the others.  
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be the wellspring of the never-waning Light, O all-
hymned Lady, we pray: With thy beams dispel darkness from our souls and bodies, 
and grant that we may behold Him.  
ODE III 
Canon I  
Irmos: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before all 
ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * to 
Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art Thou, 
O Lord. 
With divine hymns let the godly company of the sacred and venerable martyrs of 
the Monastery of Zographou be praised; for with a twofold wreath have they been 
crowned, as fasters and thrice-blessed and steadfast spiritual athletes.  
With the firmest intent did Micah and Simon bravely contend, together with 
Hilarion and Cyril, Euthymius and the rest of the twenty-six; and praising their 
memory today in hymns of joy, we glorify the Lord.  
Showing forth a single patient endurance amid a multiplicity of bodies, the 
venerable fathers who suffered in the Monastery of Zographou put the cruel Latins to 
shame, and their heads have been crowned with wreaths of victory.  
Theotokion: Ineffable is the manner of thy conceiving and birthgiving, O Virgin 
Theotokos; for thou didst conceive the Son of God Whom all things cannot contain; 
and having given birth to Him without seed, thou remainest Ever-virgin.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
The divine choir of the venerable ones amazed the angels, enduring fiery 
conflagration in the tower; putting the demons to shame. And the faithful joyously 
praise their mighty deeds.  
Christ hath glorified you greatly in heaven and on earth, O most honored fathers, 
as ones who first exercised yourselves in asceticism, and later suffered. Wherefore, we 
honor your right-renowned memory.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Let the steadfast Paul and Sabbas be hymned, with Sergius, Simon and Dometian, 
and all the rest, for they denounced the mindlessness of the Latins.  
Theotokion: Dispelling the most profound gloom of the passions, O pure Lady, 
grant that those who fall down before thee with love, abstinence and earnest 
supplication may behold the beams of thy light.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Taking the Cross of Christ upon your shoulders, O ye twenty-six blessed fathers, 
ye cleaved unto Him through ascetic endeavor; wherefore the enemy, hating your 
virtuous life, raised up against you the savage Latins, striving to weaken the 
steadfastness of your asceticism. Yet his machinations were set at naught when ye 
suffered most excellently. Pray ye to Christ God, that remission of transgressions be 
granted unto those who with love celebrate your holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Thou wast the chariot which David beheld shining like the sun, the couch of 
Solomon covered with royal purple, the divinely inscribed scroll of Isaiah, the animate 
tabernacle of Moses, the firm rampart of Amos, the golden lampstand of Zachariah, 
the mountain of Daniel, the golden tablet of Habbakuk, and the transcendent object 
of the prophets’ speech. Pray thou to thy Son and God, that He grant remission of 
transgressions unto those who reverently bow down before thy divine image.  
ODE IV 
Canon I  
Irmos: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, * 
O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 
Having by asceticism trod the path which leadeth to life, the twenty-six fathers of 
the Monastery of Zographou have received goodly renown for their suffering, having 
manfully denounced the deception of the mindless Michael.  
Forsaking corrupt glory and food, O fathers, ye struggled in the Monastery of 
Zographou, and steadfastly opposed the papists who strove to force you to embrace 
false Latin concepts of God; and ye offered yourselves unto God as sacrifices 
consumed by fire.  
Be thou hymned with sacred words, O most sacred Thomas, abbot of the 
Monastery of Zographou, and all those with thee, who on the summit of the tower 
put to shame the Latin-minded foe and the ungodly Beccus, as ones who introduced 
the evil tradition of innovation.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: We know thee to be the portal which is more spacious than the 
heavens and the throne more exalted than the seraphim, O most pure one; for thou 
didst contain Him Whom naught can contain, in that He is God, and thou didst hold 
in thine arms as a babe Him Who hath placed our nature upon the throne of the 
Father.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Let us be glad in spirit, celebrating the right notable memorial of the venerable 
spiritual athletes, the honored instructors of the Monastery of Zographou, for by 
their supplications we are delivered from evils.  
O divine Monastery of Zographou, adorn thyself now with thy twenty-six sacred 
offspring, the venerable spiritual athletes, who from the heights of the tower put to 
shame the ungodliness of the minions of the pope.  
Strengthened by courage and grace, the regiment of the venerable set at naught the 
wiles of the incorporeal foe and cast down the blasphemy of the papists which is full 
of impiety.  
Theotokion: O pure and unwedded Mother of God, preserve thy flock unharmed 
by all evil and the wicked intent of the cruel ones; for thee do we, thy servants, have 
as our deliverance amid evil circumstances.  
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
With the power of the dogmas ye first cut down the heresy of the Latins, O wise 
ones; and were then murdered by them with fire. And having offered yourselves up 
fervently as sacrifices to the Lord, ye now join chorus with the angelic choirs, O ever-
memorable ones.  
Thou didst tend thy flock in holiness, O blessed Thomas, most excellent pastor of 
the Monastery of Zographou, and didst suffer with thy godly disciples at the hands of 
the Latin-minded, tried by fire like gold in the crucible; wherefore ye now join chorus 
with the angels.  
Showing yourselves to be zealots for the Lord, O most wise and venerable ones, 
on the pinnacle of the tower ye denounced those who spake falsehoods, shutting their 
mouths most wisely with your explanation of the Scriptures. Wherefore, we all 
celebrate your memory today.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Theotokion: O Virgin, the Word of God, Who is with the Father in a manner 
transcending understanding, was well pleased to become immutably incarnate from 
thy pure blood. Him do we, in an Orthodox manner, understand to be of a single 
hypostasis, in two natures, actions and wills.  
Canon II  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Recognizing that the beauty of life is corrupt and quickly fading, O venerable 
fathers, ye were wounded with the love of Christ; and now, O blessed ones, ye delight 
in the ineffable joy of the divine habitations.  
Truly, the light of divine grace hath now shone forth! Truly, the incorrupt food of 
the Manna which poureth forth life hath been set before us today: the splendid 
memorial of our godly intercessors. Ye who desire it, take your fill!  
By your death amid transitory fire ye purchased immortal renown, O glorious and 
most wise merchants, trading that which is of lesser worth for that which is greater. 
Wherefore, ye now rejoice with the venerable and the martyrs.  
Theotokion: O radiant lamp of the primal Light, illumine my darkened soul with 
thy light, that I may again behold the foremost Light Who issued forth from thee, and 
hath illumined us and thee, mine enlightener: for such is the nature of light.  
ODE VI  
Canon I  
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
Today hath dawned for us as a day of radiant joy, illumining the right renowned 
feast of the twenty-six venerable ones; noetically gladdening the souls and hearts of all 
with the grace of the Spirit, Whom we praise in right fitting hymns.  
That ye might receive everlasting life in the heavens, O most wise ones, ye gave 
your bodies over to temporal fire, denouncing the heresy of the Latins. Wherefore, 
rejoicing today, we celebrate your festival.  
O ever-memorable choir of the honored and venerable ones, we honor you with 
faith, and with faith we chant, crying: Deliver now from all sorrow, tribulation and 
affliction those who honor you, that we may reverently celebrate your festival in 
hymns.  
Theotokion: The choirs of celestial intelligences and the assembly of all the saints 
honor thee, O Lady; for thou gavest flesh to the incorporeal Word of God, of Whom 
the angels stand in awe, and didst become the Mother of God, who by thy birthgiving 
hast alone broken down the middle-wall of ancient enmity.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Canon II 
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Having suffered, O ye twenty-six most venerable fathers, ye have received honors 
for your labors, and Christ, the Bestower of crowns, hath adorned you with gifts of 
grace.  
Those things which eye cannot see nor ear hear, and which the mind of man 
cannot comprehend, as is written, have ye been deemed worthy of in your portion in 
the heavens, O most glorious ones.  
Celebrating a solemn festival, let us praise today the guardians, intercessors and 
protectors of the Monastery of Zographou, the twenty-six venerable martyrs.  
Celebrating your right notable memorial, O venerable martyrs, we beseech you 
today: Preserve your monastery and those who struggle in it as monks, and deliver it 
from tribulations.  
Theotokion: As ye possess divers gifts, O fathers, deliver us from divers perils, and 
joining Cosmas and the heavenly Lady as our advocates, preserve your flock.  
Kontakion of the venerable martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
Let us praise the twenty-six sacred and venerable spiritual athletes, * the 
intercessors and protectors of Zographou, * who cast down the pride of the Latins, 
and endured fiery immolation * and were crowned as is meet; ** and let us cry: 
Rejoice, O venerable sufferers!  
Ikos: The angels were amazed, looking down from heaven upon the ungodly 
assault of the Latins, how they burned in the fire the venerable ones who, for piety’s 
sake, chose to die in piety. And having cast down the pride of the tyrants, they hear 
from us such things as these: Rejoice, O choir of venerable spiritual athletes; rejoice, 
steadfast regiment of those who suffered greatly. Rejoice, ye venerable ones, twenty-
six in number; rejoice, O Thomas and the other martyrs! Rejoice, godly Barsanuphius 
and steadfast Micah; rejoice, Dometian, Menas and the radiant Paul! Rejoice with 
Anthony, O Euthymius and Hilarion; rejoice with Parthenius, O Simon and Joseph! 
Rejoice, ye two James’s, together with Joannicius; rejoice, O Martinian, with Cosmas 
and Sergius! Rejoice, O glorious Cyprian, Cyril, Job and Sabbas; rejoice, O four 
glorious and unnamed radiant passion-bearers! Rejoice, O venerable sufferers!  
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children brought 
up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing in the 
midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Your divine and joyous memorial hath dawned today, O venerable sufferers, 
gladdening and sanctifying all who honor your struggles and sufferings, and who 
chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Consumed by the fire, ye burned up falsehood opposed to God, O venerable 
martyrs of Christ, denouncing the abominable addition of the Latins concerning the 
Spirit, and chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The valiant venerable spiritual athletes spurned all things in the world, their bodies 
and all riches, for the sake of the life which is to come; and having died with Christ, 
they now dwell in unapproachable and never-waning light.  
Theotokion: Hearken now unto the hymnody of supplication which all of us 
chant, O Theotokos and Ever-virgin, rescue from cruel circumstances those who with 
love cry aloud unto the Lord: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Let the venerable ones be fittingly praised, for they loved God as much as, they 
were able to, and who studied His divine law and fulfilled it by their suffering, 
showing forth their love for the Lord.  
Let those in heaven now clap their hands with those on earth! Let the angels be 
glad with mortals! For the heavenly men and earthly angels, the fathers of heavenly 
wisdom who suffered valiantly, are celebrated!  
Blessed are your struggles and battles, O fathers, whereby ye showed yourselves to 
be receptacles of the Spirit like the angels, and having suffered for right-mindedness, 
ye are honored throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, we pray thee: Quickly free from the grievous 
darkness of sin those who piously hymn thee as the Theotokos, and grant that those 
who have been enlightened by thee may have a share of joy.  
ODE VIII 
 Canon I  
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so the 
fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin’s womb * into which it had 
descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation bless the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Now doth the sacred Monastery of Zographou boast, O God-bearers, and, 
adorning itself, it delighteth in your miracles and is crowned by your sufferings and 
struggles; for ye put the minions of the pope to shame, opposing them with 
Orthodox dogmas, hymning Christ throughout the ages.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
With songs let the sacred Thomas, the abbot of the Monastery of Zographou, be 
hymned, together with Barsanuphius and Hilarion, Cosmas and Sergius, Euthymius 
and Menas, James, Job and Joannicius, and with them the rest of their honored 
company, twenty-six in number, who hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages.  
Save Thy servants, O King great in might, O only compassionate God, moved 
now by the manifold entreaties of Thy venerable spiritual athletes, twenty-six in 
number. With them do Thou also accept us who cry: Let all creation bless the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Like a table thou didst hold the Bread of life Who nourisheth all 
beneath His all-accomplishing overshadowing, O Maiden, and thou didst feed Him at 
thy breast as a babe. And hymning Him as God, and thee as the Theotokos, we 
declare: Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon II  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Having been shown to be chosen and precious vessels, with splendor ye received 
effulgence from on high, and truly hastened with joy to the mansions of heaven, 
illumined by the grace of the divine Trinity, Whom ye hymn in songs throughout all 
ages.  
Having each completed the same course, O venerable fathers who suffered, in the 
heavens ye have received from Christ the very crowns prepared for the righteous. 
And rejoicing with the angelic choirs, O blessed Thomas and his companions, be ye 
mindful of those who praise you.  
Triadicon: Hymning the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the thrice-radiant, 
indivisible and uncreated Godhead, the only sovereign Ruler and King, with unfailing 
love we cry out with all the armies of heaven: Holy! Holy! Holy!  
Theotokion: With thee, O Theotokos, may the twenty-six fathers be honored with 
hymns, for with dogmas and discourses they proclaimed thee to be the pure 
Theotokos, O Virgin, who didst ineffably give birth in the flesh unto God, Who 
deified human nature in thy womb.  
ODE IX 
 Canon I  
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of all 
descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom He was 
incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as the pure 
Mother of God.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Reverently following the fathers, and having lived in holiness upon the earth, ye 
steadfastly vanquished the evil one by ascetic struggle in the Monastery of 
Zographou, and suffered for piety; wherefore, we now praise you.  
Receiving now this meager hymnody from our impure mouths, earnestly 
remember us before the one Master, O steadfast and venerable spiritual athletes, that 
we may obtain remission of transgressions and may honor your memory with 
splendor.  
Shining forth clearly, like the great sun, your memory doth illumine the world; and 
celebrating it with reverence, we honor you as the guardians and wardens of the 
Monastery of Zographou, O venerable fathers who suffered.  
Theotokion: The bush prefigured thy most glorious wonder, O Virgin; for thou 
didst receive in thy womb the truly unbearable Fire, bearing Christ, the Sun of 
righteousness, yet remaining unconsumed. Wherefore, we ever bless thee.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Dwelling in noetic light, O wise ones, accept the hymnody which we offer you, for 
the sake of the great debt we owe you. And we ask that remission of the penalty for 
our transgressions be given, through your supplications, unto us who honor you as is 
meet.  
In these latter days, O venerable sufferers, God set you as unshakable towers of 
your monastery, against the implacable foe; and made your most precious bones to be 
a stumbling-block for those opposed to Him, ever strengthening the Orthodox Faith, 
O glorious ones.  
Still ye the tempests of the cruel barbarians which assail us, O most venerable 
ones; cause schisms within the Holy Church to cease; grant remission of 
transgressions unto those who hymn you; and preserve your monastery unharmed 
from every grievous circumstance.  
O Most High God - Father, Son and Spirit - O Trinity equal in honor: through the 
supplications of Thy venerable ones, preserve the sacred Monastery of Zographou 
from all adversaries, and grant unto Thy flock a peaceful state, unshakable and 
unbroken.  
Theotokion: Thou hast truly been shown to be the receptacle of the Spirit, O 
Lady; for in thy womb thou didst contain God, Whom neither heaven nor earth can 
in anywise contain. By thy supplications and those of the venerable ones, do thou 
move Him to take pity upon all of us who hymn thee.  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Exapostilarion of the venerable martyrs:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
With splendor let us praise today the intercessors for the Monastery of Zographou, 
the venerable fathers who suffered, casting down the delusion of the Latins, the 
preachers of the Orthodox Faith who, consumed by fire, offered themselves to the 
Trinity as divine wholeburnt sacrifices.  
Glory ..., the sacred Monastery of Zographou hath acquired you as intercessors 
and guardians, O most wise ones; wherefore, with splendor we celebrate your right 
renowned memory, honoring you with hymns: for, having glorified the Lord, ye are 
now honored with the angels, as is meet.  
Both now ..., O Queen of all, Bride of God, divine Lady, Mother of the King, 
flower of virginity, splendor of the angels, adornment of the celestial beings, great 
refuge of sinners: we hymn thee, O most holy one, as the savior of the world.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the venerable martyrs, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Come, ye faithful, and assembling with the choirs of the unwedded, with hymns let 
us praise the valiant warriors of Christ, the beacons of Orthodoxy, the steadfast 
twenty-six venerable spiritual athletes, crying out to them with faith: Entreat the 
Savior on our behalf!  
Having shaken off earthly cares, O fathers, struggling in the Monastery of 
Zographou, ye suffered valiantly at the hands of the cruel and perverse; and as 
preservers of the Traditions of the fathers ye have received twofold crowns.  
Standing upon the tower with joyful hearts and a steadfast resolve, ye denounced 
the delusion of the cruel Latin-minded ones; and consumed by fire, O venerable ones, 
ye offered yourselves up to the Master as acceptable wholeburnt sacrifices, and are 
therefore magnified.  
O twenty-six valiant warriors of Christ, from all harm, and from enemies visible 
and invisible, preserve those who with faith celebrate your memory; and grant unto 
them the kingdom of heaven, O venerable ones.  
Glory ..., Idiomelon, in Tone IV:  
With what words shall we offer hymnody unto you, O venerable fathers who 
suffered? With what hymns of praise shall we extol you? For even a multitude of 
mouths will not suffice for this, let alone one lacking in skill. And even though they 
are not worthy of you, yet hearken unto these things which we sing: Rejoice, 
champions of Orthodoxy, vessels of virtue, confirmation of monastics and foun-
dation of your monastery! Rejoice, expellers of demons, opponents of heretics, famed 
guides for the lost, most honored habitations of the Trinity! Rejoice, bowls 
overflowing with sweet-smelling myrrh, ever-flowing rivers of fragrance, bulwark of 
the Holy Mountain, heirs of eternal good things! Pray ye for us who with love 
celebrate your most honored memory!  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Deliver us from our needs, * O Mother of Christ God, * thou who hast given birth 
to the Creator of all, * that we all may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou who alone 
art the intercessor for our souls!  
Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the 1st canon, and 4 from 
ODE VI of the 2nd canon of the venerable martyrs.  
With divine hymns let the godly company of the sacred and venerable martyrs of 
the Monastery of Zographou be praised; for with a twofold wreath have they been 
crowned, as fasters and thrice-blessed and steadfast spiritual athletes. (Twice) 
With the firmest intent did Micah and Simon bravely contend, together with 
Hilarion and Cyril, Euthymius and the rest of the twenty-six; and praising their 
memory today in hymns of joy, we glorify the Lord.  
Showing forth a single patient endurance amid a multiplicity of bodies, the 
venerable fathers who suffered in the Monastery of Zographou put the cruel Latins to 
shame, and their heads have been crowned with wreaths of victory.  
Having suffered, O ye twenty-six most venerable fathers, ye have received honors 
for your labors, and Christ, the Bestower of crowns, hath adorned you with gifts of 
grace.  
Those things which eye cannot see nor ear hear, and which the mind of man 
cannot comprehend, as is written, have ye been deemed worthy of in your portion in 
the heavens, O most glorious ones.  
Celebrating a solemn festival, let us praise today the guardians, intercessors and 
protectors of the Monastery of Zographou, the twenty-six venerable martyrs.  
Theotokion: As ye possess divers gifts, O fathers, deliver us from divers perils, and 
joining Cosmas and the heavenly Lady as our advocates, preserve your flock.  
Troparion of the venerable martyrs, in Tone I:  
Having honorably passed your life in asceticism at the Monastery of Zographou, * 
O venerable regiment, ye twenty-six valiant fathers, * ye offered yourselves as 
sacrifices to God in the fire * with the steadfast resolve of piety. * Wherefore, ye have 
received a twofold wreath from the Lord God, ** sending up glory unto Him Who 
hath crowned you.  
Another Troparion, in Tone IV:  
Rendering honor today as is meet, O venerable martyrs, * we offer up praise at 
your annual feast, * for it is the cause of good things for us; * and celebrating the all-
night vigil we chant: * O proclaimers of the Spirit, * faithful servants of the Trinity, ** 
pray ye fervently to the Lord on our behalf!  
Kontakion of the venerable martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
Let us praise the twenty-six sacred and venerable spiritual athletes, * the 
intercessors and protectors of Zographou, * who cast down the pride of the Latins, 
and endured fiery immolation * and were crowned as is meet; ** and let us cry: 
Rejoice, O venerable sufferers!  
 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §233 (6: 10-17)  
Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW §36 (10:16-22) 
 The Lord said to His disciples: Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of 
wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: 
for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues; and ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a 
testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end 
shall be saved.  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
A PRAYER TO THE VENERABLE MARTYRS OF ZOGRAPHOU  
O our holy and blessed fathers, ye who in your great love for us, your unworthy 
children, were consumed in the flames: Forget us not, but send up fervent prayers to 
God for us and for them that have mercy on us, and for the sanctification” 
glorification, and well-being of your holy monastery of Zographou, of this monastery 
(city, etc.) and for every city. Ye that stand even now before the throne of our Lord 
and God Jesus Christ, the Fashioner of all creation, and partake of the glory, the 
beauty, and the very sight of Him: Remember us, your children who keep your 
memory, and entreat His ineffable goodness to take pity on our weakness and 
wretchedness; to overlook all our sins, voluntary and involuntary; to implant in us 
godly fear of Him; to strengthen us with His grace in the fulfillment of our monastic 
(baptismal) vows, and in the performance of His holy and life-creating 
commandments and precepts; to quench His righteous anger which hath fallen upon 
us; to disperse the dark and gloomy cloud of sorrows which casteth its shadow upon 
our monastery (city); to protect, aid and deliver us who dwell therein, and all 
Orthodox Christians in every place from all enemies visible and invisible, from every 
evil, misfortune and danger that cometh upon us, expected or unforeseen; to preserve 
us in peace, tranquility and serenity; to grant us every prosperity and abundance; that 
protected by your fervent prayers and mighty intercession and assistance, and deliv-
erest from every misfortune and temptation, overflowing with every good work, amid 
peace, tranquility and plenty, we may radiantly celebrate your annual commemoration, 
glorifying the Lord Who hath glorified you with crowns of glory, which we, your 
lowly children, also request of you, O our right-blessed fathers; that passing the 
boundaries of this life in good repentance and God-pleasing endeavor, we may be 
deemed worthy to be with you. And even though our forgiveness is a great thing, yet 
do we trust in the goodness and the ineffable love for mankind of our Lord, God and 
Savior Jesus Christ Himself: to Whom be honor, glory and worship, with His 
beginningless Father and His most holy, good and life-creating Spirit, Both now ..., 
and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
