--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR PHOCAS, BISHOP OF SINOPE 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE CODRATUS,  
Whose Feast is transferred to this day from the 21st of September because of the 
Apodosis of the Exaltation of the Precious Cross.  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera; 3 of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
O glorious Codratus, as a sacred hierarch, as a divine preacher, as a divinely chosen 
witness of the sufferings of Christ, and a co-heir of the ineffable glory which is to be 
revealed, thou didst all-wisely preach the sacred Gospel, O most sacred one, and with 
light guided those who are in the darkness of ignorance. Wherefore, joyously keeping 
festival, we honor thy most sacred and holy memory, O blessed God-bearer.  
Having most gloriously been taught divine things, like the sun thou didst traverse 
the earth in the lightning flashes of thy preaching, O initiate of the sacred mysteries, 
and enlightening the souls of those who were in darkness, thou didst thus drive away 
the prince of darkness and his terrible demons, who could not endure the radiance, or 
the divine grace, or the all-accomplishing activity of the Spirit which dwelt within 
thee, O sacred hierarch Codratus, blessed intercessor for those who praise thee.  
Strengthened by thy confession of God, and adorned with the beauties of wounds, 
thou wast driven from thine Athenian flock by wicked men, O all-blessed one, but 
like a saving spring thou didst water the earth and show forth as fertile the hearts of 
those who before were frozen by the darkness of vanity, in that thou art an apostle 
and a disciple of Christ, O sacred and most true hierarch Codratus, thou supplicant 
on behalf of those who rightly praise thee.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Having cast down the vanity of idols * by thy sacred discourse, * thou didst make 
steadfast unstable hearts by faith, * and guide them to life, O hierarch, * and having 
suffered under the law, ** thou didst become a martyr of the Lord, O Phocas.  
Having dyed thy sacred vesture * in the blood of thy sacred body, O most sacred 
father, * thou didst truly receive from Christ a twofold crown, * O all-blessed one, * 
and with the angels thou dost hold chorus in the heavens, ** praying that we be 
saved.  
Thou didst illumine the whole world * with the rays of thy miracles, O father; * 
ever helping those who are at sea, * and dispelling the carnal weakness of every soul, * 
having received grace from the Lord, ** O divinely blessed martyr Phocas.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone IV, the composition of Cyprian the Studite: 
From thy childhood thou didst love the Lord, O all-blessed Phocas, wise 
hieromartyr, for, taking the weapon of the Cross upon thy shoulders, thou didst 
unwaveringly travel the path of salvation, and by Him thou wast revealed to be a co-
dweller with the angels, an opponent of the demons, and a most radiant intercessor 
for the world.  
Both now ..., Theotokion; or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel: “Called from on high ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: “Lament not for Me, O Mother, * beholding Me thy Son and 
God hanging upon the Tree, * Who hath suspended the earth upon the waters 
unsupported, * and hath fashioned all creation; * for I shall arise and be glorified, * 
and shall crush the kingdoms of Hades with strength; * destroying its power and 
delivering those in bondage * from its wickedness, * for I am compassionate; * and I 
shall bring them to My Father, ** in that I am the Lover of mankind.”  
The Aposticha Stichera from the Oktoechos.  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III:  
O holy Apostle Codratus, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls. 
Glory ..., that of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Phocas, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV.

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, and two of the saints.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy apostle, in Tone II, the acrostic whereof is: “For thee do I weave 
praise, O great Codratus”: 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Bearing thy crown and standing before the King of hosts, entreat Him to enlighten 
those who radiantly celebrate this thy memorial, O blessed apostle.  
Building on the foundation of the faith, O thou fullness of the pious, with thy 
most mighty teachings thou didst overthrow all the delusion of idolatry.  
Ministering the sacred Gospel with thy most sacred words, thou didst consecrate 
souls to thy Creator through faith and the strength of the Spirit, O ever-memorable 
Codratus.  
Theotokion: The Fashioner of creation, born in the flesh from a Maiden who 
knew not wedlock, preserved her a Virgin after birth-giving, as she was before birth-
giving, for so it was well-pleasing to Him.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV, the acrostic whereof is:  
“May God grant me the gift of hymning thee, O Phocas,” by Joseph:  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Enlighten my soul today with the luminous rays of the Spirit, that I may hymn thy 
divine memory, O glorious one, who hast been revealed to be a pastor and a beholder 
of the Ruler of all.  
Thou didst splendidly enrich the godly glory of the martyrs, adorning thyself with 
pastoral beauty and dyeing thy vesture in the blood of thy sacred suffering, O divinely 
blessed one.  
Making thy thoughts firm with the hope of that which is better, O all-wise one, 
thou didst utterly paralyze him who is mighty in wickedness, and, O most renowned 
victor, ascend with haste to the heavens, O Phocas.  
Theotokion: O pure one, the forbidding of our ancestors hath been rescinded, for 
thou hast given birth unto the pre-eternal God, Who hath revealed Himself as a little 
Babe and truly refashioned anew all the essence of humanity.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE III 
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Working awesome wonders, O Codratus, thou didst lead unbelievers to the divine 
faith, as a God-pleasing apostle, an honored hierarch, O most sacred one.  
With divine teachings thou didst enlighten many, for thou wast revealed to be a 
servant of the Light, illumining the ends of the earth with divine radiance, O sacred 
hierarch Codratus.  
For thy flock thou wast a mediator of the greatest of blessings, rescuing it from the 
darkness of unbelief and enlightening it with displays of most glorious miracles.  
Theotokion: Unbearable Fire dwelt within thee, yet did not consume thy womb, O 
Theotokos, and doth burn up our passions and reduceth the filth of deception to 
ashes.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Accomplishing healings by evoking the name of Christ, O venerable one, by the 
grace of God thou didst save a city and people from the deceit of the enemy.  
Being a temple of God, thou didst cast down temples of idols, O martyr, 
possessed of the all-accomplishing power of the Helper and Fellow-worker.  
O Phocas, an army of angels and the infinite light of God became visible when the 
Lord glorified thee before the judges’ seats.  
Theotokion: Taking flesh of thee, God united Himself to mankind in His loving-
kindness, and thereby annulled the curse, O thou who alone art the all-blessed Lady.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VI: 
As a hierarch who offered sacrifice, O father, * thou didst ultimately offer thyself 
as a living sacrifice, * bearing witness under the law concerning Christ God, * 
strengthened by angels, and assenting to death, * O thou who art ever amongst those 
who cry to thee: ** Come thou with us, O Phocas, and no one shall be against us!  
Ikos: O ye who desire to live in the heavens, trampling pleasures underfoot on 
earth, let us cleanse our lips and purify our tongues for hymnody and praise, that we 
may fittingly fashion hymns for the hierarch Phocas; for, having arrived at the gates 
of heaven, he obtained entrance without hindrance to that which is beyond nature, 
and doth behold the Desired One, Who is glorified by the angels. Hence, he is able to 
move to compassion Him Who alone is compassionate, such that He granteth us 
healing of our spiritual infirmities, in that he bore witness concerning Him. Therefore, 
let us sing to him and cry aloud: Come thou with us, O Phocas, and no one shall be 
against us!  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
O Codratus, thou didst preach Him Who is more comely in beauty than the 
children of mankind, the beginningless Word, Who was incarnate in a manner 
surpassing understanding. Thus, as a godly hierarch, thou didst enlighten those who 
were in darkness, becoming a light to the gentiles. Wherefore, keeping thy luminous 
festival in faith, we hymn thee.  
Glory ..., of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy grave, O Savior ...”: 
Thou hast been sacredly glorified as a martyr and pastor, and, having empurpled 
thy priestly vesture with blood, and dost now stand before the Lord. Wherefore, the 
Church of God doth today celebrate thy most glorious memory, O all-blessed 
Phocas.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O Christ, 
Thine all-immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the 
Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, wherewith Thou hast 
saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”  
ODE IV 
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
Working in the field of the heart with the sickle of thy words, thou hast cut down 
all the thorns of malice.  
Thy tomb gusheth forth gifts of healing upon all of us who praise thee, O sacred 
Codratus.  
Mercifully inclining thine ear, O sacred Codratus, thou dost rescue from hateful 
misfortunes those who entreat thee.  
Illumining with the lamps of thy words those who were darkened in deception, 
thou didst consume all the underbrush of deceit.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, the Creator became incarnate from thy pure blood, 
renewing all who had been subject to corruption.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
On the summit of the Church hath the Master set thee, O Phocas, as a most 
radiant star enlightening all hearts with the rays of thy sufferings and wonders, O 
most sacred one.  
Confessing the Master’s incarnation before the tyrant’s tribunal, O martyred 
passion-bearer, thou didst splendidly put to shame the idols of the Hellenes and the 
godlessness of polytheism.  
Thou didst traverse the sea of deception, harrowed by the storm of polytheism, by 
divine guidance, O glorious one; and became a haven most calm for all that sail.  
Theotokion: O blessed Virgin, who knewest not wedlock, boast of hierarchs and 
crown of all passion-bearers: from misfortunes and sorrows do thou deliver those 
who hymn thee.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
The most pure God, finding thy pure soul and abode of His glory, through thee 
cleanseth souls which have been defiled by grievous falls into sins.  
The Hellenes, compelled by thy wise dogmas, were prevailed upon, O blessed one, 
to confess Christ to be the Creator, the Wisdom and Power of the beginningless 
Father.  
Sacredly proclaiming the Radiance which came down from the Father of lights 
upon mortals, O Codratus, thou didst enlighten the people to honor and glorify the 
indivisible Trinity.  
Theotokion: Thou didst give birth without seed to a Son Who was incarnate for us 
in two natures and Who was begotten timelessly from the Father before all ages, O 
pure one, for He alone is supreme.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Thou didst manifestly trip the steps of the enemy, directing thine own feet to the 
paths of divine desire, O most sacred one.  
Thy much suffering body, pierced with wounds, tore off the members of 
godlessness with divine strength, O divinely blessed Phocas.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
As a wholeburnt offering didst thou bring thyself to God Who offered Himself up 
for our sake, putting an end to the bloody sacrifices of idolatry, O all-praised one.  
Theotokion: O Sovereign Lady, the Wisdom of God fashioned a temple for 
Himself from thy pure blood, for He was well-pleased to do so.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Thou wast a lofty heaven proclaiming the saving glory of God, in that thou wast a 
divine hierarch and a glorious apostle, O Codratus.  
Preaching the one beginningless Being and the one dominion of the Godhead, O 
all-wise Codratus, thou didst destroy the dark madness of polytheism.  
O blessed and most sacred one, thy body which now, in accordance with the law 
of nature, lieth in the tomb, doth work most glorious things in a manner transcending 
nature, O ever-memorable Codratus.  
Theotokion: He Who stretched out the heavens according to His will hath shown 
thee to be another heaven, one on earth, O Lady Birthgiver of God, and through thee 
He enlighteneth those who are in darkness.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Thou didst dry up the sea of godlessness, O all-wise one, gushing forth venerable 
teaching as a wellspring of life; and now thou dost wash away all the stench of the 
passions with showers of miracles.  
Despitefully used, thou wast broken and dismembered upon a tree, O sacred 
hierarch, but a voice strengthening thee from on high didst thou hear, O much-
suffering martyr.  
Having emulated the sufferings of the Passionless One, O Phocas, thou dost heal 
divers sufferings and dost deliver those who sail through storm and wave by thy 
divine prayers unto God.  
Theotokion: Like a shower, the saving Word was poured forth through thine 
incorrupt womb, O all-holy Maiden, and by divine power He hath dried up the 
streams of wickedness.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “As first fruits ...”:  
As an honored and sacred hierarch and a most steadfast sufferer * the world doth 
offer to Thee the Apostle Codratus, O Lord, * and with hymns it doth honor his 
precious memory, * ever entreating the remission of sins ** to be granted unto those 
who hymn him, O Compassionate One.  
Ikos: Let us honor the wise hierarch as a faithful pastor and teacher, for in the 
meadow of suffering he hath budded forth a most sacred rose and perfumed us, the 
faithful, having filled the whole world with the radiance of healing and enlightenment, 
with rays of miracles and virtuous works, for God hath made him wondrous for all 
who honor his precious memory with hymns, in that He is compassionate.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Having elevated thy mind to the First Good, thou didst become a temple of the 
Trinity most divine in appearance, and by thy most exalted teachings thou hast raised 
up those who are in the abyss of misery and who cry: O God of our fathers, Blessed 
art Thou!  
Having demolished the temples of idols with the tools of thy prayers, thou didst 
raise up temples of God through the divine Spirit, O most sacred father, leading 
multitudes of the saved who cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Being fiery, for thou didst ever have within thy heart the divine fire of the Spirit, O 
all-wise one, thou hast been seen to be a torch consuming all the underbrush of 
deception, enlightening those who cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Delivered from the curse of our first parents by thee, O divinely 
joyous one, we know thee to be the cause of good, in that thou hast given birth unto 
the Word, the Cause of all, in a manner surpassing all understanding and wonder; 
wherefore we cry aloud to thee, O most pure and blessed one: Thou hast given birth 
to God in the flesh.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Thou didst not fear the fury of the tormentors, O glorious one, but, presiding over 
thy reason-endowed flock, thou didst offer thyself as a lamb to Christ, the Chief 
Shepherd, O Phocas, who art glorified in martyrdom.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Thou wast tried like gold in a crucible, O martyr, and cast into the midst of fiery 
lime, thou wast in no wise consumed, and cried aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord my 
God, in the temple of Thy glory!  
With the divine dew of divine love, which consumed thy heart, thou wast 
preserved unconsumed in the fire which burnt up the filth of godlessness, O glorious 
hierarch.  
Theotokion: O most pure Maiden, who by thy birth-giving hast renewed all 
mankind, in that thou art good, renew the putrid house of my soul with examples of 
repentance.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Having the pillars of thy soul founded upon the noetic Stone, thou didst cause the 
enemies of the Lord to stumble, O blessed Codratus, making steadfast all who hymn 
and supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages.  
Having a heart and soul adorned with the virtues, thou hast adorned souls with the 
word of thy teaching, delivering all from the chaos of idolatrous madness, O divinely 
eloquent Codratus.  
As a disciple of Jesus, and a radiant apostle, as a brilliant lightning flash of the Bun 
of righteousness, O Codratus, sanctify those who keep thy holy memory.  
Theotokion: With most sacred voices the most sacred prophets of God clearly 
foretold thee as the future Mother of Him Who doth rule all things, O most pure 
one. Him do we bless throughout all ages.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Grace was poured forth into thy mouth, O Phocas, whereby thou didst convert 
peoples led astray by the counsel of the serpent, and as a true shepherd, thou didst 
lead to Christ those who cried aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The assemblies of the faithful have thee, O wise one, as an ever-vigilant 
intercessor calming the raging waves of the sea, subduing temptations, and delivering 
from every grievous circumstance, those who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, O ye works 
of the Lord!  
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Thy temple doth ever pour forth streams of healing upon those who are in need 
thereof, revealing itself as a haven undisturbed by waves, which driveth away the 
passions from those who honor thee, O martyr, and who cry out to Christ: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
That we may honor thy precious memory by keeping festival, O Phocas, do thou 
earnestly entreat the supremely good Lord, that He grant deliverance from vexations 
to us who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Objects of the Law prefigured thee, O most pure one, the ark of the 
covenant and the jar which contained the manna, the divine table, and, furthermore, 
the candlestick of shining gold, which bore the Light of revelation for the gentiles, 
Who illumineth the ends of the earth with the knowledge of God.  
ODE IX 
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Adorned in mind, thou dost stand before the comely Master as a hierarch ever 
most splendid and pleasing to God, as a divine apostle, truly asking for peace for the 
world with all the apostles, O Codratus.  
Magnesia, possessing the shrine of thy relics as a divine tabernacle, O Codratus, 
lovingly draweth forth therefrom every benefit; and the heavenly mansions, 
possessing thy soul, rejoice with all the saints.  
Thy radiant day, thy light-bearing memorial, thy truly illustrious feast, hath dawned 
like the sun upon all, and we faithfully celebrate it, O Codratus, asking that through 
thy prayers we may find remission of sins and great mercy.  
Theotokion: Spare me, O Lord, spare me, when Thou wilt judge me, and condemn 
me not to the fire, neither reprove me in Thy wrath, for Thou art thus entreated, O 
Christ, by the Virgin who bore Thee, and the multitude of the apostles, martyrs and 
prophets.  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Come ye all, and with divine and sacred voices let us celebrate most sacredly the 
most sacred memory of the sacred pastor who prayeth to God, the Benefactor, for us.  
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Thou didst show thyself to be consumed with zeal for the Master, O martyr, when 
thou wast put into the fiery bath, wherein, in gladness, thou didst surrender thy soul 
into the hands of God, O martyr.  
The choirs of hierarchs, the assemblies of martyrs, the company of sacred apostles 
and the souls of all the righteous, having thee in their midst, O martyr Phocas, rejoice.  
Thy memory hath spread throughout the world, illumining the souls of those who 
with faith praise thy feats and struggles, and thy manifold sufferings, O right 
wondrous pastor and martyr.  
Theotokion: O pure one, enlighten my soul which hath been darkened by sin, and 
by thy mediation deliver me from the everlasting flame of darkness, that, rejoicing, I 
may praise thy glory.  
Exapostilarion of the holy apostle: 
Spec. Mel.: “By the spirit in the Sanctuary ...”:  
Turning the course of thy comely feet, O Apostle Codratus, thou didst ascend, 
rejoicing, along the heavenly path; and standing before the Trinity, thou dost behold 
the Son and the Holy Spirit in the Father. Wherefore, with faith we celebrate thy most 
sacred and divine memory.  
 
Glory ..., of the holy hieromartyr:  
 
Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars ...”:  
O divinely wise father, thou didst show thyself to be the glory of hierarchs, a 
defender of the poor and a pillar of the virtues. Wherefore, remember us who hymn 
thee, O Phocas.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Thee do all we sinners have as an intercessor, O all-holy Virgin, for by thy 
maternal supplications thou hast rendered thy Son easily reconciled unto us.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III:  
O holy Apostle Codratus, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls. 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Phocas, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VI: 
As a hierarch who offered sacrifice, O father, * thou didst ultimately offer thyself 
as a living sacrifice, * bearing witness under the law concerning Christ God, * 
strengthened by angels, and assenting to death, * O thou who art ever amongst those 
who cry to thee: ** Come thou with us, O Phocas, and no one shall be against us!  
 Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII: 
As an honored and sacred hierarch and a most steadfast sufferer * the world doth 
offer to Thee the Apostle Codratus, O Lord, * and with hymns it doth honor his 
precious memory, * ever entreating the remission of sins ** to be granted unto those 
who hymn him, O Compassionate One.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE HEBREWS (4:14-5:3)  
Brethren: seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the 
heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not a 
high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all 
points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the 
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. 
For every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things pertaining 
to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins: who can have compassion 
on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way; for that he himself also is 
compassed with infirmity. And by reason hereof he ought, as for the people, so also 
for himself, to offer for sins. And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he 

--- PAGE 13 ---
that is called of God, as was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an 
high priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee. 
As he saith also in another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of 
Melchisedec. 
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (10:9-16)  
The Lord said unto the Jews who came unto Him: I am the door, by me if any 
man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief 
cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might 
have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the 
good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the 
shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the 
sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling 
fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, 
and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so 
know I the Father, and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, 
which are not of this fold, them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and 
there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
