--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 30th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS MICHAEL, FIRST 
METROPOLITAN OF KIEV, WONDERWORKER OF ALL RUSSIA  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone V,  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
With hymns doth the land of Russia crown thee, the first of its bishops, O 
venerable Michael, most blessed and holy hierarch of Christ: for thou wast the first to 
illumine it with perfection through divine baptism; thou wast first to bring the light of 
the Gospel into the darkness; thou wast first to destroy its idolatrous sacrifices by the 
sign of the Cross, wherewith thou didst amaze its unbelieving people. And now, 
standing as a preacher with the holy hierarchs before thy Master, pray thou earnestly, 
that all may obtain the never-waning Light, and that we may receive from Christ God 
great mercy. (Twice)  
From the Imperial City didst thou bring the Gospel of Christ - the gift which is 
truly more splendid than the sun, the most precious pearl which hath enriched the 
whole world - unto the land of Russia, which was beset by the poverty of unbelief; 
and thou didst present it thereto. And adorned therewith as with ornaments of gold, 
as a comely virgin it standeth before the King of all, delighting in gladness in the 
heavenly bridal-chamber. And standing there, O hierarch Michael, pray thou with 
those who have inherited thy preaching, that they may receive from Christ God great 
mercy. (Twice) 
Borne aloft on the tranquil winds of the help of the Most High, thou didst arrive 
like a winged and swift eagle, bearing the Gospel of Christ to the Russian land. And 
having driven forth the nestlings of delusion which hid under the shadow of the 
madness of idolatry, thou didst utterly destroy them with thy divine teaching, And 
having by thy miracles rendered meek the raging people who were fainting from 
spiritual starvation, thou didst lead them to Christ, nurturing them on the word of the 
Gospel. To Him do thou pray, O hierarch, that He grant great mercy unto all. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone III:  
O ye people, let us praise the hierarch Michael, the witness of the truth and 
preacher of the Gospel of Christ; for he is a disciple of Christ his Master, who, being 
sent to unbelieving people, arrived as an apostle, and, fulfilling the prophecy of the 
first-called apostle, by the sign of the Cross won over the deluded nations, leading 
them back to the Master. And standing now before the throne of the Most High, he 
prayeth for our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone III: 
How can we, O all-honored one, * not marvel at thine Offspring? * who is both 
God and man. * For without knowing a man, O all-immaculate One, * without a 
father thou hast given birth to a Son in the flesh, * who without a mother was 
begotten from the Father before all ages, * yet in no way undergoing change, fusion 
or separation, * but preserving fully the characteristics of both natures. * Wherefore, 
O Sovereign Lady, and Virgin Mother, * beseech Him to save the souls of those ** 
who with Orthodox faith confess thee to be the true Theotokos.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace.· O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 

--- PAGE 3 ---
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON.  
When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is 
immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the 
Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. 
For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that 
ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of 
God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master 
of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is 
a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image 
of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more 
beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the 
light, she is found pre-eminent. She hath delivered from pain those who please her, 
and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them 
from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that 
godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall 
judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, 
reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his 
holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our 
strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing 
to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and 
denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have 
the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a 
reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like 
other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery, 
and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. 
Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine 
him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his 
forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall 
he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wick-
edness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither 
bethought they that Thou alone art God, who hast the power of life and death, savest 

--- PAGE 4 ---
in time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and 
merciful, givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
The land of Russia * was gladdened by thine arrival, O holy Michael, * and the 
glorious city of Kiev * doth piously keep festival, * having been enlightened by divine 
baptism. * And lo! they who before offered sacrifices unto idols * now bring their 
souls as gifts to the Most High in purity of heart, * having thee going before them as 
the mediator ** and intercessor for all who honor thy memory.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Sensing thine arrival, * O most blessed Michael, * the idols cried aloud in 
lamentation: * “Woe to our accursedness! * How shall we, who before were honored 
by all * with great veneration, * now be subjected to mockery by this one man, * a 
stranger, who beareth the image of Jesus Who had no home, ** Who granteth 
restoration unto all the world?”  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
The most glorious city of Kiev * is perfumed by thine anointing with spiritual 
myrrh, O father Michael, * and receiveth the sign of adoption. * Those who had 
fallen away from the noetic Light * and were darkened by the gloom * of the madness 
of idolatry * are illumined by the holy font of baptism * and come to the light of the 
knowledge of God, ** as children of the Light and newly-converted people.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
When the divine Spirit desired to choose new people for Himself, He first brought 
to divine knowledge Vladimir, great among princes; and when he was enlightened 
with noetic radiance by grace from on high in the holy font, he accepted thee as his 
pastor through a revelation from on high, and brought thee to Russia, to sheep who 
had gone astray through unbelief. And having cleansed them by thy teaching and 
through baptism in water, thou didst bring them into the fold as the sheep of Christ. 
Standing now with them before the throne of the Master, do thou watch over those 
who today celebrate thy memory, O Michael, first-enthroned hierarch of Russia.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O most 
pure one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign 
Lady, ** the intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 
At the blessing of loaves: Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Today hath the prophecy of the first-called apostle been fulfilled, * for, lo! on 
these mountains grace hath shone forth and the faith hath increased. * And those 
who had grown old through unbelief have found rebirth * through the divine font 
and became a renewed people, * a holy priesthood, a hallowed nation, the flock of 
Christ. * And thou wast shown to be His first pastor, * in that thou didst first serve 
Him by baptism. * Standing now before Christ God the Master, * pray thou that all 
the children of Russia may be saved; * for thou art possessed of boldness, ** as a 
hierarch and sacred minister of God. (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Today hath the prophecy of the first-called apostle been fulfilled, * for, lo! on 
these mountains grace hath shone forth and the faith hath increased. * And those 
who had grown old through unbelief have found rebirth * through the divine font 
and became a renewed people, * a holy priesthood, a hallowed nation, the flock of 
Christ. * And thou wast shown to be His first pastor, * in that thou didst first serve 
Him by baptism. * Standing now before Christ God the Master, * pray thou that all 
the children of Russia may be saved; * for thou art possessed of boldness, ** as a 
hierarch and sacred minister of God. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
O holy hierarch Michael, thou wast a vessel chosen to bring the name of Christ 
before unbelieving people; wherefore, upon being sent to the Russian land, and 
illumining it with holy baptism, thou didst guide it to the knowledge of God by thy 
teachings. Do thou thereby guide us also to the path of the commandments of the 
Lord, we beseech thee, O most blessed favorite bf God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
Rejoice, O most pure Virgin, thou golden cup wherein the wine of our salvation 
was mingled by the Holy Spirit, wherewith He hath gladdened our souls! For thou art 
the cup which draweth forth everlasting joy for us!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:  
The Word Who with the Father and the Spirit is without beginning was brought 
into the land of Russia by thee, O holy hierarch; and thou didst unwaveringly preach 
Him with thy mouth, denouncing the arrogance of the idols, and didst lead to the 
Lord new people and a new inheritance. Standing with them as an initiate of the 
sacred mysteries and a servant of God, pray thou continually for the souls of those 
who hymn thine honored repose, O father.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V:  
As the true Mother of the Word Who is equally without beginning, intercede for 
us who would give answer at the hour of judgment, and beseech thy Son with fervent 
entreaties; for we know that thy maternal supplications are able to accomplish much, 
and for their sake we hope to find mercy on the day of the dread trial.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Michael, 
and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God on our 
behalf.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice).  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Inclining upon His breast ...”:  
O most blessed and holy hierarch Michael, we offer unto thee the first-fruits of 
hymnody, as to the leader of our hierarchs, the planter of the Faith of Christ in 
Russia, the destroyer of the arrogance of the idolatry, the shepherd of the newly elect 
people, celebrating thy memory today and crying out to thee with love. Standing 
before the throne of the Most High, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of 
offenses unto those who piously bow down before thy precious image.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
In that thou art the true consolation of all who sorrow and the proper instruction 
of those who have strayed from the path of truth, O most pure Birthgiver of God, do 
thou quickly intercede for us and deliver the grievously oppressed from peril. For 
thou art able to accomplish all things whatsoever thou desirest, in that thou dost 
possess boldness before thy Son and God. Intercede before Him with thy maternal 
supplications, that He grant forgiveness of offenses unto those who with piety of 
mind honor thy nativity.  
Hymn of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 36 (IN. 10: 9-16)  
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 

--- PAGE 8 ---
know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one Shepherd.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
When the divine Spirit desired to choose a new people for Himself, He first 
brought to divine knowledge Vladimir, great among princes; and when he was 
enlightened with noetic radiance by grace from on high in the holy font, he accepted 
thee as his pastor through a revelation from on high, and brought thee to Russia, as 
unto sheep who had gone astray through unbelief. And having cleansed them by thy 
teaching and through baptism in water, thou didst bring them into the fold as the 
sheep of Christ. Standing now with them before the throne of the Master, do thou 
watch over those who today celebrate thy memory, O Michael, first-enthroned 
hierarch of Russia.  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (The Paraclisis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and that of the holy hierarch, with 8 Stichera, in Tone VI:  
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Standing with the choirs of the saints of heaven before the throne of the Most 
High, as a hierarch and servant of God, pray for us who serve with divinely inspired 
hymns, that we may stand with thee where the gladness of the righteous is.  
As one chosen by the Lord for the service of His glory in the work of the Gospel 
of Christ, O holy hierarch Michael, pray for us who have assembled for thy memorial, 
that we may labor in the commandments of the Gospel and may receive as our 
reward the gladness of the venerable.  
Standing like a candle upon a candlestick, thou didst shine far and wide with the 
light of thy good works, O father, for by thine instruction the light of the vision of 
God illumined the unbelieving people, and the land enlightened by thee rejoiceth.  
Theotokion: In that thou art she who from thy womb hath revealed to the world 
the true Light, enlighten and direct upon the way us who walk in the darkness of the 
passions, O Mary Bride of God, who gayest birth to the Way for the human race.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
The Faith was not planted nor piety rooted in Russia, O holy hierarch Michael, 
until thou, as a most wise husbandman, didst plough up the barren ground of 
polytheism, deepening the steadfast confession of the knowledge of God.  
Illumined by light from on high, the great Vladimir, receiving thee like a radiant 
beam, O hierarch of God, brought thee to the land of Russia, which was darkened by 
idolatry, that there the people might be enlightened by thy coming and be brought to 
knowledge by thy confession of the steadfast Faith.  
Christ God, the Sun of righteousness, revealed thee, O Michael, to the land of 
Russia as a ray of splendor, and, illumining it with the regeneration of the font of 
baptism, thou didst bring to the Master a new people, restored through the 
confession of the good Faith.  
Theotokion: Our true God, the Sun of righteousness, borrowing flesh from thee, 
O Virgin Mary, shone forth upon the world and utterly destroyed the darkness of 
polytheism. Illumine me with light, O Virgin Mary, who am darkened by 
despondency, and guide me to the path of goodly works.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
With the axe of the teaching of the Gospel thou didst fell the graven idols, and 
overthrowing their temples thou didst plant piety. And the city of Kiev, adorned 
therewith, crieth out to thee with love: Rejoice, O Michael, first enthroned of the 
hierarchs of Russia!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O thou who hast delivered from barbaric slavery those who chant unto thee 
“Rejoice!”, rescue us from slavery to the alien, root out idolatrous passions from our 
thoughts, and plant therein the right-mindedness of the fear of God; for thou art the 
cause, beginning and fulfillment of all that is good.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Sensing thee, the servant of Christ and steward of piety, O holy hierarch, the idols 
bitterly lamented their destruction; but the people, renewed through baptism, were 
filled with gladness, celebrating a splendid festival in the Lord.  
When thou, O father, didst arrive at the mountains of Kiev, Perun, the foremost 
idol, was cast down and dragged away by horses, and the rest of the graven images 
trembled with fear. But the people chanted, celebrating the day of their regeneration.  
People of every age and gender, who before were darkened, came to the River 
Dnieper for enlightenment, a countless multitude with thee at its head. And having 
administered to them the bath of regeneration, thou didst guide them to the 
knowledge of God, O Michael, holy hierarch of God. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: All generations call thee blessed O Mary our Queen, and we, blessing 
thee with hymns, bow down before thy countenance, depicted upon thine icon, and 
celebrate a splendid feast in memory of thy holy hierarch.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
The newly-baptized people, illumined by the light of God, cried out with thee, O 
Michael: O Christ God, grant that we may behold Thee alone, the Word of God, 
Who dost rescue us from the darkness of the madness of idolatry!  
When Joshua son of Nun bore the ark around the walls of Jericho, they tumbled 
down; and when thou camest forth with the Cross, O holy hierarch, the idols likewise 
fell. And the people glorified Thee, the Word of God, O Christ, who dost rescue 
mankind from the darkness of unbelief.  
Clothed by thee through the font of baptism, the city of Kiev is adorned even to 
this day, O holy hierarch; and it beareth upon its shoulders the precious Gospel of 
Christ, as it were coins of gold. And we, kissing it, glorify the Word of God Who hath 
rescued us from the darkness of sin.  
Theotokion: We are all adorned by thy beauty, O Mary Bride of God, for thou art 
truly beauteous. And desiring thy beauty, the Most High united Himself to thy flesh: 
God became a man, for thy sake deifying us who had fallen into corruption, O pure 
Virgin.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Like Moses thou didst cut through the fetid sea of the madness of idolatry with 
the staff of the Cross, O hierarch Michael; and cleansing the people with the water of 
the vision of God, thou hast led into harbor those who chant: Glory to Thee, O 
greatly merciful Christ!  
The land of Russia, which of old had gone astray and was not established in the 
Faith, hath now come to the vision of God, guided by thee, O hierarch Michael; and 
having received the ring of adoption, it rejoiceth, crying aloud: Glory to Thee, O my 
greatly merciful Christ!  
Having subdued in the Russian land the people who raged in their unbelief and 
imposed upon them the yoke of obedience to the Church, O Michael, thou didst 
bring many laborers to the vineyard of the heavenly Master. Make us also wise 
husbandmen, O holy one, for we offer thee praise this day.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Tame thou the passions which rage within me, and impose upon me 
the yoke of humility, O Theotokos, that I may labor the rest of my days therein and 
find mercy on the day of judgment.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in tone II:  
Thou wast shown to be a second Moses for Russia, O father, * bearing the noetic 
grapes from the Egypt of idolatry * to the land foreseen by prophecy, which said: * 
The Faith will be established in this land, * and on the peaks of the mountains of 
Kiev will the Fruit which nourisheth the whole world * be exalted higher than 
Lebanon! ** And tasting thereof, we bless thee, O Michael, thou hierarch of God.  
Ikos: Having brought the scattered people together into one understanding of the 
vision of God, and washed away by baptism the old blindness of the Russian land, 
thou didst illumine it by the Cross. And having taught it to glorify the most holy 
Trinity-the Father, the Son and the most holy Spirit, thou didst make it a reason-
endowed flock of Christ God, and standing with faith before Him to this day, it crieth 
out: Deliver from every evil circumstance the city and people who bless thee, O 
Michael, thou hierarch of God!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
By thee, O holy hierarch, was Russia washed with the dew-giving water of grace, 
and the scales fell away from its noetic eyes in the holy font. It recognized the one 
Creator, and crieth out with faith: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
When thou wast filled with gladness after baptism, O city of Kiev, the abominable 
idols lamented. And the idol Perun, which was the first of them to be dragged away, 
cried out bitterly. Wherefore, the people, acknowledging their former error, cried out 
with thee, O Michael: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Placing the golden ring of the new grace upon the hand of Russia, O hierarch 
Michael, thou didst betroth her, the Church of the nations, as a pure bride unto 
Christ. And spiritually rejoicing to this day, she crieth aloud: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O pure Virgin, we call thee the golden ring, adorned as with a 
precious diamond by Christ’s union with the flesh. Wherefore, we cry out with love: 
Blessed art thou alone, whose Son is the God of our fathers!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Snatching the Russian land from the flame of the deception of idolatry, O most 
wise one, thou didst bedew it with the dew of baptism, and it no longer yearneth to 
return to its old ways, but supremely exalteth Christ and thee, its pastor, throughout 
the ages.  
Disposing all things well for the newly-elect people, thou didst ordain pastors and 
teachers for the cities; and having thereby made provision for the newly-chosen flock, 
thou thyself didst depart unto Christ God, the Chief Shepherd, to reign with Him 
throughout the ages.  
Much weeping and lamentation didst thou cause the city of Kiev by thy departure, 
O father; but the Jerusalem on high, taking thee to its bosom, rejoiced. And living 
there, forget not thy flock, but pray that it may dwell with thee throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: Much gladness and joy do I cause the demons by my evil deeds, and 
thus much grief also to my guardian. O pure Mary, Mother of Christ God, guide me 
to repentance, that they may weep and mine angel may find joy, and me with him 
throughout the ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Like a palm-tree didst thou flourish in the house of God, O father, and thou didst 
show forth the incorruption of thy relics like fruit unto all; wherefore, we the people, 
understanding from this that thou standest before Christ, magnify thee with hymns.  
Like a fragrant cedar dost thou spread thy perfume, O holy hierarch, and delightest 
those who bow down before thee. Fill us also with the sweet savor of thy prayers, for 
we magnify thy memory with hymns.  
We magnify the choir of the holy hierarchs of Russia and the council of those who 
love the feasts of the Church. Haste ye together to the holy cave, ye pastors of the 
Chief Shepherd! Ye people, with us honor your father with hymns! For today we 
magnify his memory.  
Theotokion: All creation hymneth thee, O Virgin, as her who passed through all 
the gates of heaven and standeth at the right hand of the fiery throne. Grant that we 
also may stand at the right hand of thy Son, for with hymns do we magnify thee and 
Him Who was born of thee.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch: 
Thou standest before the King of all, O holy hierarch Michael, and thy head is 
crowned with blessing by the right hand of the Most High. Stretch forth thy hand and 
bless us as ones approaching for thy priestly blessing; for thou art not dead, but livest 
forever. And the whole Church of Russia praiseth thy memory with hymns, and with 
her we also give thee glory.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O thou who art Queen, the Mother of the King of the ages, show forth those who 
hymn thee to reign over the passions; for, lo! we bring before thee in supplication the 
wondrous Michael, thy holy hierarch, bowing down in whose memory we magnify 
thee.  
On the praises, 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I:  
Spec Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Today renowned Kiev, the mother of cities, * doth celebrate thy memory, O holy 
hierarch, * and the people of Russia honor with praises thy passing over into life 
everlasting. * For thou hast departed unto the heavens, * yet art not absent, watching 
over mortals ** as a faithful mediator and advocate for our souls. (Twice)  
Beginning the first ascent of the new year, * we offer the first-fruits of hymnody 
unto thee, * as to the first hierarch of the Russian land, O blessed one; * wherefore, 
accept them as an honored gift, * and bestow thy blessing upon us, ** for thou art 
ever the advocate for our souls.  
Delighting in the desire for the love of Christ, * thou didst furnish thyself with 
noetic wings, * soaring aloft from that which is below unto that which is above. * The 
gates of paradise are thrown open, and entering therein thou dost delight in the vision 
of God. * With the sweetness thereof gladden the souls of those ** who hymn thy 
memory, O hierarch Michael.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Receiving spiritual anointing from the heavens, O most blessed Michael, thou wast 
like a fruitful olive-tree in the house of God. And delighting Vladimir, great among 
princes, with thy fruits, he received thee with love into the governance of the Russian 
land. And having cleansed it of idolatry, thou didst lead it to the knowledge of God. 
Wherefore, celebrating thy memory as is meet, and falling down before thee, we pray: 
Ask of Christ God prosperity for thy flock and forgiveness and great mercy for all.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
Save thy servants from misfortunes, O Virgin Theotokos, for after God it is to 
thee that we flee, as to an impregnable rampart and protection.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Dismissal. First Hour  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the canon 
of the holy hierarch. 
The Faith was not planted nor piety rooted in Russia, O holy hierarch Michael, 
until thou, as a most wise husbandman, didst plough up the barren ground of 
polytheism, deepening the steadfast confession of the knowledge of God. (Twice) 
Illumined by light from on high, the great Vladimir, receiving thee like a radiant 
beam, O hierarch of God, brought thee to the land of Russia, which was darkened by 
idolatry, that there the people might be enlightened by thy coming and be brought to 
knowledge by thy confession of the steadfast Faith.  
Christ God, the Sun of righteousness, revealed thee, O Michael, to the land of 
Russia as a ray of splendor, and, illumining it with the regeneration of the font of 
baptism, thou didst bring to the Master a new people, restored through the 
confession of the good Faith.  
Like Moses thou didst cut through the fetid sea of the madness of idolatry with 
the staff of the Cross, O hierarch Michael; and cleansing the people with the water of 
the vision of God, thou hast led into harbor those who chant: Glory to Thee, O 
greatly merciful Christ!  
The land of Russia, which of old had gone astray and was not established in the 
Faith, hath now come to the vision of God, guided by thee, O hierarch Michael; and 
having received the ring of adoption, it rejoiceth, crying aloud: Glory to Thee, O my 
greatly merciful Christ!  
Having subdued in the Russian land the people who raged in their unbelief and 
imposed upon them the yoke of obedience to the Church, O Michael, thou didst 
bring many laborers to the vineyard of the heavenly Master. Make us also wise 
husbandmen, O holy one, for we offer thee praise this day.  
Theotokion: Tame thou the passions which rage within me, and impose upon me 
the yoke of humility, O Theotokos, that I may labor the rest of my days therein and 
find mercy on the day of judgment.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Today hath the prophecy of the first-called apostle been fulfilled, * for, lo! on 
these mountains grace hath shone forth and the faith hath increased. * And those 
who had grown old through unbelief have found rebirth * through the divine font 
and became a renewed people, * a holy priesthood, a hallowed nation, the flock of 
Christ. * And thou wast shown to be His first pastor, * in that thou didst first serve 
Him by baptism. * Standing now before Christ God the Master, * pray thou that all 
the children of Russia may be saved; * for thou art possessed of boldness, ** as a 
hierarch and sacred minister of God.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in tone II:  
Thou wast shown to be a second Moses for Russia, O father, * bearing the noetic 
grapes from the Egypt of idolatry * to the land foreseen by prophecy, which said: * 
The Faith will be established in this land, * and on the peaks of the mountains of 
Kiev will the Fruit which nourisheth the whole world * be exalted higher than 
Lebanon! ** And tasting thereof, we bless thee, O Michael, thou hierarch of God.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 318 (HEB. 7:26 - 8:2)  
Brethren: such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those 
high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people’s: for 
this he did once, when he offered up himself. For the law maketh men high priests 
which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the 
Son, who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this 
is the sum: We have such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of 
the Majesty in the heavens; A minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, 
which the Lord pitched, and not man. 
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his 
tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 36 (JN. 10: 9-16) 
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “I am the door: by Me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he who is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and 
know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd.”  
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
