--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 30th DAY OF THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR GREGORY  
OF GREATER ARMENIA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”:  
Having dyed thy sacred vesture * in the blood of thy martyrdom, * thou didst 
enter into the holy of holies, * O right wondrous martyr, * where there is ineffable 
light, * divine glory, and the voice of one who keepeth festival, * receiving therein * 
the reward of thy labors: * an imperishable crown, * glory which is everlasting * and a 
dwelling-place in paradise, * O wise Gregory. ** Pray thou with boldness on behalf of 
our souls. (Twice)  
The threefold waves of tortures * did not shake thy soul, * nor did thy long 
imprisonment, * enclosed in a gloomy pit, * O glorious spiritual athlete. * But thou 
hast shone forth like light * upon those who languish in the darkness of vainglory, * 
and hast shown them to be children of the day * through the font of baptism, * 
through higher and saving regeneration, * and truly divine life, in that thou art a God-
pleasing hierarch, ** O all-wise Gregory. (Twice) 
Rhipsimia, loving Thee, * the Master of all, * the immortal Bridegroom, * accepted 
the flaying of the skin of her body, * having first through abstinence rent asunder * 
the dark hairshirt of the passions; * and with her the ever-memorable Gaiana also 
struggled, * leading an assembly of virgins * who suffered mightily * and cast down 
the ancient deceiver of Eve. * Praising them as is meet, ** we glorify Thee, O Christ. 
(Twice) 
Glory ..., the composition of Sergius, in Tone VI:  
Who can recount the victories of thy virtues as is meet? What mouth can describe 
thine endurance of torture? For in both wast thou triumphant, O Gregory, O saint of 
God, cease thou never to pray, that our souls be saved, for thou hast great boldness, 
O hieromartyr.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: When, of old, the unblemished ewe-lamb * and immaculate 
Sovereign Lady, * beheld her Lamb * upon the tree of the Cross, * she exclaimed 
maternally, and marveling cried aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new 
and most strange sight I see? * How hath the thankless synagogue * betrayed Thee to 
the judgment-seat of Pilate * and condemned Thee to death, * Who art the Life of 
all? ** Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, O Word!”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Noetically entering into the impenetrable cloud of ineffable light, the martyr and 
pastor learned the ineffable mysteries of Christ, for he was enlightened as a martyr 
and taught the mysteries as a pastor. Wherefore, he hath been crowned with a 
twofold wreath of heavenly glory, ever beseeching Christ on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth birth to 
Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son How is it 
that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Gregory, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without the martyria; and that of the holy 
hieromartyr, with 6 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I hymn thee, the vigilant shepherd, O martyr”, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
Standing, crowned, before the adored Trinity as a vigilant shepherd and a sacred 
martyr, with thy sacred supplications lull to sleep the dark fantasies of my passions, 
for I praise thee, O blessed Gregory.  
Today the inextinguishable lamp, the great hierarch, the much-suffering pastor, the 
test of struggles, the boast of Armenia hath summoned us to hymnody. Assembling, 
let us bless him.  
Thou wast full of living waters, O blessed Gregory, like a river issuing forth from 
the noetic Eden, watering the face of the Church and drying up the depths of idolatry.  
Theotokion: Strengthened by the Cross of Him Who became incarnate of thee, O 
pure one, the women suffered mightily; and they have been brought before Him in 
Thine entourage, resplendent in the brilliance of virginity and the blood of 
martyrdom.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Likened to a barren woman * the Church from among the nations hath 
given birth, * and the assembly abundant in children, hath grown weak. * Let 
us cry out to our wondrous God: * Holy art Thou, O Lord!  
With the wounds of thy struggles thou didst break the teeth of the lions, and, 
inundating the blood of the demons with the outpourings of thy blood, thou dost cast 
down the temples of the idols from the foundation, O right wondrous one.  
Neither the oppression of the wicked, nor bitter tortures, nor long imprisonment 
in a most gloomy pit changed thine adamant resolve, O right wondrous martyr.  
Thou gavest no slumber to thine eyes, O martyr, until thou didst show forth as 
children of the day those wickedly held fast in evil slumber, who cry aloud: Holy art 
Thou, O Lord!  
Theotokion: The martyr Rhipsimia, knowing thee to be the only Virgin Mother, O 
Maiden, desired thy beauties; and, shining with her sufferings, she was led before 
Christ in Thine entourage.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Having brightly illumined thy soul with most radiant splendors, O hierarch, thou 
didst enlighten the face of the earth with virtues, having Christ within thy heart; and 
like a never-setting sun thou dost enlighten the assemblies of the nations, adorning us 
with the beauties of martyrdom, O Gregory all-wise. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
As one who loveth sin, I beseech thee who hast given birth to the sinless God 
Who taketh away the sins of the world: O most pure one, have compassion on my 
greatly sinful soul and cleanse me of my many sins; for thou art the cleansing, 
salvation and aid of the faithful.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Seated in glory * upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus most divine 
is come on a swift cloud, * and with His incorrupt arm hath He saved those 
who cry aloud: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ! 
The Most High Lord, exalted in power, led thee up to the lofty eminence of 
martyrdom, O glorious one; and, rejoicing, thou didst emulate His sufferings, O 
hieromartyr, crying aloud: Glory to Thy power!  
With divine power thou didst cast down the ungodly foe who was destroying all 
the land of Armenia, and, shining forth like a ray of-light, thou didst illumine those 
who lay in the darkness of vanity, O wise one.  
O Gregory, thou didst bring to the Creator a talant increased many times: those 
saved by thy divine teachings, and thou hast received from Him a portion which 
groweth not old; the kingdom and splendor of the heavens.  
Theotokion: The virgin maidens who suffered with Rhipsimia loved thee in that 
thou art beautiful, elect and comely, O Virgin Mother Mary, and, rejoicing, they have 
been brought before thy Son in Thine entourage.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Do Thou O Lord send down upon us * Thine enlightenment, and free 
us * from the gloom of transgression, O Good One, * granting us Thy peace. 
Thou didst manifestly behold the sign of the Cross shining with light, destroying 
the night of idolatry, and making the faithful, children of the light.  
In a pit most deep Christ God saved thee who wast long enclosed with wild 
beasts, yet desired to illumine the mindless ones with the light of the divine Word.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Having struggled in martyrdom, thou wast crowned as a victor; and anointed with 
the oil of the high priesthood, thou didst anoint the people, delivering them from 
fetid delusion, O Gregory.  
Theotokion: The virgins, sensing the sweet fragrance of the myrrh of the Word 
Who shone forth from thee, O pure Virgin, rejoicing, pleased Him well with the 
struggles of martyrdom.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
By the power of thy words the temples of the idols were destroyed, the fragile 
graven images of the demons were cast down, and the hearts of the faithful were 
made steadfast with divine love.  
Like a lamb, thou didst lead Tiridates who was bound like a wild boar to the Lord, 
he who before was like a ravening wolf, but now hath been saved through the great 
bounty of God’s compassion.  
By thy true teachings thou didst show the divine path unto the lost, O hierarch 
Gregory, acting as a shepherd, emulating the true Shepherd.  
Theotokion: When Rhipsimia recognized the Crucified One Who had become 
incarnate of thee, O Theotokos, she was crucified with Him, offering herself as a 
lamb to the shepherd, as an unblemished sacrifice to God.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”: 
O ye faithful, in songs and hymns let us all praise today * the right glorious 
hierarch Gregory as a spiritual athlete, a vigilant shepherd and teacher, * a universal 
luminary and champion; ** for he prayeth to Christ, that we be saved.  
Ikos: In hymns let us praise this divine luminary, great among spiritual athletes, the 
faithful pastor and teacher of Armenia, and let us crown his head with divine 
hymnody; for he hath destroyed the darkness of the ungodliness of the idols, and 
with them, all the activity of the demons. Wherefore, having borne labors with 
strength of mind and grace, he now prayeth to Christ, that we be saved.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Having endured multifarious tortures, O martyr, thou hast freed many from 
manifold torments and the grief which is to come, crying aloud: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Making thyself a house of the Trinity, O blessed one, thou didst destroy the 
temples of the idols and raise up temples to the Word Who seeth all things, for the 
salvation of the people.  
Thou wast shown to be a performer of the sacred rites, and didst first offer thyself 
fervently to thy Master as a sacrifice; and sacrificing to Him later, thou didst distribute 
Him to pious souls for their salvation.  
Theotokion: Adorned with the crowns of martyrdom, the maidens were brought 
before God Who shone forth from the Virgin, chanting in hymnody: Blessed art 
Thou, O Christ!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
Having suffered lawfully, thou didst most mightily put to shame the iniquitous 
foes, O hierarch Gregory, and lead to God a multitude of those who chant: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Cultivating a barren field, thou didst sow the seeds of the Word, reaping a harvest 
of the grain of the Word a hundredfold, yielding souls in abundance for the 
Husbandman.  
With the brilliance of thy discourses thou didst illumine many tens of thousands, 
and didst lead them forth to Him Who willingly endured sufferings for our sake, to 
Whom we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Unafraid of the multitude of tortures, and refusing to submit to 
carnal pleasures, Rhipsimia confessed the Lord Who came forth from the Virgin, 
crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Strengthened by the power of Christ, thou didst endure the pangs of tortures, and 
didst destroy the fangs of the demons and demolish the temples of the idols; and 
thou hast illumined men who were in ignorance, O most honored hieromartyr.  
Like the dawn thy memorial hath shone forth upon us, bearing the radiance of 
grace; for thou wast shown to be a receptacle of divine Light, and hast ascended to 
the never-waning Light, O thou who art richly illumined with divine effulgence, O 
venerable one.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thou hast been shown to be a converser with the prophets, and dweller with the 
martyrs and the apostles, the hierarchs and the venerable, and a peer of the angels. 
With them, O father, entreat the Lover of mankind, on behalf of us who honor thee.  
The honorable women were valiant, rectifying the fall of Eve, and they endured 
threefold waves of tortures; and him who boasted exceedingly against the heights of 
heaven they crushed beneath their most beautiful feet, wherefore we bless them as is 
meet.  
Theotokion: Illumined with the light of the countenance of Him Who shone forth 
from thee, O Ever-virgin, in her flesh Rhipsimia emulated His sufferings and death 
with unbounded love. Wherefore, she now rejoiceth with thee, O Lady.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hieromartyr: 
Spec. Mel.: “To the disciples ...”: 
Let us praise the glorious Gregory, who was long enclosed in a pit with fierce 
beasts, who transformed the tyrant Tiridates into a wild boar, and proclaimed the 
word of enlightenment to all the land.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos who art more honorable than all other creatures and 
who hast given birth to Christ, entreat Him, that this, thy little flock, be preserved 
unharmed by all the assaults of the adversary.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the holy hieromartyr.  
With the wounds of thy struggles thou didst break the teeth of the lions, and, 
inundating the blood of the demons with the outpourings of thy blood, thou dost cast 
down the temples of the idols from the foundation, O right wondrous one.  
Neither the oppression of the wicked, nor bitter tortures, nor long imprisonment 
in a most gloomy pit changed thine adamant resolve, O right wondrous martyr.  
Thou gavest no slumber to thine eyes, O martyr, until thou didst show forth as 
children of the day those wickedly held fast in evil slumber, who cry aloud: Holy art 
Thou, O Lord!  
Theotokion: The martyr Rhipsimia, knowing thee to be the only Virgin Mother, O 
Maiden, desired thy beauties; and, shining with her sufferings, she was led before 
Christ in Thine entourage.  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Gregory, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone II: 
O ye faithful, in songs and hymns let us all praise today * the right glorious 
hierarch Gregory as a spiritual athlete, a vigilant shepherd and teacher, * a universal 
luminary and champion; ** for he prayeth to Christ, that we be saved.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto me?  
 
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, §166 (1 COR. 16: 13-24)  
Brethren: Watch, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like men, be strong. Let all your 
things be done with charity. I beseech you, brethren, (ye know the house of Stephan 
as, that it is the first-fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to the 
ministry of the saints,) That ye submit yourselves unto such, and to every one that 
helpeth with us, and laboreth. I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus 
and Achaicus: for that which was lacking on your part they have supplied. For they 
have refreshed my spirit and yours: therefore acknowledge ye them that are such. The 
‘
I
 
J

--- PAGE 9 ---
churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with the 
church that is in their house. All the brethren greet you. Greet ye one another with an 
holy kiss. The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand. If any man love not the 
Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema. Maranatha. The grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ be with you. My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MA’ITHEW, §1O3 (MT 24: 42-47)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your 
Lord doth come. But know this, that if the good-man of the house had known in 
what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have 
suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as 
ye think not the Son of man cometh. Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom 
his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? 
Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Verily I 
say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
