--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 8th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE MOTHER PELAGIA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! * Showing courage, a woman hath trampled the enemy 
underfoot * and quenched the passions of the body * through great abstinence. * 
Zealously taking the Cross of the Lord * upon her shoulders, * Pelagia put off the 
burden of life’s possessions * and followed after Christ ** through the teachings of 
the wise Nonus.  
Thou hast been revealed to us as a new Thecla! * For, finding thy teacher Nonus * 
to be another Paul, * thou didst accept his teachings, O glorious one, * having 
fervently embraced repentance, * and through abstinence thou didst join thyself to 
Christ, * O most blessed and most honored Pelagia. * Wherefore, cease thou never to 
pray to Christ, ** that we be saved.  
Rejoice, O most honored Pelagia! * For, most honorably enkindled * by zeal 
divine, * thou didst cast aside the pleasure of fornication, * O most blessed one, * and 
hastening to Nonus, didst cry aloud: * “Thou must needs give answer for my deeds * 
if thou wilt not seal me with the sign of Christ, O glorious one, ** investing me 
through baptism with a pure raiment!”  
Glory ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone IV:  
Where sin hath increased, there grace aboundeth, as the Apostle hath taught; for in 
prayers and tears thou didst dry up the abyss of many offenses, O Pelagia, and didst 
finally bring to the Lord right acceptable repentance, and therein dost pray for our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O mother, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, 
thou didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Pelagia.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos; and that of the saint, with 4 Troparia, the acrostic 
whereof is: “I honor the wise Pelagia with love”, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Mystically setting her divine memorial today before the whole world as a great 
feast, Pelagia commandeth all to partake of her struggles as though they were food.  
Making its abode within thy soul, O honored one, desire beyond all desire 
illumined thy mind, and the enkindled flame of the Spirit illumined thee burning away 
the dross of thy passions.  
Fleeing the waves of the sea of sin, O honored Pelagia, thou didst put in at the 
calm harbor of Christ; wherefore, thou hast inherited the land of the meek by thy 
repentance.  
Theotokion: Thou art the calm of those whirled about in the midst of life, their 
firm and mighty anchor, O pure one; and thou art their haven and sustenance, ever 
guiding and saving those who have recourse to thee.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Uplifted by thy manifold pangs, thou hast soared aloft to the heavens of Christ on 
wings of abstinence, O dove.  
Having washed away the fetid mire of the passions with the water of Christ, O 
honored Pelagia, thou didst show thyself to be myrrh for Him.  
Thine ardent love and desire for God truly became a deadly weapon against the 
enemy, O honored one.  
Theotokion: Thy gladness, O pure one, dropping down like the morning dew, 
doth ever quench the furnace of the passions for those who hymn thee.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Having quenched the flame of the passions with the dew of repentance, thou didst 
offer thy life to Christ thy Savior; and, fleeing the world for His sake, thou didst 
withdraw in solitude to the desert, attaining unto an angelic life. Wherefore, obtaining 
from God an honorable end with great glory, thou hast become known to the ends of 
the earth, O angelic Pelagia. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto 
those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, * we have been overcome by the 
storms of our uncountable sins, * and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, * we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. * Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee * to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O most pure one, * 
unto Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, * that those who worthily 
hymn thee ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Liken to a most precious incense burning on the embers of abstinence, O Pelagia, 
thou didst become a wholeburnt fragrance for Christ our God, hastening to the sweet 
savor of His myrrh.  
Thy bodily splendor which before was liken to the mire of sin, O Pelagia, thou 
didst wholly transform into undefiled beauty, which Christ, thy Bridegroom, desired.  
The grace of the Spirit, abiding in thy soul like a spark of the Word, O Pelagia, 
kindled a lofty flame of faith and burned up thy sins.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou didst put forth the Rod from whence Christ our 
God, the noetic Flower, grew, filling all things with divine fragrance, in that He is the 
inexhaustible and precious Myrrh.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Irrigated with the mystic waters of the Spirit, through the pangs of asceticism thou 
didst blossom forth in faith with the fruitfulness of the virtues.  
Thou, O Lord, the Light of all who lie in darkness, hast shone forth in the heart of 
the venerable one the splendor of divine understanding.  
Sown with tears, O honored Pelagia, thy pangs have gathered an abundance of 
gladness and joy in the heavens.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: Thy grace hath truly been shown to be marvelous, O most pure one, 
most gloriously performing wonders and acts of power throughout the earth.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
When the never-waning radiance of Christ our God was manifest in the soul of 
Pelagia, the prince of darkness was driven away, and the grace of the Spirit and faith 
in Him made their abode therein.  
She who before had been trapped by the serpent hath been shown to be a snare 
for him, restraining his power and trampling down his wickedness by the power of 
God.  
Loving Christ God, thy Bridegroom, thou didst adorn thyself with the virtues, O 
Pelagia, and arrayed in thy divine labors, thou hast been deemed worthy to dwell in 
His bridal-chamber.  
Theotokion: Of old, all the divine prophets desired to behold thine ineffable glory; 
yet in latter times thou didst appear to us who love thee more than all.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Laying waste to thy body with fasting, * with vigilant supplications thou didst 
entreat the Creator concerning thy deeds, * that thou mightest receive complete 
remission; * and this thou hast manifestly acquired, O mother, ** having shown us 
the path of repentance.  
Ikos: Come with me, as many as have defiled yourselves in sins in this life, and let 
us strive to emulate the penitence, tears and struggles of our venerable mother 
Pelagia, that we may quickly receive forgiveness from God as did the blessed one 
who, while yet alive, washed away the defilement of sin and received from God 
complete forgiveness, showing forth the path of repentance.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Thou hast truly been shown to be an abyss of divine corrections, drowning all the 
might of the enemy therein. Wherefore, thou dost chant: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Divinely melting thy body and soul like pure gold in a crucible, O honored Pelagia, 
thou didst show forth thy pristine beauty as most lustrous through extreme 
abstinence.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Having truly shed the first garment of the passions and the corrupt man in the 
divine font, O glorious one, thou didst put on the new man, in the image of Christ.  
Theotokion: The Word of God Who sitteth on the throne of the Father strangely 
and awesomely made His abode within thee, O Theotokos, and lifted up our nature, 
exalting it in Himself, in that He is compassionate.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
The beams of thy miracles shine forth radiantly like the sun, revealing the fullness 
of the splendor of thy life, and the divine faith which shines within thee; and they cry 
out: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
the ages!  
Binding thyself faithfully to Christ with an unbreakable bond, thou didst cleave 
unto Him and through union with Him remained inseparable from His love. Through 
faith in Him, O Pelagia, thou didst noetically become a part of Him, abiding 
inseparably with Him.  
Having received understanding in thy heart, through the Spirit thou didst 
manifestly forsake all the vainglory of life; wherefore, astonishing all by thy sudden 
transformation, O honored one, thou hast filled even the heavens with gladness.  
Theotokion: The noetic armies hymn thy mighty works, O most pure Virgin, and 
all the patriarchs, the prophets and the apostles manifestly proclaim them, as do the 
choirs of the martyrs and all the multitude of the venerable. And with them we also 
offer thee homage.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Thou didst truly desire to behold the beauty of Christ thy Bridegroom, O 
venerable one, for Whose sake thou didst crucify thyself to the world, and cause the 
beautiful flower of thy body to wither, hating the love of temporal life.  
Completely casting off the burden of the body, O Pelagia, through abstinence and 
pangs thou didst make passage to the mansions of heaven, wherein thou delightest in 
the beauty that thou dost love, O glorious one. 
O venerable one, watch now over all who honor thee with love and celebrate this, 
thine annual commemoration. Pray thou to thy Creator and Fashioner that we may 
become partakers of His glory.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: I hymn thy grace, O Virgin, I magnify thy glory! For thou art truly the 
enlightenment and consolation of my soul, my speedy helper, my salvation and 
defense.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O mother, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, 
thou didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Pelagia. 
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Laying waste to thy body with fasting, * with vigilant supplications thou didst 
entreat the Creator concerning thy deeds, * that thou mightest receive complete 
remission; * and this thou hast manifestly acquired, O mother, ** having shown us 
the path of repentance.  
 
