--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 6th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY AND GLORIOUS APOSTLE THOMAS  
AT VESPERS  
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
O all-blessed one, * when thou didst touch the side of the Master * thou didst 
grasp the most excellent of good things, * for like a sponge thou didst soak up waters 
therefrom, * the wellspring of blessings * and life eternal * moistening hearts dried up 
through unbelief, * and pouring forth the dogmas ** of the divine knowledge of God. 
(Thrice)  
By thy faithful disbelief * thou didst assure the faithful, * having begun to speak of 
God, * that He is the God and Lord of all creation, * Who took flesh for the sake of 
us on earth, * and endured the Cross and death, * the print of the nails, * and the 
piercing of His side with a spear, ** from whence we draw forth life. (Thrice)  
The wondrous Thomas * hath disclosed the wellspring of dogmas unto the 
divinely wise, O Master; * for, when he touched Thy side * and was taught Thy 
twofold energies * through Thy two Natures, * he rightly cried aloud: * Thou art my 
God and Master! * For Thou art the Lord of glory, ** Who didst become flesh for 
my sake! (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VI, the composition of the Studite: 
As a servant of the Word and of His ineffable incarnation, thou didst draw forth 
an abyss of wisdom, O Apostle Thomas; for luring souls from the depths of 
deception, thou didst draw them up with the pole of the Cross. Hence, with the net 
of thy dogmas, thou hast brought the whole world to enlightenment and illumined 
the souls of the darkened Indians with the light of knowledge. Wherefore, radiantly 
delighting in the glories of Christ, do thou entreat Him to have mercy on our souls.  
Both now ..., the Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three lessons:  
READING FROM THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERAL OF JOHN (1:1-7) 
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen 
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word 
of life; for the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and show 

--- PAGE 2 ---
unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us; 
that which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have 
fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus 
Christ. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full. This then is the 
message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in 
him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in 
darkness, we lie, and do not the truth: but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, 
we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth 
us from all sin.  
READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JAMES (1:1-12) 
James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which 
are scattered abroad, Greeting. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers 
temptations; knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh patience. But let 
patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. If 
any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and 
upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering: 
for he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed. For let 
not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. A double-minded man 
is unstable in all his ways. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted: 
but the rich, in that he is made low: because as the flower of the grass he shall pass 
away. For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withereth the grass, 
and the flower thereof falleth, and the grace of the fashion of it perisheth: so shall the 
rich man fade away in his ways. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for 
when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to 
them that love him.  
READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JUDE (1:1-25) 
Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that are sanctified 
by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called: Mercy unto you, and 
peace, and love, be multiplied. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of 
the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that 
ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints. 
For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this 
condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and 
denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. I will therefore put you in 
remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord, having saved the people 
out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed not. And the angels 
which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in 
everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Even as Sodom 
and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to 
fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the 

--- PAGE 3 ---
vengeance of eternal fire. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise 
dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Yet Michael the archangel, when contending 
with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a 
railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. But these speak evil of those things 
which they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things 
they corrupt themselves. Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain and 
ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of 
Korah. These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding 
themselves without fear: clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; trees 
whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots; raging 
waves of the sea, foaming out their shame, wandering stars, to whom is reserved the 
blackness of darkness for ever. And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied 
of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, to execute 
judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their 
ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches 
which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. These are murmurers, complainers, 
walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having 
men’s persons in admiration because of advantage. But, beloved, remember ye the 
words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; how that 
they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their 
own ungodly lusts. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the 
Spirit. But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the 
Holy Ghost, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord 
Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And of some have compassion, making a difference: 
and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment 
spotted by the flesh. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to 
present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the only 
wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. 
Amen.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and then these Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
With the rod of grace * thou didst lure all up from the depths of vanity, * O right 
wondrous Thomas, * obedient to the command of the Master, * Who wholly 
enlighteneth thy mind, * and hath shown thee to be an apostle, * an honored and 
divine proclaimer * of His unapproachable divinity, ** O all-blessed one.  
The radiance of the Spirit * descended upon thee in the aspect of fire, * O blessed 
one, * and made a divine refuge of thee * who dost quickly drive away the gloom of 
godlessness * enlightening the world with the radiance of thine all-wise words, * O 
expounder of the mysteries, * adornment of the apostles, ** and blessed beholder of 
Christ.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Illumining those who sat in the darkness of ignorance * with the lightning flashes 
of thy preaching, * O glorious one, * thou didst show them to be children of our God 
and Master * for the sake of their faith. * His sufferings and death didst thou emulate, 
* and wast an inheritor of glory, * in that thou art wise and divinely eloquent, ** O 
disciple of the Truth.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Forsaking earthly things, thou didst follow after Christ, and signed with the 
inspiration of the Holy Spirit, thou wast sent by Him to the nations that had fallen 
into perdition, that thou mightest turn them to the light of knowledge of God, and 
having completed the struggles of thy divine suffering and divers torments, thou didst 
commit thy soul unto Christ, O Apostle Thomas. Him do thou entreat, O all-blessed 
one, that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
All my hope do I place in thee, * O Mother of God. ** Keep me under thy 
protection.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou didst give a sign ...”: 
Christ, the Lover of mankind, * took thee like a pearl * from the abyss of the 
turmoil of the world, * enriching with thee the poor * and those who are held fast by 
the poverty of evil circumstances, * O Apostle Thomas. * Wherefore, we bless thee 
and glorify in praise * thy most festive memorial, ** piously honoring thee.  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  
Thou didst enlighten all the land of India, * O most sacred Apostle and Seer of 
God; * for, having illumined them, * thou didst make them children of Light * and of 
the day of the Spirit, O wise one. * And having cast down the temples of idols, * thou 
didst through grace raise up churches * to the glory and praise of God, ** O blessed 
intercessor for our souls.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Having probed with thy curious hand * the divine side and the wounds of the nails 
* which the Immortal One bore for our sake, * and having joyously transformed * thy 
disbelief into right belief, O Thomas, * thou didst cry aloud: * Thou art my God and 
Lord! * I glorify Thee, O Lover of mankind, ** Who through Thy sufferings hast 
poured forth dispassion upon the faithful!  
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI, the composition of Anatolius:  
Beholding the divine wisdom of Christ, thou wast mystically shown to be a noetic 
bowl wherein the souls of the faithful are gladdened, O Apostle Thomas; for, with 
the divine net of the Spirit, thou didst draw men from the depths of wretchedness. 
Wherefore, thou didst go forth from Zion like a river of grace, pouring forth thy 
divine dogmas upon the whole world. Therefore, emulating the sufferings of Christ, 
thou wast pierced in thy side, entering the shade of incorruption. Him do thou 
entreat, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, ** that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
At the blessing of the Loaves: the Troparion, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Thomas, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins ** unto our souls. (Twice) 
And, Rejoice O Virgin Theotokos ..., (Once) 
 
Or if the vigil is not served, this Troparion, in Tone II: 
Thou wast a disciple of Christ, * a member of the divine assembly of the apostles, 
* for thou didst make certain of the Resurrection of Christ * through thy disbelief * 
and didst verify His most pure Passion by thy touch, * O all-praised Thomas. ** 
Beseech thou now peace and great mercy for us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II:  
All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, * O Theotokos; * 
for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, * thou art known to be a true Mother, 
having given birth unto God. ** Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 
 
AT MATINS  
Thou wast a disciple of Christ, * a member of the divine assembly of the apostles, 
* for thou didst make certain of the Resurrection of Christ * through thy disbelief * 
and didst verify His most pure Passion by thy touch, * O all-praised Thomas. ** 
Beseech thou now peace and great mercy for us. (Twice) 
 Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, * O Theotokos; * 
for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, * thou art known to be a true Mother, 
having given birth unto God. ** Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
With hymns let us all praise the memory of the apostle and disciple of Christ, for, 
having in a godly manner touched the print of the nails and sought out the true faith, 
he hath made our thoughts steadfast in the world and beseecheth the Savior that our 
souls find mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
O pure one, do thou ever entreat the God and Lord, Who, for the sake of us who 
have become corrupt through transgressions, became incarnate from thee, that He 
take pity and turn away His anger and wrath from those who with faith unceasingly 
hymn thy greatness, O thou who art full of grace.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”:  
Having touched the Savior’s side and drawn forth therefrom knowledge of God, 
O glorious apostle, by thy disbelief hast thou drawn those of earth unto the Faith as 
faithful; and having been pierced with spears throughout thy whole body, thou dost 
enlighten the souls of all that praise thy holy repose. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O unashamed hope of those who trust in thee! O thou who alone didst, in a 
manner transcending nature, give birth in the flesh unto Christ our God: with the 
holy apostles entreat thou Him, that He grant to the world cleansing of transgressions 
and to us all correction of life before the end.  
After the Polyeleos, the Megalynarion: We magnify thee, O apostle of Christ 
Thomas, and we honor thy pangs and labors, wherewith thou didst struggle in 
the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
With the radiance of the Spirit of God thou didst destroy the darkness of 
polytheism and didst illumine the hearts of the faithful, chanting the commandments 
of salvation, O most wise Apostle Thomas. Beseech Christ God, that He grant us 
great mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Whither doth each one who is saved, * rightly have recourse; * and to what other 
such refuge can there be * which doth protect our souls like thee, ** O Theotokos?  
Song of Ascents, the first Antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and 
their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Let every breath ..., 
READING FROM THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (21 :15-25).  
At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the 
dead, and saith to Simon Peter, and saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jona, lovest 
thou me more than these? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love 
thee. He saith unto him, Feed my lambs. He saith to him again the second time, 
Simon; son of Jona, lovest thou me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that 
I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my sheep. He saith unto him the third time, 
Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the 
third time, Lovest thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; 
thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep. Verily, verily, I 
say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou 
wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another 
shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not. This spake he, signifying by 
what death he should glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, 
Follow me. Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; 
which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth 
thee? Peter seeing him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus saith 
unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. Then 
went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet 
Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is 
that to thee? This is the disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote these 
things: and we know that his testimony is true. And there are also many other things 
which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even 
the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone IV:  
Christ, the great Sun, sent thee forth unto India as a brilliant ray of light, O initiate 
of the mysteries, and thou didst quickly dispel the gloom of deception, O most wise 
Apostle Thomas, enlightening the people to honor the divine Trinity, by Whom all 
are preserved.  
Canon to the Theotokos (the Paraklisis), with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and 
the canon of the holy apostle, in Tone IV, with 8 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I 
marvel at Thomas who is full of wonders,” the composition of Theophanes.  
ODE I  
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
The beginningless Son of God, God the Word, Who appeared on earth in a form 
like unto ours, Him Whom thou didst behold, and Whose hands and side thou didst 
touch, O glorious one, Him do thou beseech, that He save thy flock.  
Jesus, my God, Who knowest hidden things, Who trieth the reins and testeth 
hearts, chose thee to be a divine apostle and a minister and witness of His 
manifestation as God, O all-blessed Thomas.  
Thou wast shown to be a river of mystic waters flowing with streams of divine 
knowledge and the thundering of the Spirit upon the face of the earth, the assembly 
of the Church, dispelling the deception of polytheism.  
 
Theotokion: O all-hymned Theotokos, destroyer of death and corruption, thou 
didst give birth to Christ, the Source of incorruption, Who hath adorned human 
nature with the grace of immortality, O most pure one.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Splendid in the excellence of virtue and miracles, O thou who wast an eyewitness 
of Christ, and having illumined the shapeless darkness of the Indian people with 
divine light, thou didst enlighten them with faith.  
Ablaze with radiance through the activity of the Spirit Himself, thou wast launched 
like a bolt of divine light, O thou who wast pleasing unto God, and didst enlighten 
the world with miracles, O Thomas.  
Instructed in the mysteries of the dogmas of divine wisdom, which surpasseth the 
swiftness of lightning, O Apostle Thomas, thou didst illumine the ends of the earth 
with light.  
 Theotokion: O thou who knewest not wedlock, and hast given birth unto God in 

--- PAGE 9 ---
the flesh, make me steadfast who am shaken by the assaults of the passions, for I 
have no other helper, save thee, O most pure one.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of wisdom ...”: 
Fishing for reason-endowed fish with the net of divine words, thou didst offer 
them to our God as first-fruits; and, wishing to be arrayed in the wounds of Christ, 
thou didst show thyself to be an emulator of His suffering. Wherefore, assembling 
together, we honor thine all-festive memory as is meet, O glorious apostle, and with 
one accord we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins 
unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Beginning with the manifestation of most magnificent wonders, and radiantly 
professing the glory of the divine dogmas, thou didst embrace the whole world with 
thy preaching, which crieth out: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!  
O blessed and most honored Thomas, we praise thee as one who himself beheld 
the Word, and who art an apostle and a fervent minister and eye-witness to His glory 
and majesty.  
Having set a foundation firmly upon the chief Cornerstone, O blessed and ever 
all-memorable one, thou didst build a bridal chamber and a heavenly tabernacle for 
those who cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!  
Theotokion: We call the all-holy Virgin the un-ploughed soil which put forth the 
Grain of life, the cloud of light which let fall the shower of the Bestower of life, 
crying aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!  
ODE V  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Radiant with the glory of Christ, O apostle, having touched the life-creating side, 
thou didst draw forth an unfathomable abyss of theology, thereby enriching the 
world.  
O greatly Merciful One, Thomas, who had not been present at Thy first entrance, 
did not believe the disciples, but, believing later, rejoicing, he cried out, proclaiming 
Thee God and Lord.  
Like an animate heaven Thomas proclaimed Thy glory with spiritual thunder, O 
Christ, and confessing Thee to be God and Lord, he announced the glad tidings to 
the faithful.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, show forth our mind to be a vanquisher of the 
passions, and put down the assaults of the thoughts thereof, O Bride of God, Who 
hast given birth unto God, the Savior of our souls.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
O blessed Thomas, thy disbelief doth heal the soul-destroying disbelief of all, for 
without doubt thou didst probe the wounds made by the nails and the spear.  
O Christ, as Thou art powerful, Thou didst launch Thine apostle like a speeding 
arrow into the hearts of Thine enemies, and he hath brought them to Thee as the 
spoils of war.  
O compassionate one, thou didst abolish idolatrous sacrifices, being thyself slain 
on a tree, and by the holy sacrifices of the divinely inspired apostles who emulated thy 
sufferings.  
Theotokion: O wonder more wondrous than all wonders! As a Virgin, without 
knowing a man, thou didst conceive in thy womb Him Who holdeth all things, yet 
thou didst not confine Him.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Today hast Thou appeared ...”: 
Full of the grace of wisdom * the apostle and true servant of Christ cried out to 
Thee in repentance: ** Thou art my Lord and God!  
Ikos: Peter cried out to the divinely eloquent Thomas, the disciple of the Lord and 
great initiate of the mysteries: We have seen the Lord! And his friend said to him and 
cried aloud: Except I see the wounds of His hands, I will not believe. Then the 
Master of all came as a servant, wishing to save all, and said to Thomas: Touch thou 
My hands and side, and be not unbelieving; for I am thy Lord and God. And he, in 
repentance, cried out: Thou art my Lord and God!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
As an apostle, rejoicing, thou dost hold chorus with the choirs on high in the 
heavens, O blessed one, chanting in gladness: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, O Lord!  
From one end of the earth to the other thy proclamations and the utterances of 
thy divine words have passed, teaching those who cry: Blessed art Thou in the temple 
of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Thou wast a temple of the Trinity O all-famed one, wherefore utterly destroying 
the temples of the idols, O apostle, thou didst raise up temples to the glory and praise 
of Christ God. 
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving have we been delivered from slavery to the Law, 
for thou, O Theotokos, without knowing a man, didst give birth unto the Redeemer 
for us. Blessed art thou among women, O all-immaculate Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Conversing with God incarnate, forgetting the flesh, O blessed one, thou hast 
been enriched with supra-natural deification, rendered divine by thy closeness to 
God, and crying out: Praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  
Uniting thyself to Christ with love, thou didst seek to die with Him, O blessed 
one, proclaiming to thy fellow apostles: Come, let us accept death with Him, crying 
out: Praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
O ye apostles, Christ hath shown you to be clouds full of the rain of His will which 
watereth the Church with showers of divine knowledge, O most wise ones, and gives 
drink unto those who sing: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O thou who art devoid of lusts and defilement, thou art the temple of 
the all-holy Word Who sanctifieth all things, and Who is co-beginningless with the 
Father. Wherefore, O Virgin, we hymn and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
O glorious one, thou wast revealed to be a splendid chariot bearing the Word 
seated upon thy most comely and God-bearing soul, directing unto salvation those 
who hymn-thee.  
Celebrating thy most blessed memory, we pray that we may be delivered from 
every threefold wave by the boldness which thou hast as an apostle of Christ, O all-
honored beholder of God.  
This day do we all celebrate thy memory, O Apostle Thomas; sanctify and forgive 
us, and deliver us by faith from all temptations, evil circumstances and passions 
through thy prayers.  
Theotokion: From the soil of the Virgin hath sprung forth God the Word, the 
comely Ear of grain, tasting of which, O ye faithful, we live and are established in 
Him. Wherefore we magnify thee who hast given birth to Him.  
Exapostilarion of the holy apostle:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
O apostle of the all-compassionate Christ, thou who thyself didst behold Him: 
entreat Him to grant peace unto all the world, victory over heresy and schism unto 
Christ-loving hierarchs, and salvation and remission of transgressions unto those who 
praise thee as a divinely eloquent disciple, O Thomas.  
Glory ..., and. another Exapostilarion:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the spirit in the Sanctuary...”:  
O glory of the apostles, like the most radiant sun of the east, thou wast sent to the 
people of India, and illumined them with the light of thy words and by faith in the 
Trinity. Wherefore, we celebrate thy holy and divine memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
We, the faithful, bring before Thee as is meet Thy most holy Mother as an 
intercessor and fervent helper, O Christ. Grant Thy servants to share in Thy glory 
and the inheritance of the righteous and the food of paradise; and grant us the 
Kingdom of heaven.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone I, the composition of Anatolius: 
Thou didst follow after Christ, O Apostle Thomas, disdaining the world. And 
having laid up His teachings in thy treasury, thou wast revealed to be an apostle. 
Wherefore, being amongst pagan souls, darkened by their deception and passions, 
thou didst illumine them with the Savior’s commandments, that they might believe in 
the consubstantial Trinity. (Twice) 
In Tone IV: Thou didst enlighten thy mind with the divine fire of the Master, as a 
lawful disciple, O Apostle Thomas; for with the Cross as a rod thou didst draw the 
souls of the impious, from the depths of ignorance. Wherefore, with the rod, of the 
divine Spirit thou didst even fish to enlighten the darkened conscience of those in 
India. Ever beseech Christ God, that we be delivered from the aim of the dark 
enemy, and that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Abandoning the depths which were fished, with faith thou didst hasten to the rod 
of the Cross, and therewith thou didst fish for souls, O Apostle Thomas. Wherefore, 
having touched the most pure side of the Word, thou wast deemed worthy to also 
feel with thy finger the wounds of the nails’ entry. Do thou ever earnestly entreat 
Christ God, that He save our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Thou wast shown to be like Elijah who rode upon a chariot, O Apostle Thomas, 
aflame with the fire of the divine Spirit, riding upon a chariot of the virtues; for, 
plumbing the depths of the sea of knowledge, thou didst catch fish, bringing them up 
from death to life. Wherefore, enlightening the souls of the faithful with the staff of 
the Cross didst thou lead them up from deadly deception unto life, and, standing 
before Christ with the bodiless ones, do thou ever earnestly beseech Him for the 
salvation of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  
Great Doxology. Troparia. Dismissal. First hour. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia, from ODES III and VI of the canon of the holy 
apostle.  
Splendid in the excellence of virtue and miracles, O thou who wast an eyewitness 
of Christ, and having illumined the shapeless darkness of the Indian people with 
divine light, thou didst enlighten them with faith. (Twice) 
Ablaze with radiance through the activity of the Spirit Himself, thou wast launched 
like a bolt of divine light, O thou who wast pleasing unto God, and didst enlighten 
the world with miracles, O Thomas.  
Instructed in the mysteries of the dogmas of divine wisdom, which surpasseth the 
swiftness of lightning, O Apostle Thomas, thou didst illumine the ends of the earth 
with light.  
O blessed Thomas, thy disbelief doth heal the soul-destroying disbelief of all, for 
without doubt thou didst probe the wounds made by the nails and the spear.  
O Christ, as Thou art powerful, Thou didst launch Thine apostle like a speeding 
arrow into the hearts of Thine enemies, and he hath brought them to Thee as the 
spoils of war.  
O compassionate one, thou didst abolish idolatrous sacrifices, being thyself slain 
on a tree, and by the holy sacrifices of the divinely inspired apostles who emulated thy 
sufferings.  
Theotokion: O wonder more wondrous than all wonders! As a Virgin, without 
knowing a man, thou didst conceive in thy womb Him Who holdeth all things, yet 
thou didst not confine Him.  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone II: 
Thou wast a disciple of Christ, * a member of the divine assembly of the apostles, 
* for thou didst make certain of the Resurrection of Christ * through thy disbelief * 
and didst verify His most pure Passion by thy touch, * O all-praised Thomas. * 
Beseech thou now peace and great mercy for us.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV: 
Full of the grace of wisdom * the apostle and true servant of Christ cried out to 
Thee in repentance: ** Thou art my Lord and God!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS (4:9-16)  
Brethren: God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed to death: for 
we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools for 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are 
honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and 
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place; and labor, 
working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: 
being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the off-
scouring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as my 
beloved sons I warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet 
have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel. 
Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of the saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
READING FROM THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (20:19-31)  
Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week: when the doors 
were shut, where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and 
stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you. And when he had so said, 
he showed unto them his hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad, when they 
saw the Lord. Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: as my Father hath 
sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and 
saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whosesoever sins ye remit, they are 
remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained. But Thomas, 
one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came. The other 
disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord. But he said unto them, 
“Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print 
of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.” And after eight days 
again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them: then came Jesus, the doors 
being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you. Then saith he to 
Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, 
and thrust it into my side; and be not faithless, but believing. And Thomas answered 
and said unto him, My Lord and my God. Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, because 
thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet 
have believed. And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, 
which are not written in this book: but these are written, that ye might believe that 
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his 
name.  
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
