--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 5th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR CHARITINA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
As the namesake of joy * thou hast passed over with joy * to the heavenly bridal-
chamber, O all-honored one, * where, having truly endured * the painful torment of 
fire * and the uprooting of all thy teeth and nails, * thou didst desire to acquire thy 
dwelling-place, * O spiritual athlete Charitina, ** much suffering virgin martyr.  
Thou didst break the jaws of the lions, * O much suffering one, * enduring the 
breaking of thine own jaw, * and thou didst valiantly bear * the rending away of thy 
nails, * uprooting the cruel savagery of deception; * and, cast into the depths of the 
sea, * thou didst drown the malice ** of the wicked adversary.  
After thy blessed end, * thy father received thee, O glorious one, * who hadst been 
cast into the sea; * and he cried out in awe: * “What grace hath been bestowed upon 
thee, * O my most sacred and beloved child, * through the torments of thine honored 
suffering! * Truly thou hast justified thy name, ** which signifieth grace!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Bedew my mind * with showers of the Most holy Spirit, O most pure one, * who 
ineffably gaveth birth unto Christ * the drop Who with His compassions washeth 
away * the countless iniquities of mankind; * dry up the upwelling of my passions, * 
and grant unto me a torrent * of ever-living nourishment, ** by thy supplications.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Charitina O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and that of the martyr, with 4 Troparia;  
The acrostic whereof is: “With love I hymn the grace of Charitina”; 
The composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Grace thou my mind with thy gifts, O Charitina who wast graced with sacred 
sufferings, that in sanctity I may hymn thee as a spiritual athlete and martyr 
resplendent in virginity.  
The grace of the most holy Spirit which was given thee adorned thee with wreaths 
woven of joy, and strengthened thee, who suffered with manly mind, to inherit 
everlasting joy.  
The right glorious martyr, O Master, understanding Thee Who wast lifted up upon 
the Cross, received the strength to endure painful wounds by the power of Thee Who 
strengthened our nature.  
Theotokion: Thou wast a habitation containing the divine Essence, O pure 
Birthgiver of God; wherefore, Charitina, who loved thee and followed after thee in 
virginity, hath been brought before thy Son.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
The divine desire which set thy soul afire burned up carnal love and the cruel 
pangs of being boiled alive.  
Beholding the enemy laid prostrate before thy martyric feet by the grace of Christ, 
we offer praises to Him.  
With the strength of the Almighty thou didst crush the head of the malicious one, 
mightily enduring the burning of thine own head, O martyr.  
Theotokion: Loving thee as the only one blessed among women, O pure one, 
Charitina was glorified by thy goodly grace.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Having graced thy soul with God-given virtues, thou wast truly illumined by thy 
suffering, O honored Charitina, and betrothed thyself to thy Creator, remaining 
incorrupt in purity; wherefore, thou didst trample the enemy underfoot, victoriously 
enduring many and varied sufferings and pangs. Therefore, with faith we celebrate thy 
most holy memory.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
As he contemplated that which was beyond nature * Joseph was struck with 
wonder O Theotokos, at thy conception without seed. * He contemplated the 
mysterious dew upon the fleece, * the bush un-burnt by fire, * Aaron’s rod which 
budded. * Thus thy Betrothed and guardian bore witness and cried unto the priests 
saying: * A Virgin beareth a child, ** and after child-birth remaineth yet a virgin. 
Stavrotheotokion: The Virgin and ewe-lamb, beholding on the Cross the Lamb 
Who was born of her without seed, His side pierced by a spear, was wounded and 
with grief and cried aloud, exclaiming amid her pain: “What is this new mystery? How 
is it that Thou diest Who alone art Lord of life? Wherefore, arise, raising up our fallen 
forefather!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
O passion-bearing martyr, like an unblemished sacrifice the tyrants snatched from 
the hands of thy father, thee who exceedingly loved the heavenly Father.  
Following the wise maidens, O all-glorious one, thou didst richly provide the lamp 
of thy soul with thy blood as with oil, and inherited the divine bridal-chamber, O 
martyr, namesake of joy.  
Thy heart, set afire with love for the Bridegroom, extinguished the embers of 
delusion with the outpouring of thy blood, drying up the sea of polytheism, O thou 
of valiant mind.  
Theotokion: O pure Birthgiver of God, thou hast given birth to the incarnate 
Word of God; and Charitina, loving Him ardently, stood up against the fire and the 
many and varied torments.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Though they shaved thy head and tormented thee with the heat of burning 
embers, O divinely wise one, in nowise were they able to shake the strength of thy 
mind.  
Portraying an image of Thy nails and sacrifice, O Lord, the martyr cried out: “I 
endure the pain of red-hot goads!”  
When the nails of thy hands and feet were torn away, O pure virgin, thou didst 
hallow the faithful with the precious blood which flowed forth, and like Christ didst 
cleanse the world of the blood of demons.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: An earthly mind cannot understand thy conceiving, which 
transcendeth nature, O Virgin Mother and Maiden; for thou hast given birth unto 
God.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
With grace and signs was thy sacred head crowned by Christ, for Whom thou didst 
will to suffer, O spiritual athlete, thou namesake of divine joy.  
He Who delivered Jonah from the depths saved thee alive when thou wast cast 
into the depths of the sea, O divinely wise one; drowning the enemy in the depths of 
thy blood.  
With the sword of patience thou didst slay the enemy, O glorious one, and, 
enduring the utter uprooting of thy teeth, thou didst break the jaws of the incorporeal 
lions.  
Theotokion: The spiritual athlete Charitina, finding thee to be her strength and 
confirmation, mightily endured tortures; and, rejoicing, she is brought before the 
Master of all in Thine entourage, O Virgin.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Rendering thy soul steadfast * with mighty understanding, * O all-blessed 
Charitina, * thou didst manifestly put to shame the adverse enemy, * arrayed in a robe 
dyed purple in thy blood; * and thou dost ever rejoice with the angels. ** Pray thou 
for us, O spiritual athlete.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
He Who delivered the three youths from the furnace saved thee from the wheel of 
fire, O martyr, who chanted in thanksgiving: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, O Lord!  
Thou dost go up to the heavens with the virgins as a lamp-bearer, in that thou 
didst mightily endure burning torches, when thou didst chant: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
The all-iniquitous one, reproved by thine endurance, bound thy hands and feet 
and cast into the depths thee who chanted: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
With thy divine discourse thou didst denounce the mindlessness of the enemy, O 
martyr, and by sufferings thou didst make up for thy lack of the pangs of childbirth, 
crying: Blessed art Thou, O Lord my God!  
Theotokion: The adored Word loved thee, who alone art a Virgin pure and 
incorrupt, and the Incarnate One made Himself a whole man through thee, O 
Maiden, and hath glorified Charitina with miracles.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Thou wast comely in the beauty of thy wounds, O most honored one, and, 
remaining an incorrupt virgin, didst join thyself to Christ, the comely Word Who 
became incarnate for our sake from the Virgin. To Him do we cry aloud: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Beset by all the assaults of those who tortured thee, thou didst valiantly endure the 
cruelty of the blazing wheel, the burning of red-hot goads, being cast into the deep, 
and the uprooting of thy teeth and nails, O honored one, magnifying Christ 
throughout the ages.  
Thy feet were adorned with the beauties of pain, O glorious one; wherefore, they 
did not become wet when thou didst walk upon the waters, for the glorious angel of 
God was with thee, O virgin martyr; and with him thou didst cry aloud: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
It is a wonder which doth astonish every mind how, after thy death, the deep 
which had received thy relics gave them up to thy father, who paternally buried them; 
and, treasuring the grace which doth emanate from thee, O Charitina, he receiveth the 
kingdom of heaven.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be more exalted than the heavens, O most 
pure one, having given birth to the God of heaven Who maketh heavenly the whole 
nature of mortals, and hath enlightened the honored memory of Charitina. To Him 
let us chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
That thou mightest receive crowns of glory as one incorrupt, O virgin martyr, thou 
didst endure all manner of tortures in gladness of spirit and with firmness of mind.  
As a comely, beautiful and God-pleasing virgin, as an invincible martyr and the 
unblemished bride of the Master, thou hast soared aloft to the heavens on golden 
wings.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou didst shine forth rays of light, O radiant passion-bearer, driving away the 
darkness of demonic wickedness and the passions with the miracles ever given thee 
by God, O right wondrous One.  
Gladdening the people, thy joyous day bringeth them together to hymn thy valiant 
struggles and contests, and thy courageous suffering, O great martyr, namesake of joy.  
Theotokion: Light hath shone forth upon us from thy womb which knew not 
wedlock, O Virgin; and, illumined divinely by His radiance, the namesake of joy 
became light, O Birthgiver of God, who knewest not wedlock.  
 
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Charitina O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II: 
Rendering thy soul steadfast * with mighty understanding, * O all-blessed 
Charitina, * thou didst manifestly put to shame the adverse enemy, * arrayed in a robe 
dyed purple in thy blood; * and thou dost ever rejoice with the angels. ** Pray thou 
for us, O spiritual athlete.  
 
