--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR CYPRIAN & MARTYR JUSTINA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Through priestly anointing * and the blood of martyrdom * didst thou draw nigh 
unto God, * O most perfect and all-glorious Cyprian, * flower of nature and 
adornment of eloquence, * summit of wisdom, * measure of the correctness of the 
dogmas, * most harmonious correctness of the canons ** and magnificence of the 
Churches.  
O most honorable Cyprian, * thou glory of spiritual athletes * and crown of 
martyrs, * by thy discourses thou didst persuade the divinely wise * to maintain their 
courage most valiantly, * when confronted with imprisonment, bondage and divers 
tortures, * the stripping of their bodies, * binding and most cruel frost, ** and finally 
wounding and death.  
Opposing the spells of the demons * with hymns to the Spirit * and the sign of the 
Cross, * thou didst preserve thy virginity * and didst offer thyself to Christ * as a 
most sacred sacrifice, * O unvanquished martyr. * Wherefore, thou hast received 
crowns of victory, O Justina, ** thou adorned splendor of virgins and martyrs.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Thou didst truly spurn the delusion and lore of idolatrous teaching, and armed thy-
self for salvation with the sword of the Cross, O all-blessed Cyprian; and, discarding 
thy books of sorcery, thou didst put off the old man; and the divine knowledge of the 
consubstantial Trinity dwelt within thee, Whom do thou beseech with the angels, O 
hierarch, that we be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Tree of the Cross. O Jesus, * she 
that kneweth not wedlock said weeping: * “O sweet Child, * why hast Thou 
abandoned me * who alone gave birth to Thee, * O unapproachable Light of the 
beginningless Father? * Hasten Thou, and glorify Thyself, * that those who glorify 
Thy divine sufferings ** may receive divine glory!” 
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Let us praise Cyprian, the divinely brilliant lamp, the converser with Paul and 
sharer of his labors; for he dwelleth with the angels, having received a crown of 
incorruption from the one God, and he prayeth that our souls be saved.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb * willingly 
led as a man to the slaughter, * she said, weeping: * “Dost Thou now hasten to leave 
me childless * who gave Thee birth O Christ,? * What is this that Thou hast done, O 
Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine extreme goodness, * which 
is beyond understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of mankind!”  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Cyprian, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without the martyria; and that of the saints,  
with 6 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I hymn thy luminous grace, O good one”, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Dwelling now with the ranks of heaven, O sacred and divine one, look down from 
heaven upon those who hymn thee piously, and preserve them by thy supplications.  
In the cruel grasp of the darkness of ignorance, and enkindled by soul-destroying 
carnal passions and intemperance, O venerable one, thou didst suddenly meet a most 
glorious transformation, O all-blessed one.  
Thou didst first occupy the seat of the destroyers, O father, yet didst later glorify 
Christ on the seat of the priests, having been manifestly transformed by the divine 
grace of the Master.  
Theotokion: Thou didst remain a virgin after giving birth; for thou didst bear the 
Lord and Creator of all Himself, Who in a manner strange and extraordinary revealed 
Himself to us in a body, O Ever-virgin Birthgiver and Mother of God.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Immersed in spiritual love for Christ, like Paul thou didst become His disciple, O 
all-wise Cyprian.  
Christ betrothed Himself to thee, giving thee vesture of glory and a robe of 
regeneration in place of the garments of the passions.  
Having before been an avid promoter of spiritual athletes, O all-praised Cyprian, 
thou didst later bear witness to the Truth.  
Theotokion: In a regal and most true manner do we, the faithful, honor thee, the 
Theotokos; for thou hast given birth to God in the flesh, O all-immaculate one.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Chastised severely in thy deception, like Paul thou wast called from heaven, guided 
by the Cross to the light of understanding; for, enflamed by love for a chaste virgin, 
thou didst join thyself to the Creator of mortals for her sake. Wherefore, having 
reproved the weakness of the enemy, with her thou wast deemed worthy to join the 
choir of the martyrs. O Cyprian, adornment of hierarchs, entreat Christ God, that He 
grant remission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, * we have been overcome by the 
storms of our uncountable sins, * and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, * we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. * Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee * to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O most pure one, * 
unto Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, * that those who worthily 
hymn thee ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Coming to thy senses from thy former insanity, thou didst renounce all demonic 
delusion and soul-corrupting deception, and didst cry aloud, rejoicing: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
Strengthened with valor, and praying intensely to the pure and gracious Virgin, 
Justina eluded the snares and wiles of the enemy.  
Fortified by faith in thy Bridegroom, and invested with the power of the Cross, 
thou didst remain unscathed by the demons, crying aloud: Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
Theotokion: Free in His nature, He Who received all of human nature from thee 
hypostatically, O Ever-virgin Mother, abased Himself by taking on the form of a 
servant, in the richness of His goodness.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Manifestly having the pure Mother of God as thy champion, O Justina, enriched, 
thou didst preserve thy precious virginity intact.  
Let us honor Justina, the animate and most beautiful image of Christ, the hidden 
comeliness, the ornament which cannot be taken away.  
The true and undefiled bride of Christ weareth a twofold crown, having justly 
attained it through suffering and fasting.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: Neither the mind of angels, nor that of mortals, is able to recount the 
ineffable and most glorious wonder of thy birthgiving, O all-pure one.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Thou didst pass from the abyss of malice in the nethermost depths to the 
uttermost virtue, O father, and mounted to the summit, having been most gloriously 
transformed by divine baptism.  
Thou wast first a servant of the demons, but wast later shown to be a divinely 
revealed disciple of Christ, loving Him, the object of thy desire, with true love.  
Thou didst lead many martyrs to the Master, O divinely wise one, showing thyself 
to be the greatest of merchants, who purchased the kingdom of heaven with but a 
little blood.  
Theotokion: O Bride of God, who hast given birth to the Master of the law, rend 
asunder the bonds of mine offenses, making me free of the law of sin through the law 
of life.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of the angels ...”: 
Turning from the arts of sorcery to the knowledge of God, O divinely wise one, * 
thou wast shown to be a most wise physician for the world, * granting healings to 
those who honor thee, O Cyprian, with Justina. ** Pray thou with her to the Master 
and Lover of mankind, that He save our souls.  
Ikos: Send down upon me gifts of thy healings, O holy one, and by thy 
supplications heal mine heart, which is afflicted with the sores of sin, that I may now 
offer thee discourse of hymnody from my vile mouth, and hymn thy pangs, O 
hieromartyr, which thou hast shown to those who draw nigh to God through goodly 
and blessed repentance. For, held in His hand, thou hast mounted to the heavens as 
by a ladder, unceasingly praying, that He save our souls.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
Having mounted to the hierarchy, thou didst reveal thyself to the sacred ministers 
as a most sacred image and rule, crying aloud: O supremely hymned Lord, God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
O father, the change which came upon thee from the right hand of the Author of 
life duly made thee a wise proclaimer of God, chanting: O supremely hymned Lord, 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou hast been shown to us as an invincible sword against the adversary, O 
blessed one, denouncing his falsehoods; and we chant: O supremely hymned Lord, 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: The choirs of heaven and the celestial companies sing of Him Who 
was born of thee, O Theotokos, crying: O supremely hymned Lord, God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Rejoice, O Jerusalem, * and ye that love Zion, be ye festive. * For the 
Lord of Hosts Who ruleth unto all ages hath come. * Let all the earth stand in 
reverence before His countenance and cry aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works 
of the Lord!’.  
Most wisely didst thou reject pagan wisdom, O glorious father, and cry out the 
divine tidings of the apostles, sounded by the Spirit and clearly voiced by the tongues 
of fire: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
Offering thyself to Christ as a living sacrifice, acceptable and pleasing to God, 
through the undefiled blood of thy slaughter, O father, thou didst splendidly pass 
over to the exalted habitations on high, chanting: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye 
the Lord!  
Vanquished by the grace which dwelt within thee, the hordes of the demons were 
repulsed and the sufferings of the sick are banished, O divinely wise one; and we, the 
faithful, are filled with divine light, crying: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the 
Lord!  
Theotokion: Those who with faith call thee the Theotokos, O most pure Mother 
of God, rejoice with the angelic hosts over thy birthgiving; for thou hast given birth 
for us to the Master and Redeemer, to Whom we chant: O all ye works of the Lord, 
bless ye the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
From on high, through thy divine grace and supplications, thou dost watch over 
those who piously hymn thee, O divinely eloquent one, bestowing upon them the 
sword of thy goodwill. Grant peace and salvation unto us, in that thou art a most 
godly hierarch.  
Thy finger imparteth a multitude of healings to those who love thee; and God-
bearing women receive thee like a divine treasure, O Cyprian, fervently revealing 
hidden things, that we all may delight in thee.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Direct thou our journey to Christ by thine activity, thy God-pleasing life and most 
pure cleansing, O most noetically rich hieromartyr, and entreat the serenity of God, in 
that thou art a sympathetic hierarch.  
Theotokion: By thy power, O most pure Mother of God, strengthen our spiritual 
infirmity, and loose the burden imposed upon thy servants, O thou who ineffably 
shone forth the Sun of righteousness.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hieromartyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Let us praise Cyprian, the mirror of strugglers, who escaped damnation for his 
sorceries, transformed his character beyond measure, committed to the flames the 
books which had led him into deception, and, as befitteth a priest, received the crown 
of confession.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
He of evil craftiness, who of old seduced me with the hope of attaining divinity, is 
himself most wisely deceived by the fleshly appearance of Him Who shone forth 
from the Virgin; and thus hath carnal condemnation been abolished by the flesh, and 
death been put to death.  
The Aposticha from the Oktoechos. Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
He who before was a champion of hatred, later became a true teacher of the 
Church; he who was a minister of the deception of the idols was revealed to be a 
hierarch of the faith; and the fornicator is shown to be chaste-minded, for the sake of 
an honorable virgin. Through the prayers of them both, save us, O Lord!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all? * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the holy hieromartyr.  
Immersed in spiritual love for Christ, like Paul thou didst become His disciple, O 
all-wise Cyprian.  
Christ betrothed Himself to thee, giving thee vesture of glory and a robe of 
regeneration in place of the garments of the passions.  
Having before been an avid promoter of spiritual athletes, O all-praised Cyprian, 
thou didst later bear witness to the Truth.  
Theotokion: In a regal and most true manner do we, the faithful, honor thee, the 
Theotokos; for thou hast given birth to God in the flesh, O all-immaculate one.  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Cyprian, entreat Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Turning from the arts of sorcery to the knowledge of God, O divinely wise one, * 
thou wast shown to be a most wise physician for the world, * granting healings to 
those who honor thee, O Cyprian, with Justina. ** Pray thou with her to the Master 
and Lover of mankind, that He save our souls.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY, § 280 (I TIM. 1: 12-17)  
Timothy my child: I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me, for that 
he counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry; Who was before a blasphemer, 
and a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in 
unbelief. And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and love 
which is in Christ Jesus. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that 
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief. Howbeit for 
this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all-
longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life 
everlasting. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise Cod, be 
honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation 
for Himself.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 36 (1O: 9-16)  
The Lord said unto the Jews who came unto Him: I am the door; by me if any 
man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief 
cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might 
have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the 
good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the 
shepherd, whose own’ the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the 
sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling 
fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, 
and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so 
know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, 
which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and 
there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be, he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
