--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 5th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIERARCHS PETER, ALEXIS, JONAH, PHILIP & 
HERMOGENES, METROPOLITANS OF MOSCOW & WONDERWORKERS OF ALL 
RUSSIA 
AT LITTLE VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy hierarchs, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most honored fathers and holy hierarchs * Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and 
Hermogenes, * grant light to the blind, * healing to the sick, and the ability to walk to 
the lame, * hearkening mercifully * to those who come with faith to your temple * 
and entreat you for aid; * for all of us, the faithful, have acquired you ** as helpers, 
intercessors and protectors. (Twice)  
O most blessed fathers and holy hierarchs * Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and 
Hermogenes, * mounting the virtues as a chariot * ye made haste to God, * bearing 
trophies of victory, * and have left your bodies in their tombs as a mantle for us, O 
holy hierarchs, * to pour forth healings * and drive away the evil spirits. ** 
Wherefore, we call you blessed, O all-praised ones.  
Ye have been admitted to the choirs of the holy hierarchs, * having adorned 
yourselves with a life of fasting, * O Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and Hermogenes; * 
and, rejoicing, ye now dwell in the heavens, * where ye stand before Christ, * joining 
chorus with the angels, * deified by divine light. * Be ye ever mindful of those who on 
earth call you blessed ** and keep your all-honored festival.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
The memory of the holy hierarchs of Christ hath shone forth like the sun, 
illumining the hearts of the faithful with understanding; and splendidly celebrating it 
today, we cry out in supplication: Rejoice, O pastors and teachers of the Christian 
people of the land of Russia! Rejoice, adornment of the Church, ornament of 
hierarchs and boast of monks! O Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and Hermogenes, ye 
holy hierarchs of Christ, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, ** that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Through the operation of grace * Peter hath been revealed * as a spiritual 
habitation. * Wherefore, assembling now, ** we hymn him.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
O holy Alexis, * boast of hierarchs, * glory of priests * and standard for monastics: 
** Rejoice, thou confirmation of the Church!  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Thou art a resplendent temple * of three-sunned rays * illumining the souls of 
those * who are nourished by thy discourses, ** O Jonah. 
Verse: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, * and his tongue 
shall speak of judgment.  
Thou didst become * the dwelling-place of the Holy Spirit by grace, * filled with 
divine teachings; * and therewith watered the world, ** O Philip most wise.  
Glory ..., in the same melody: 
O city of Moscow, * thou heart of Orthodox Russia, * the habitation of the great 
hierarchs, * rejoice now with the new miracle worker ** Hermogenes. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
Rejoice, O Virgin * Theotokos, * thou boast of all the world! * Rejoice, O most 
pure and blessed ** Mother of God!  
Troparion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV: 
O primates of Russia, * true preservers of the Traditions of the apostles, * 
unshakable pillars, instructors in Orthodoxy, * Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and 
Hermogenes; * entreat the Master of all, * that He grant peace to the whole world ** 
and great mercy to our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS 
After the chanting of the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the Man ...,” the 
first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Set like most radiant stars, * O all-praised and most honored ones, * ye have 
adorned the world * and illumine it with your beams. * With the dogmas of the right 
Faith * ye dispel the darkness of heresy, O holy hierarchs. * Pray ye that those who 
celebrate * your most-honored memory with faith ** be delivered from corruption 
and misfortunes.  
Having illumined the whole world * with spiritual splendors ye were shown to be 
light giving suns, * reaching all the ends of the earth * with God’s commandments, as 
with rays; * and ye enlighten the hearts of the faithful, * O thrice-blessed God-
bearers, * dispelling the darkness of heresies * by the power of Him ** Who shone 
forth from the Virgin.  
O preachers equal to the apostles, * holy hierarchs one in wisdom, * fellow 
strugglers with the fasters, * chosen pastors, * compassionate Bestowers of mercy, * 
primates of Russia: * we praise you as is meet, O holy hierarchs, * conversers with the 
angels, ** who pray for our souls.  
And 3 Stichera, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
O most sacred and God-bearing saints, * who were truly shown to be of divine 
anointing, * invested with the Holy Spirit, * who ever enter with splendor * into the 
holy of holies, * O glorious ones, * and learn there the mysteries of salvation: * as 
sacred primates of Russia, * pray ye with boldness ** on behalf of our souls.  
Your life hath shone forth * with the brilliance of the virtues, * and ye have 
illumined the faithful, * stilled the tempest of deception, * and have truly been shown 
to be radiant suns, * O all-blessed and sacred leaders; * and ye dwell where the never-
waning Light shineth, * having become children of the day * by the grace of the Holy 
Spirit. * Wherefore, we celebrate your divine memory * and splendid festival, ** and 
in gladness call you blessed.  
O all-wise primates * Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and Hermogenes: * made brilliant 
with spiritual radiance, * ye have destroyed all the night of heresies, * illumining the 
thoughts of all the faithful by grace, * O glorious ones, * and teaching them to glorify 
the uncreated Trinity. * Wherefore, joyously celebrating * your splendid festival, we 
pray: * unceasingly entreat Christ, the supremely good God, * on behalf of our souls, 
** O all-praised ones!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O men of God and faithful servants, ministers of the Lord, men of divine desires, 
chosen vessels, pillars and confirmation of the Church, heirs to the kingdom: Cease 
ye never to cry out for us to the Lord.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons: 
A READING FROM PROVERBS 
The memory of the righteous man calleth forth praises, and the blessing of the 
Lord is upon his head. Blessed is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that 
getteth understanding. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of 
silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than costly stones; 
everything that is honored cannot be compared to her. Length of days and years of 
life are in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honor. Out of her mouth 
truth proceedeth, and law and mercy she carrieth on her tongue. Hear me, then, O 
children, for I will speak of excellent things; and happy is the man that will keep unto 
my ways, for my paths are the paths of life, and the desire is fashioned of the Lord. 
Wherefore, I entreat you and put forth my voice before the sons of men, for I with 
wisdom set up everything; I have called forth counsel, understanding and knowledge. 
Counsel is mine and sound wisdom, mine is understanding and strength is mine. I 
love them that love me, and those that seek me shall find grace. Understand, then, O 
ye simple, the cunning, and ye uninstructed-direct your hearts unto it. Hearken unto 
me again, for I will speak of honorable things, and the opening of my mouth shall be 
right things, for my mouth shall speak truth, and wickedness is an abomination to my 
lips. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing froward or 
perverse in them. They are all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that 
find knowledge. For I will teach you the truth, so that your hope may be in the Lord 
and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom; the lips of wise men know grace. 
The mouth of wise men meditateth wisdom, and righteousness shall deliver them 
from death. At the death of a just man, his hope doth not perish. A righteous son is 
born for life; and a good man shall eat of the fruits of righteousness. The righteous 

--- PAGE 5 ---
always have light, and with the Lord they find grace and glory. The tongue of the wise 
knoweth what is good; there is wisdom in the good heart of a man. The Lord loveth 
holy hearts, and pleasing to Him are all the undefiled in the way. The wisdom of the 
Lord enlighteneth the countenance of the prudent; for she overtaketh those who 
desire her, in making herself first known unto them, and is easily seen of them that 
love her. Whoso seeketh her early shall have no great travail; and whoso watcheth for 
her shall quickly be without care. For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of 
her, and showeth herself favorably to them in the ways. Vice shall not prevail against 
wisdom. For this cause was I a lover of her beauty; and I loved her, and sought her 
out from my youth. I desired to make her my bride, for the Master of all Himself 
loved her. For she is privy to the mysteries of the knowledge of God, and a discloser 
of His works. Her labors are virtues: for she teacheth chastity and prudence, justice 
and fortitude, which are such things, as men can have nothing more profitable in their 
life. If a man desireth much experience, she knoweth things of old, and conjectureth 
aright what is to come. She knoweth subtleties of speech, and can expound obscure 
dreams; she foreseeth signs and wonders, and the events of seasons and times. She is 
a good ally unto all, for immortality is in her, and in communing with her in speech, a 
good report. Wherefore, I spake with the Lord, and besought Him, and with my 
whole heart I said: God of my fathers and Lord of mercy, Who hast created all things 
by Thy word, and fashioned man by Thy wisdom, that he should have dominion over 
the creatures which Thou hast made, and order the world according to equity and 
righteousness: give me wisdom which sitteth by Thy throne, and reject me not from 
among Thy children, for I am Thy servant and the son of Thy handmaid. O, send her 
from the heavens, out of Thy holy habitation, and from the throne of Thy glory, that, 
being with me, she may teach me what is well-pleasing in Thy sight, may guide me to 
understanding and preserve me in her glory. For the thoughts of mortal men are 
miserable, and their ponderings sinful.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
When the righteous is praised, the people are glad; for his memorial is immortality, 
because it is known unto God, and to men. For his soul pleased the Lord. Love ye 
wisdom, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. For the beginning of 
her is love, and the keeping of her laws. Honor wisdom, that ye may reign for 
evermore, I will tell you, and will not hide the mysteries of God from you. For He is 
the guide to wisdom and the Director of the wise, and the Artisan of all 
understanding and craft. In her is a Spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of 
light everlasting and the image of the goodness of God. Friends of God and prophets 
doth she make. She is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the order of stars: 
being compared with the light, she is found before it. She hath delivered from pain 

--- PAGE 6 ---
those who please her, and hath guided them in right paths. She hath given them 
knowledge of holy things; she hath kept them safe from those who lay in wait, and 
hath given them a mighty contest, that all may know that godliness is stronger than 
all. Vice shall never prevail against wisdom, nor shall judgment omit to denounce the 
wicked. For the ungodly said, reasoning within themselves, but not aright: Let us 
oppress the righteous man and take no pity on his holiness; neither let us spare the 
ancient gray hairs of the aged. For let our strength be the law of justice., Let us’ 
therefore lie in wait for the righteous, because he is displeasing unto us and is clear 
contrary to our doings. He upbraideth us with our offending the law, and denounceth 
us for our offenses against our upbringing. He professeth to have knowledge of God, 
and calleth himself the child of God. He is for us a reproof to our thoughts, and is 
grievous for us even to behold; for his life is not like other men’s, and his ways are of 
another fashion. We are held by him to be an object of mockery; he abstaineth from 
our ways as from filthiness; he pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. Let us 
see if his words be true; and let us prove what shall happen in the end of him. Let us 
examine him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and test his 
guilelessness. Let us condemn him to a shameful death, for by his own words shall he 
be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wickedness 
blinded them, and they comprehended not the mysteries of God, neither understood 
they that Thou alone art God, Who hast authority over life and death, Who savest in 
time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil, Who art compassionate and merciful, 
and bestowest grace upon Thy saints, and Who dost oppose the prideful with Thine 
own arm.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Come, ye assemblies of the faithful, and let us clap our hands to psalms, chanting 
hymns to the consolers of the grieving, the fervent intercessors for all in every place, 
who pray to the Lord for sinners: the holy hierarchs Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and 
Hermogenes, the boast of the land of Russia, the adornment of all the priesthood, 
who are truly rivers of mercy, the lovers of the divine humility of Christ Who hath 
granted great mercy to the world.  
As ye possess boldness before the Lord, O most sacred and holy hierarchs and 
pastors, ye confirmation of the faithful, pray that those who with love celebrate your 
most honored memory be delivered from every evil circumstance and from foreign 
invasion, through your supplications to the Master.  
O beacons of knowledge for the Church, emulators of the Trinity, primates of 
Russia, who have driven back the gloom of deception and illumined the world with 
the light of Orthodoxy: ye have been deemed worthy to become partakers of divine 
glory. Pray ye unceasingly to Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
With the trumpet let us sound forth hymns! Let us leap up in festivity and join 
chorus, rejoicing, for the feast of supplication to the wise hierarchs. Let kings and 
princes come together and clap their hands in hymnody to the luminaries of the 
Church of Christ. Ye pastors and teachers of the Good Shepherd, assembling, let us 
praise the wise initiates of the mysteries of God, the luminous beacons, the radiant 
lamps, the pillars of the Church, the mighty foundations of the Faith, the swallows 
announcing the divine spring of salvation, the trumpets sounding forth in music, 
uttering praise in divine hymns! And let us say: O holy wonderworkers Peter, Alexis, 
Jonah, Philip and Hermogenes, go ye quickly before us, and deliver us from foreign 
invasion and civil strife; and save your flock by your supplications.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Let us sound the trumpet of hymnody! For the Queen of all, who is both Mother 
and Virgin, hath been revealed from on high, and with blessings crowneth those who 
hymn her. Let those who exercise dominion assemble and in hymns praise the Queen 
who hath given birth unto the King Who before was well-pleased, in His love for 
mankind, to deliver those held fast by death. Ye pastors and teachers, assembling, let 
us praise the most pure Mother of the good Shepherd, the golden lamp-stand, the 
Light-bearing cloud, her who is more spacious than the heavens, the animate ark, the 
fiery throne of the Master, the golden jar which received the Manna, the gate of the 
Word which was shut, the refuge of all Christians; and praising her with divinely 
eloquent hymns, let us say thus: O palace of the Word, vouchsafe the kingdom of 
heaven unto us, the lowly, for naught is impossible for thy mediation.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy hierarchs, in Tone II: 
With what hymns of beauty shall we praise the holy hierarchs of Christ, the most 
splendid preachers of the Gospel, the preservers of the Church and helpers of the 
land of Russia, the guides to the light of the knowledge of God, the allies of faithful 
Orthodox rulers? By their supplications may Christ, Who hath great mercy, bring low 
the arrogance of the enemy.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
With what vigilant mouths shall we praise the divinely wise hierarchs, the splendid 
adornment of the Church of Christ, the crowns of the priesthood, the rule of piety, 
the divine well-springs of inexhaustible healings, the outpouring of spiritual gifts, the 
rivers of many miracles which gladden the land of Russia by their flow: Peter, Alexis, 
Jonah, Philip and Hermogenes, the allies of all faithful Orthodox rulers? By their 
supplications may Christ, Who hath great mercy, bring low the arrogance of the 
enemy.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
With what embellished voices shall we hymn the holy hierarchs Peter, Alexis, 
Jonah, Philip and Hermogenes, wondrous in miracles, who were hallowed from their 
earliest childhood, the immovable pillars of the Church, which dwell together with 
the incorporeal hosts, the restoration of justice, the helpers of the oppressed, the 
physicians who heal the ailing without fee? By their supplications hath Christ granted 
unity, peace and great mercy to the Churches.  
Glory ..., in Tone III: 
O most honored and holy hierarchs, most blessed fathers and wonderworkers, 
favored ones of Christ, primates of Russia, Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and 
Hermogenes, who shone forth in the prophetic life: unceasingly ministering to the 
Savor with the angels, ye have been deemed worthy of the gifts of the apostles. Pray 
ye, that we be delivered from every transgression, that Christ grant peace and great 
mercy to our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
By the will of the Father and without seed * thou didst conceive through the 
divine Spirit the Son of God * Who hath existed from the Father without a mother 
from before the ages, * and Who for our sake came forth from Thee in the flesh 
without a father, * and Him hast thou suckled as a babe. * Wherefore, cease not to 
beseech Him, ** that our souls be delivered from tribulations. 
At the blessing of the Loaves: Troparion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV: 
O primates of Russia, * true preservers of the Traditions of the apostles, * 
unshakable pillars, instructors in Orthodoxy, * Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and 
Hermogenes; * entreat the Master of all, * that He grant peace to the whole world ** 
and great mercy to our souls. (Twice) 
And, Rejoice O Virgin Theotokos ..., (Once) 
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV: 
O primates of Russia, * true preservers of the Traditions of the apostles, * 
unshakable pillars, instructors in Orthodoxy, * Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and 
Hermogenes; * entreat the Master of all, * that He grant peace to the whole world ** 
and great mercy to our souls. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV. 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
Let us praise the holy hierarchs of the Lord as the royal adornment of the Church, 
a treasury of Traditions which cannot be taken away; for thereby they have instructed 
us to honor the Holy Trinity Who is One in Essence, but separate in Hypostases. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
O all-holy Virgin, * have mercy on us who with faith have recourse to thee, * the 
mercifully compassionate one, * and who ask thy fervent aid; * for, since thou art the 
good Mother of God Most High, * O thou who art full of the grace of God, * thou 
dost ever make entreaty with thy maternal supplications, ** that He save us all.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Pillars of the Church and a wealth of piety which cannot be stolen were ye, O 
divinely eloquent and holy hierarchs, and ye illumined your life with dispassion and 
made clear the teachings and commandments of the Trinity. O venerable fathers, 
entreat Christ God on behalf of our souls. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence when He took flesh in thy 
womb, the one Lord remained God though He had become a man; and even after thy 
birthgiving He preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He grant us great mercy.  
Polyeleos, and this Magnification: We magnify you, O holy hierarchs of Christ 
Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and Hermogenes, and we honor your holy memory; 
for ye entreat Christ our God on our behalf.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Selected Psalm Verse: 
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Let the most wise teachers of the whole world, who on earth have glorified God in 
word and deed, be magnified today as Bestowers of salvation upon us all. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O Birthgiver of God, unassailable intercessor, and ready help of those who have 
recourse unto thee: deliver me from tribulations, and disdain me not, O thou help of 
all.  
Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord 
Gospel according to John, § 36 (JN. 10: 9-16) 
The Lord spake unto His disciples saying: I am the door: by me if any man enter 
in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, 
but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and 
that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd 
giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose 
own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and 
the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is an 
hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, 
and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I 
lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: 
them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and 
one shepherd.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Divine grace overshadoweth the most precious shrines of your relics, O most 
blessed ones. Wherefore, hastening to the scent of the myrrh of your miracles, we 
draw forth healings for the infirm. O holy hierarchs of Christ Peter, Alexis, Jonah, 
Philip and Hermogenes, entreat Christ God on behalf of our souls. 
 Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclisis), with 6 Troparia, 
including its Irmos, in Tone VIII. And the following canon of the holy 
hierarchs, with 8 Troparia. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE I 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Beset by many perils, we flee to you to obtain salvation, O great and holy hierarchs 
Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and Hermogenes. Save us from cruel necessity and 
tribulations!  
Assaults of the passions and many griefs and tribulations are destroying my soul. 
Bring peace to it, O holy hierarchs, by your supplications to God, and turn it from 
sorrow to joy.  
Entreat Christ the Savior, O great and chosen wonderworkers Peter, Alexis, Jonah, 
Philip and Hermogenes, that we may be delivered from trials, griefs and barbarian 
invasion by your supplications.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God and Lady, grant unto us, who are in sorrow and 
pain, the divine visitation and providence which are from thee.  
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
After God, ye have been the helpers and protectors of Moscow, O favorites of 
God. Guide us to the haven of salvation; for ye are a wall of defense for the faithful.  
We entreat you, O holy wonderworkers Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and 
Hermogenes: dispel our spiritual turmoil and the tempest; of grief, and grant us 
serenity by your supplications of God.  
As ye were right noble emulators of the good, and have been enriched by God 
with miracles, render help unto all, praying to God Who glorifieth you, His favored 
ones.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, help us who experience trials in cruel infirmities 
and the terrible distress of barbarian invasions; and transform our grief into joy.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV: 
O holy fathers, to the Master of all stretch forth your hands with which ye labored 
well, and pleased God, and gave abundantly to those in need; and open your lips for 
prayer, wherewith ye glorified God and instructed the people in divine knowledge. 
Hasten ye, therefore, to our aid, and by your supplications to God deliver us from the 
tribulations and evils which assail us, and from all necessity. (Twice)  
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O all-immaculate Virgin * who hast given birth to the transcendent God: * do 
thou unceasingly entreat Him with the incorporeal ones, * that He grant forgiveness 
of transgressions * and correction of life before the end, * to us who, as is meet, 
hymn thee with faith and love, ** O thou who alone art all-hymned.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Entreat God by your supplications, O holy fathers, that He still the turmoil of my 
passions and the tempest of the assaults of my many tribulations.  
O holy fathers, extend the abyss of your tender compassion unto us who call upon 
you for help, for the merciful God doth hearken to your supplications.  
Having you as our hope, O holy fathers Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and 
Hermogenes, and your supplications to God as a steadfast rampart, we are delivered 
from evils and all misfortunes.  
Theotokion: Heal thou our spiritual infirmities and our bodily sufferings, O pure 
one. Yea, hasten thou, O Sovereign Lady, to bestow health upon us by thy 
supplications.  
ODE V 
Irmos: Illumine us with Thy commandments, O Lord, * and with Thine 
upraised arm grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind.  
Fill our life with gladness, O holy fathers, delivering us from the invasion of 
barbarians and from civil strife.  
Deliver us from tribulations, O holy wonderworkers, for ye are fervent 
intercessors who pray for our souls.  
Dispel the gloom of my transgressions and mine unseemly acts by your prayers to 
God.  
Theotokion: We have acquired thee, O Lady, as an indestructible bulwark and 
haven, the perfect salvation of our souls, and a wide place amid our sorrows. Save us 
now from our passions and tribulations.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Deliver your city from death, corruption and captivity to barbarians, and preserve 
it from fiery conflagration by your supplications to God.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
We know you to be the helpers and steadfast preservers of our city, O holy 
hierarchs of the Lord; wherefore, fleeing unto you, we receive mercy and are 
delivered from tribulations.  
We have acquired you as a rampart and a haven, O holy wonderworkers, a 
spacious place amid our sorrows, the confirmation and salvation of our souls.  
Theotokion: I know thee to be the mediatress of life and our steadfast preserver, 
O Virgin, who dost ever disperse the tumult of temptations and fend off the assaults 
of the demons, wherefore I entreat thee to deliver me from the passions, O all-
immaculate one.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Piously did ye live amid holy hierarchs; * and ye guided the people toward divine 
knowledge, * and were well pleasing unto God. * Wherefore, ye have been glorified 
by Him with incorruption and miracles, ** as disciples of the grace of God.  
Ikos: O primates of Russia, who sat in the place of the first-called apostle, great 
luminaries Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and Hermogenes, emulators of the Trinity, 
instructors in Orthodoxy: ye lived in the world and enlightened the universe with 
your teaching. Wherefore, ye have become heirs to the kingdom of heaven and have 
been glorified with incorruption and miracles, as disciples of the grace of God.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
As Thou didst desire to arrange our salvation, O Savior, Thou dost glorify with 
miracles Thy favored ones who cry out to Thee: O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
Him Whose will is mercy, to Whom the Virgin Mother gaveth birth, entreat ye, O 
holy hierarchs of Christ Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and Hermogenes, that from our 
transgressions, from misfortunes and evils, He deliver us who cry aloud: O God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
A treasury of salvation and a well-spring of healing were ye, O favorites of God, 
and instructors in repentance for those who cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Theotokion: Thou hast shown forth her who gaveth birth unto Thee to be a 
treasury of salvation and a well-spring of incorruption, a tower of confirmation and 
portal of repentance for those who cry: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
O holy fathers and instructors in Orthodoxy, disdain not those who are in need of 
your aid, who hymn and supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages.  
Heal the impotence of our souls, and from ailments of the body raise up those 
who cry out and supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages.  
A wealth of healings do ye pour forth upon those who have recourse to you, the 
favorites of God, and who with faith hymn and supremely exalt Christ throughout 
the ages.  
Theotokion: Thou dost drive away assaults of temptations and the incursions of 
the passions, O Virgin, that we may hymn and exalt supremely thee, the pure one, 
throughout the ages.  
ODE IX 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Spurn not the torrents of our tears, we entreat you, O holy fathers Peter, Alexis, 
Jonah, Philip and Hermogenes, and grant consolation unto all who call you blessed.  
Fill our hearts with joy through your prayers unto God, O holy fathers and fervent 
helpers.  
O most radiant luminaries, emulators of the Trinity, Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip 
and Hermogenes, by your labors and struggles the gloom of ignorance hath been 
dispelled from us who right faithfully call you blessed. 
 Theotokion: With the rays of thy light illumine those who right faithfully confess 
thee to be the Theotokos, O Virgin, dispelling the gloom of ignorance and saving us 
from grievous misfortunes.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarchs: 
Let us praise the God-bearing fathers, who are radiant beacons brighter than the 
rays of the sun, supra-naturally united with the Trinity, the Origin of light, the Three-
sunned Unity. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
With unceasing hymns we call thee blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, who received 
One of the Trinity in thy womb and bore the transcendent Word in thy divine arms, 
without change or alteration.  
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
On the Praises, 6 Stichera of the holy hierarchs, 4 in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Possessed of a merciful soul, * a pure mind, a heart untroubled, * a blameless faith, 
love unfeigned, * excellent doctrine and the hierarchal dignity, * thou hast now been 
admitted * to the choirs of holy hierarchs in the heavens. * Wherefore, we honor 
thee, O holy hierarch Peter, * and with sacred hymns ** we all piously call thee 
blessed. 
O most honored father, right wondrous and most wise Alexis, * thou didst please 
God in the monastic life. * God chose thee first from thy youth as a pastor and great 
teacher for the reason-endowed sheep. * Thou wast revealed to be an instructor of 
priests * and a most radiant star for all the land of Russia, * illumining with miracles 
all who with faith fall down before the shrine of thy relics. * Wherefore, the choir of 
primates hath received thee. * With them offer up supplication, ** entreating 
remission of sins for thy flock.  
O father Jonah, divinely wise hierarch, * having loved Christ from childhood * 
thou didst cleave unto His love; * and having through Him illumined thy heart with 
the divine rays * of the Most holy Spirit, * thou didst truly become radiant of 
countenance. * Wherefore, grant thou those petitions which conduce to salvation * to 
those who have recourse to thy temple, ** and entreat Christ God, that our souls be 
saved.  
Thou didst finish the race * and keep the faith, * O blessed and holy hierarch 
Philip; * for which cause Christ hath crowned thee * with a splendid crown of 
righteousness * and adorned thy confession, O right wondrous one. * Wherefore, 
having received a heavenly inheritance, * beseech the Savior ** on behalf of those 
who hymn thy memory.  
In Tone VII: May the judgment that is written be done with hymns, and may this 
glory belong to the great Hermogenes, for he was manifest as a lover of Orthodoxy, 
and a protector of all Russia, overshadowing it as with the wings of an eagle.  
In Tone VIII: O most honored and right wondrous fathers Peter, Alexis, Jonah, 
Philip and Hermogenes, who increased the talent entrusted to you, ye have been 
deemed worthy of the joy of your Lord; and stand now with the choirs of the holy 
hierarchs, adorned with the grace of divine splendor. Wherefore, with faith and love 
we praise your most radiant memory, magnifying Christ Who hath glorified His 
favored ones.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O good and faithful servants, good husbandmen of the vineyard of Christ, ye bore 
the burden of the day, increasing the talent given you, and did not envy those who 
came after you. Wherefore, the gates of heaven have been opened unto you. Enter ye 
into the joy of Christ the Master, praying on our behalf, O holy teachers.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: ** Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the holy hierarchs. 
After God, ye have been the helpers and protectors of Moscow, O favorites of 
God. Guide us to the haven of salvation; for ye are a wall of defense for the faithful. 
(Twice) 
We entreat you, O holy wonderworkers Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and 
Hermogenes: dispel our spiritual turmoil and the tempest; of grief, and grant us 
serenity by your supplications of God.  
As ye were right noble emulators of the good, and have been enriched by God 
with miracles, render help unto all, praying to God Who glorifieth you, His favored 
ones.  
Deliver your city from death, corruption and captivity to barbarians, and preserve 
it from fiery conflagration by your supplications to God.  
We know you to be the helpers and steadfast preservers of our city, O holy 
hierarchs of the Lord; wherefore, fleeing unto you, we receive mercy and are 
delivered from tribulations.  
We have acquired you as a rampart and a haven, O holy wonderworkers, a 
spacious place amid our sorrows, the confirmation and salvation of our souls.  
Theotokion: I know thee to be the mediatress of life and our steadfast preserver, 
O Virgin, who dost ever disperse the tumult of temptations and fend off the assaults 
of the demons, wherefore I entreat thee to deliver me from the passions, O all-
immaculate one.  
Troparion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV: 
O primates of Russia, * true preservers of the Traditions of the apostles, * 
unshakable pillars, instructors in Orthodoxy, * Peter, Alexis, Jonah, Philip and 
Hermogenes; * entreat the Master of all, * that He grant peace to the whole world ** 
and great mercy to our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone III: 
Piously did ye live amid holy hierarchs; * and ye guided the people toward divine 
knowledge, * and were well pleasing unto God. * Wherefore, ye have been glorified 
by Him with incorruption and miracles, ** as disciples of the grace of God.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  

--- PAGE 18 ---
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, §335 (HEB. 13: 17-21) 
Brethren: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they 
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and 
not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, that 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, Make you perfect in every good work 
to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall 
speak of judgment.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, §11 (MT. 5: 14-19) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on 
an hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on 
a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine 
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come 
to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot 
or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever 
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he 
shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach 
them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
 
