--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 1st DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER  
THE PROTECTION OF OUR MOST HOLY LADY, THE THEOTOKOS AND EVER-
VIRGIN MARY  
If the church is dedicated to the Theotokos, or if the rector so desireth, we celebrate 
an all-night vigil thus: 
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the Theotokos, in Tone I: 
God Who alone resteth on the thrones in the highest granted His favored one to 
behold that which transcendeth earthly things when he stretched forth his most 
divine hands in supplication, entreating thee, O Lady, on behalf of his city and 
people, praying: O our Sovereign Lady, cover us now with the omophorion of thy 
mercy! (Twice)  
O most pure Virgin, Bride of God who knewest not wedlock, protection and help 
of all mankind: with thy precious omophorion thou dost protect the city which 
honoreth and glorifieth thee as is meet, against the assaults of adversaries.  
O Mother of God, thou animate palace of Christ, bulwark, protection and might 
of the faithful, through thee is thy city saved, with thy help are Orthodox rulers 
crowned, and those who boast in thee win victories over the heathen; for thou 
coverest us with the omophorion of thy mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
Come, ye assemblies of those who love the feasts of the Church, let us hymn the 
most holy Virgin! For today the angels and saints celebrate the honored protection of 
the Mother of God, and call us mortals to cry out in praise with unceasing voices: 
Rejoice, O miraculous adornment of the Church and most wondrous protection of 
the whole world! Rejoice, O ally of faithful kings in battle and preservation of 
warriors! Rejoice, our protection and help! For the Christian race doth unceasingly 
bless thee.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the Theotokos, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
There is glory in the heavens * and gladness upon the earth, * for the Queen 
prayeth * in the church with all the saints ** for all of us.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
Come, ye faithful, * to the holy church, * for there the Theotokos * doth protect 
the people with her omophorion ** against all the assaults of the enemy.  
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.  
O most pure Theotokos, * forget us not * who are thy servants, * but pray thou 
for us ** who hymn thee with faith.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone III: 
Come, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, and let us bless the honored 
protection of the Mother of God; for she hath mercifully stretched forth her hands to 
her Son, and the world hath been shielded by her holy protection. Wherefore, with 
mouth and heart, with hymns and spiritual songs, let us splendidly celebrate with all 
who have recourse unto her.  
Troparion of the Theotokos, in Tone IV:  
Overshadowed by thy coming, O Mother of God, * we, the right faithful people, 
celebrate today with splendor, * and gazing upon thy most precious image, we cry 
aloud with compunction: * Cover us with thy precious omophorion, * and deliver us 
from all evil, * entreating thy Son, Christ our God, ** that He save our souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the Theotokos: 4 in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O wondrous miracle ...”: 
O pure Theotokos, well-spring of wisdom, thou art the great help of the grieving, a 
speedy helper, the salvation and confirmation of the world, an abyss of mercy! We, 
the faithful, hymn thee the protection of the world, ineffably praising thy luminous 
omophorion, saying: Rejoice, for the Lord is with thee, Who through thee granteth 
the world great mercy! (Twice)  
The wondrous Isaiah prophesied saying: “In the later times the mountain of the 
Lord shall manifestly appear, and the house of the Lord shall be upon the summit of 
the mountain.” O Lady, we know thee to be the true fulfillment of this, for the 
mountains and hills have been adorned with the renowned churches of thy feasts. 
Wherefore, in gladness we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O joyous one, the Lord is with 
thee, Who through thee granteth the world great mercy!  
Thou art the wondrous adornment of all the faithful, the true fulfillment of the 
prophecies, the glory of the apostles, the beauty of the martyrs, the boast of virginity 
and the most marvelous protection of the whole world! O Lady, with thine 
omophorion protect all the pious who cry aloud: Rejoice, O joyous one, the Lord is 
with thee, Who through thee granteth the world great mercy!  
And 4 Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
We know thee, O Theotokos, * to be like a divinely planted garden of paradise, * 
the place of the Tree of life, * watered by the Holy Spirit, * the one who gave birth to 
the Creator of all * Who feedeth the faithful with the bread of life. * With the 
forerunner entreat Him on our behalf, * with thy precious omophorion protecting 
people ** from all tribulations. (Twice)  
Heaven and earth are sanctified, * the Church is rendered radiant * and all the 
people are gladdened; * for, lo! the Mother of God, arriving invisibly * with the 
angelic armies, the forerunner and the theologian, * the prophets and the apostles, * 
prayeth to Christ for Orthodox Christians, * that He have mercy upon the city and 
the people ** Who glorify the feast of her protection.  
Thou art the beauty of Jacob * and the heavenly ladder * whereby the Lord 
descended to earth. * At that time these images * manifested thine honor and glory, 
O Theotokos. * The angels of heaven and mortal mankind * bless thee who hast 
given birth to the God of all, * for thou prayest for the whole world, covering with 
thy mercy ** those who celebrate thine honored feast.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
All the ranks of the noetic beings rejoice with us who spiritually form a material 
choir, seeing the Queen and Sovereign Lady of all most excellently glorified by the 
faithful. And the spirits of the righteous rejoice, beholding her stretching forth her 
most precious hands in supplication, asking peace for the world, and salvation for our 
souls.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS  
Jacob went forth from the well of the oath, and departed into Haran. And he came 
to a certain place, and slept there, for the sun had gone down; and he took one of the 
stones of the place, and put it at his head, and lay down to sleep in that place, and 
dreamed: and behold a ladder fixed on the earth, whose top reached to heaven, and 
the angels of God ascended and descended on it. And the Lord stood upon it, and 
said: “I am the God of thy father Abraham, and the God of Isaac. Fear not; the land 
on which thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And thy seed shall be like 
the sand of the earth; and it shall spread abroad to the sea, and the south, and the 
north, and the east; and in thee and in thy seed shall all tribes of the earth be blessed. 
And behold I am with thee to preserve thee continually in all the way wherein thou 
shalt go; and I will bring thee back to this land; for I will not desert thee, until I have 
done all that I have said to thee.” And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said: “The 
Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.” And he was afraid, and said: “How fearful is 
this place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!”  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF EZEKIEL  
Thus saith the Lord: “It shall come to pass from the eighth day and onward, that 
the priests shall offer your wholeburnt-offerings on the altar, and your peace-
offerings; and I will accept you, saith the Lord.” Then He brought me back by way of 
the outer gate of the sanctuary that looketh eastward; and it was shut. And the Lord 
said to me: “This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no one shall pass 
through it; for the Lord God of Israel shall enter by it, and it shall be shut. For the 
Prince, he shall sit in it, to eat bread before the Lord; He shall go in by the way of the 
porch of the gate, and shall go forth by the way of the same.” And He brought me in 
by way of the gate that looketh northward, in front of the house: and I looked, and, 
behold, the house was full of the glory of the Lord.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
Wisdom hath built a house for herself, and set up seven pillars. She hath killed her 
beasts; she hath mingled her wine in a bowl, and prepared her table. She hath sent 
forth her servants, calling with a loud proclamation to the feast, saying: “Whoso is 
foolish, let him turn aside to me,” And to those who want understanding she saith: 

--- PAGE 5 ---
“Come, eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you.” Leave folly, 
that ye may reign forever; and seek wisdom, and improve understanding by 
knowledge. He who reproveth evil men shall get dishonor to himself; and he who 
rebuketh an ungodly man shall disgrace himself. Rebuke not evil men, lest they 
should hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. Give an opportunity to a 
wise man, and he will be wiser: instruct a just man, and he will receive more 
instruction. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of understanding: for to know the 
law is the character of a sound mind. For in this way thou shalt live long, and years of 
thy life shall be added to thee.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera:  
In Tone III: The most radiant feast of thine honored protection hath dawned 
today, O most pure Virgin! Thou dost illumine more than the sun those people who 
with faith and a pure heart confess thee to be the true Mother of God, and cry out to 
thy Son: O Christ God, through the supplications of the Ever-virgin who gave birth 
to Thee in purity and without corruption, give not Thine inheritance over to the 
enemies who wage war on us, but in that Thou art merciful save our souls in peace.  
In Tone IV: The people of thy Son desire to chant praises to thee as is meet, O 
most pure Lady, yet without thee they are unable; for thou dost ever help all the 
faithful, covering them with thy precious omophorion, praying that all who with faith 
honor thee as the pure one, the true Theotokos be saved.  
In Tone II: Assembling today, ye faithful, let us bless the Mother of Christ God, 
the most immaculate and most pure Virgin Queen of all; for she doth ever mercifully 
stretch forth her hands to her Son. The most wondrous Andrew beheld her in the air, 
covering the people with her precious omophorion. Wherefore, let us cry out to her 
with compunction: Rejoice, O protection, help and salvation of our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Having purified our minds and thoughts, we splendidly celebrate, with the angels, 
beginning David’s hymn to the Maiden, the Bride of Christ our God, the King of all, 
saying: Arise, O Lord, into thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy holiness! For having 
adorned her as a beautiful palace, O Master, at her supplications and by Thy mighty 
power Thou hast sent her to thy city, to edify and protect it against pagan adversaries.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the Theotokos:  
In Tone II: Christ hath given thee to the Christian race as a mighty protection and 
a helper more exalted than all things of heaven and earth, more glorious than the 
cherubim and more honorable than all creation, to protect and save the sinful people 
who have recourse to thee. Wherefore, O Lady, we hymn thee, the refuge of all, and 
celebrate with splendor the honored feast of thy protection, entreating Christ, that He 
grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
In Tone V: Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
O ye people, let us chant with splendor a hymn to the Maiden Bride, the Mother 
of Christ God, the King of all: The Queen stood at Thy right hand, O Master, clothed 
in robes of gold and all-adorned with divine beauty. For having adorned her, His 
chosen one, beyond all the women of the world, He was well-pleased to be born from 
her in His great mercy; and hath given her, the only blessed one, to His people as a 
helper, to edify and protect His servants from all misfortunes.  
In Tone VII: Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance.  
Thou art a mountain greater and more glorious than Mount Sinai, O Theotokos: 
for, unable to bear the descent of the glory of God in images and shadows, it burned 
with fire, and thunder and lightning smote it; but thou, without being consumed, 
didst wholly bear within thy womb God the Word, the divine fire, Who holdeth all 
things in His hand. As thou hast maternal boldness before Him, O Lady, help those 
who celebrate thine honored feast with faith, and forget us not, but visit us with 
mercy; for thou hast received from God the gift to edify and protect thy servants, thy 
Christian flock.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
The Church of God is arrayed in thine honored protection as with a most radiant 
crown, O all-pure Theotokos, and, rejoicing, it shineth today and mystically joineth 
chorus, crying out to thee, O Sovereign Lady: Rejoice, precious raiment and crown of 
the glory of God! Rejoice, thou who alone art the perfection of glory and everlasting 
gladness! Rejoice, O refuge, deliverance and salvation of us who have recourse to 
thee!  
Troparion of the Theotokos, in Tone IV: 
Overshadowed by thy coming, O Mother of God, * we, the right faithful people, 
celebrate today with splendor, * and gazing upon thy most precious image, we cry 
aloud with compunction: * Cover us with thy precious omophorion, * and deliver us 
from all evil, * entreating thy Son, Christ our God, ** that He save our souls.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Theotokos, in Tone IV:  
Overshadowed by thy coming, O Mother of God, * we, the right faithful people, 
celebrate today with splendor, * and gazing upon thy most precious image, we cry 
aloud with compunction: * Cover us with thy precious omophorion, * and deliver us 
from all evil, * entreating thy Son, Christ our God, ** that He save our souls. (Thrice) 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Surrounded by the divine radiance of the angelic armies and with the ranks of the 
prophets and apostles, and receiving their adored ministrations as Mother of God, 
visit us, thy servants, entreating Christ our God, that He grant us great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI:  
O most pure Mother of God, thou art truly the strength of the helpless. 
Wherefore, we who have been cast down are raised up by thee and are borne aloft in 
thee, for thou art the protection of all and our mediator before God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: It is meet to magnify thee, O Theotokos, 
who art more honorable than the cherubim and more glorious beyond compare 
than the seraphim.  
Or this magnification: We magnify thee, O all-immaculate Mother of Christ our 
God, and we honor thy labors and thy precious omophorion, for the holy 
Andrew beheld thee in the air, entreating Christ for us.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: He that dwelleth in the help of the Most High shall abide in the shelter of 
the God of heaven.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Extended on thy most pure and incorrupt hands, thine all-precious omophorion 
shining immaterially, spiritually, with greater luster than electrum, truly more 
honorable than the ark of old doth mercifully preserve those who honor the right 
beauteous feast of thy protection, O Sovereign Lady, which, having assembled, we 
celebrate with fervor.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation 
and generation.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 4 (LK. 1: 39-49, 56)  
In those days, Mary arose, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of 
Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came to 
pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; 
and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit: and she spake out with a loud voice, and 
said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And 
whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo, as 
soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my 
womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of 
those things which were told her from the Lord. And Mary said, My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath re-
garded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all 
generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; 
and holy is His name. And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to 
her own house.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VIII:  
All the ranks of the noetic beings rejoice with us who spiritually form a material 
choir, seeing the Queen and Sovereign Lady of all most famously glorified by the 
faithful. And the spirits of the righteous rejoice, beholding her stretching forth her 
most precious hands in supplication, asking peace for the world, and salvation for our 
souls.  
Canon of the Theotokos, with 12 Troparia, the Irmos chanted twice, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
Having entered the church in great glory today as the Mother of God, with the 
ranks of the holy angels and the assemblies of the prophets and apostles, thou prayest 
for all Christians, delivering them from perils and grief, and covering them with thy 
mercy.  
Moses called thee the tabernacle and the rod of Aaron, for thou didst put forth 
Christ, the Tree of life; and as thou hast boldness before Him, O Queen, pray thou 
for us who honor thee, that He deliver us from all evil, that we may glorify the feast 
of thy protection.  
Assembling choirs, David doth dance, not as he did before the ark of old, but even 
more now, hastening into thy presence in the church with the ranks of the saints. And 
bowing down before thee, we say: Pray thou for us, the people who honor thee, that, 
glorifying thy protection, we may celebrate it with honor.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
The ranks of the angels hymn thee, O Theotokos, and the patriarchs and holy 
hierarchs glorify thee, hastening into thy presence in the church. And the holy 
Andrew then beheld thee with them, praying to God for us sinners, that He have 
mercy upon the people who glorify the feast of thy protection.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Like an unploughed field thou didst manifestly produce the divine Grain. Rejoice, 
O animate table holding the Bread of life! Rejoice, O Lady, thou inexhaustible 
wellspring of the Water of life!  
O Lady, we, thy people, standing before thee with faith in thy church, await thy 
mercy. Visit our lowliness, and with thy holy protection defend Orthodox Christians 
from all evil.  
O far-famed Virgin who was honorably prefigured by the prophets, with the angels 
they now do thee homage. Pray thou to God with them, that, rejoicing, we may all 
splendidly celebrate thy holy protection today.  
Gideon prefigured thee as a fleece, for Christ God descended upon thee like dew. 
Pray thou to Him, O Theotokos, that He grant victory to our Orthodox hierarchs 
over all heresies, that, casting them down like the Midianites, they may glorify thy 
holy feast.  
O Theotokos, with thy radiant omophorion thou lightest the church and the 
people more than the rays of the sun, and by thy visitation drivest away the darkness 
of our sins, praying for us to thy Son and God.  
Sessional Hymn of the Theotokos, in Tone V: 
O pure Ever-virgin, fervent and invincible intercessor, excellent and unashamed 
hope, bulwark, protection and refuge of those who have recourse to thee: with the 
angels beseech thy Son and God, that He grant compunction, salvation and great 
mercy to the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
O all-hymned Virgin, we cry out to thee in voices of hymnody: Rejoice, thou 
butter mountain, curdled by the Spirit! Rejoice, O lampstand, O jar bearing the 
Manna which sweeteneth the senses of all the pious!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
O Theotokos, God hath wholly sanctified thee, more than the ark of Aaron, and 
commanded the saints and angels to do thee homage. With them pray for the city and 
people who glorify thine honored feast.  
O Theotokos, come now in glory unto thy church, with the councils of all the 
saints, as once the holy Andrew beheld thee in the air, radiantly praying for Christians; 
and grant us thy mercy.  
Strengthen our armed forces against all adversaries, as God did David against 
Goliath, O Lady, that in gladness we may cry to thee: Rejoice, O holy protection and 
helper of our city!  
With faith we fall down before thee, O Sovereign Lady, and, rendering homage 
with thanksgiving, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin full of the grace of God, our 
protection and wall of defense, the helper of those in misfortune! Save us who have 
recourse to thee, for in thee do we place our trust!  
ODE V  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Of old, Solomon described thee as the marriage-couch and bed of the King of 
heaven, and spake of thee as surrounded by the seraphim, O Theotokos. Wherefore, 
we now beseech thee, O all-holy Mother of God: Protect us from all misfortunes!  
To thee do the foremost among the angels and the honored prophets and apostles 
render service with honor as the Mother of God, beholding thee making supplication 
for the world; and the Lord, hearkening to thine entreaties, doth save thy city and the 
people who place their trust in thee.  
Isaiah, great among the prophets, prophesied thee, saying that without knowing 
wedlock thou wouldst give birth to God; for thou, O pure Mary, art more holy than 
all, in that thou didst bear God in thy womb and in thine arms. To Him pray thou for 
us, with thy protection covering those who faithfully glorify thee.  
Spreading spiritual wings, the councils of the saints came mystically to render thee 
homage, O Theotokos, beholding thee on the light cloud of glory, praying to Christ 
the Savior, that He grant victory to our armed forces, that they prevail over all 
adversaries.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Divinely wise priests, standing in thy church with the pious people, await thy 
mercy, O Theotokos. Transform our grief into joy, in that thou hast given birth to the 
Joy Who hath done away with the sins of all mankind.  
To thee doth all the earth offer gifts as to the Queen and Mother of God. 
Hierarchs bow down in homage, and all the people are glad, protected from all evil by 
thy supplications, O Theotokos.  
Daniel described thee beforehand as a great mountain; for from thee Christ was 
born without seed. He hath destroyed all the delusion of the demons, and hath filled 
all the earth with His Faith. To Him do thou pray for us who glorify the feast of thy 
protection, O Theotokos.  
O most pure one, we utter unto thee the cry of the angel: Rejoice, O throne of 
God, upon which Ezekiel beheld the Lord in the guise of a man, borne up by the 
cherubim! With them pray thou for us, O Theotokos, that He save our souls.  
Kontakion of the Theotokos, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Today the Virgin standeth forth in the church, * and with the choirs of the saints 
she invisibly prayeth to God for us. * Angels and hierarchs offer homage, * and the 
apostles and prophets join chorus; ** for, for our sake the Theotokos entreateth the 
pre-eternal God.  
Ikos: Come, O ye people, let us delight in her most glorious miracles; for through 
her hath Adam been delivered from corruption. She is the ark fashioned, not by 
Noah, but by God. Of old, Moses was unable to see God in the fiery bush; but now 
the whole earth doth acknowledge the Son of God Who was born of her and to 
Whom she prayeth on our behalf. Wherefore, we glorify her as the Mother of God; 
for, for our sake the Theotokos entreateth the pre-eternal God.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
O Virgin, thou wast not described by the many prophets and wast also unknown 
to the angels of heaven who minister to God; but now all know thee to be the 
Theotokos, and we require thy help and aid, O blessed one.  
O Virgin Theotokos, thou mountain curdled by the Spirit which Habbakuk saw 
pouring forth the sweetness of healing upon the faithful, heal us who cry out to thy 
Son: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
He Who bowed down the heavens made His abode within thee, O Virgin, and 
now regardeth thy supplication, fulfilling thy petitions, O pure Queen and Theotokos. 
To Him do thou now earnestly pray, for we place our hope in thee, O blessed one.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
O Christ God, our Creator and Savior, accept the entreaty of Thy Mother, which 
she offereth to Thee for us sinners, that, rejoicing, we may chant to Thee: O all-
hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
With the ranks of the angels, the honorable and glorious prophets, the preeminent 
apostles, the hieromartyrs and holy hierarchs, O Lady, pray thou to God for us 
sinners who glorify the feast of thy protection in this land.  
Cast down pride and arrogance, scatter the councils of the unjust, and destroy 
those who instigate wars, O Mother of God, most honored Queen! And exalt the 
horn of our Orthodox hierarchs, that we may glorify thy feast, O all-pure Virgin 
Theotokos, crying: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
Offering thee hymnody with our mouths, we bow down before thee spiritually 
with our souls; for our hearts burn within us. O most pure Mother of God, have 
mercy upon us who pray to thee, who hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages.  
Weighed down by many sins, I am at a loss how to write in praise of thy 
protection, O Theotokos; but as thou art the Mother of God, adorn thy feast with 
miracles, that, rejoicing, we may all hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
O exalted King Who sittest with the Father and art hymned by the seraphim: look 
down upon the supplication of Thy Mother, which she offereth to Thee for us 
sinners, and wash away our sins. Save this city and multiply the people. Grant health 
of body and victory over all adversaries, through the prayers of her who gave birth to 
Thee.  
O divinely chosen Virgin, we cry out to thee with the voice of the angel: Rejoice, 
thou who hast led Adam back into paradise! Rejoice, thou who drivest the demons 
away with thy name! Rejoice, O hope of Christians! Rejoice, sanctification of souls! 
Rejoice, preserver of our city!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Remember us in thy supplications, O Virgin Sovereign Lady and Theotokos, that 
we not perish because of the multitude of our sins. Protect us from all evil and 
grievous perils, for in thee do we place our trust, and, honoring the feast of thy 
protection, we magnify thee.  
As Mother of God, thou hast received from God the gift to heal the infirmities of 
all Christians, to deliver them from misfortunes, to forgive their sins and save them 
from captivity and all want. Disdain us not, O Sovereign Lady, for thou knowest that 
we are in need of health for our bodies and salvation for our souls.  
Exapostilarion: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
O most holy Lady, Virgin Theotokos, cover us with thy wondrous omophorion, 
preserving thy city and people from all evil, as the all-wondrous Andrew beheld thee 
praying in the Church of Blachernae. And send down upon us thy great mercy, O 
Sovereign Lady. (Thrice)  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the Theotokos, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
We fall down before thee, O Sovereign Lady, * and rendering homage, we entreat 
thee with compunction: * Rejoice, O Lady blessed of God, O Virgin of great renown, 
* who wast prefigured with honor by the prophets! * For on thee did Christ God 
descend like dew, * and thou hast given birth to Him without knowing wedlock, O 
pure one, * and held in thine arms the Creator and Lord of all. * To Him do thou 
now pray for us ** who glorify the feast of thy protection with faith. (Twice) 
The ranks of angels hymn thee, O Virgin Theotokos, * the patriarchs and 
hierarchs glorify thee, * and the holy apostles do thee homage with honor * as the 
Mother of God, * beholding thee praying for the world * to Christ God, the Savior of 
all. * To Him do thou pray, that He deliver * the city and people who glorify thee 
with faith ** and honor the feast of thy protection.  
Through the Holy Spirit * God wholly sanctified thee, O Theotokos, * more than 
the ark of Aaron; * and we are illumined by thine omophorion * more than by the 
radiance of the sun: * for thou dost enlighten the church and thy people, * driving 
away the darkness of our sins, * and delivering from misfortunes and sorrows ** 
those who with faith honor the feast of thy precious protection.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
In that the most wondrous Andrew beheld thee with a multitude of archangels, 
with the apostles and prophets, and the vast company of the martyrs, praying to thy 
Son and our God for the city and people, O Lady, and covering them with thy 
precious omophorion, fail not, O most pure one, to save the excellent inheritance of 
thy Son, which doth celebrate thy most honored feast, O thou who art greatly 
hymned.  
Great Doxology. Troparion, Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the Theotokos.  
Like an unploughed field thou didst manifestly produce the divine Grain. Rejoice, 
O animate table holding the Bread of life! Rejoice, O Lady, thou inexhaustible 
wellspring of the Water of life!  
O Lady, we, thy people, standing before thee with faith in thy church, await thy 
mercy. Visit our lowliness, and with thy holy protection defend the Orthodox people 
from all evil.  
O far-famed Virgin who was honorably prefigured by the prophets, with the angels 
they now do thee homage. Pray thou to God with them, that, rejoicing, we may all 
splendidly celebrate thy holy protection today.  
Gideon prefigured thee as a fleece, for Christ God descended upon thee like dew. 
Pray thou to Him, O Theotokos, that He grant victory to our Orthodox hierarchs 
over all heresies, that, casting them down like the Midianites, they may glorify thy 
holy feast.  
Divinely wise priests, standing in thy church with the pious people, await thy 
mercy, O Theotokos. Transform our grief into joy, in that thou hast given birth to the 
Joy Who hath done away with the sins of all mankind.  
To thee doth all the earth offer gifts as to the Queen and Mother of God. Kings 
and princes bow down in homage, and all the people are glad, protected from all evil 
by thy supplications, O Theotokos.  
Daniel described thee beforehand as a great mountain; for from thee Christ was 
born without seed. He hath destroyed all the delusion of the demons, and hath filled 
all the earth with His Faith. To Him do thou pray for us who glorify the feast of thy 
protection, O Theotokos.  
O most pure one, we utter unto thee the cry of the angel: Rejoice, O throne of 
God, whereon Ezekiel beheld the Lord in the guise of a man, borne up by the 
cherubim! With them pray thou for us, O Theotokos, that He save our souls.  
Troparion of the Theotokos, in Tone IV:  
Overshadowed by thy coming, O Mother of God, * we, the right faithful people, 
celebrate today with splendor, * and gazing upon thy most precious image, we cry 
aloud with compunction: * Cover us with thy precious omophorion, * and deliver us 
from all evil, * entreating thy Son, Christ our God, ** that He save our souls.  
Kontakion of the Theotokos, in Tone III: 
Today the Virgin standeth forth in the church, * and with the choirs of the saints 
she invisibly prayeth to God for us. * Angels and hierarchs offer homage, * and the 
apostles and prophets join chorus; ** for, for our sake the Theotokos entreateth the 
pre-eternal God.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone III, the Hymn of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my Spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 320 (HEB. 9: 1-7)  
Brethren: The first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly 
sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and 
the table, and the showbread; which is called the sanctuary. And after the second veil, 
the tabernacle which is called the holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the 
ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that 
had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it 
the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy seat; of which we cannot now speak 
particularly. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into 
the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the 
high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, 
and for the errors of the people.  
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 54 (LK. 10: 38-42,11: 27-28)  
At that time, Jesus entered into a certain village; and a certain woman named 
Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat 
at Jesus’ feet, and heard His word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, 
and came to Him, and said, Lord, dost Thou not care that my sister hath left me to 
serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me. And Jesus answered and said unto 
her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing 
is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from 
her. And it came to pass, as He spoke these things, a certain woman of the company 
lifted up her voice, and said unto Him, Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the 
paps which Thou hast sucked. But He said, Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the 
word of God, and keep it.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
