--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE JAMES, THE SON OF ALPHEUS  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER ANDRONICUS & HIS WIFE, ATHANASIA  
AT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
As radiant as the sun * thou didst shine forth, O apostle, * with the beams of the 
Spirit, * illumining the whole world * with divine knowledge, O blessed one, * and 
driving away the darkness of polytheism * with thy divine preaching. * Wherefore, 
celebrating thine all-splendid and praiseworthy festival today, ** we reverently glorify 
thee. (Thrice) 
Thou hast thundered forth sacred and saving doctrines * upon the whole world, O 
most wise one, * cleansing all creation of the madness of idolatry, * O divinely wise 
one, * and enlightening the people * with the radiance of the knowledge of God. * 
And, having demolished the temples of the idols through grace, * thou didst raise up 
churches ** to the praise of our God. (Thrice)  
Seated in the heights of divine knowledge, O James, * thou didst receive the grace 
of the Spirit, * which appeared to thee in the guise of fire * and manifestly consumed 
* all the idolatrous filth of impiety * with a tongue of fire. * Wherefore, we praise thee 
* as an apostle and herald of God, ** celebrating today thy holy festival. (Twice)  
Glory ..., the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  
Manifestly receiving the grace of the divine Spirit, O James, thou wast numbered 
among the sacred choir of the apostles. Wherefore, by His descent from the heavens 
and His mighty inspiration, He illumined thee with a tongue of fire, whereby thou 
hast consumed the thorny ungodliness of the heathen. Entreat Christ God, O divine 
herald, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Prophet David, the ancestor of God, * spoke of thee in psalmody unto Him Who 
hath accomplished great things in thee. * For God was well pleased without father to 
become a man from thee, * the Queen who standeth at His right hand, * and He - the 
source of life - showed thee to be His mother, * that He might renew His own image, 
corrupted by the passions. * Having found the lost sheep wandering on the mountain 
* He hath laid it upon his shoulders, * that He may bring it to his Father; * and in 
accordance with His own will * unite it to the heavenly Powers * and thus, O 
Theotokos, save the world, ** Christ, Who is richly and abundantly merciful. 
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JOHN (I JN. 1: 1-7)  
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen 
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word 
of life; (for the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and show 
unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us;) 
that which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have 
fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus 
Christ. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full. This then is the 
message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in 
him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in 
darkness, we lie, and do not the truth: but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, 
we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth 
us from all sin.  
READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JAMES (1:1-12) 
James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which 
are scattered abroad, Greeting. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers 
temptations; knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh patience. But let 
patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. If 
any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and 
upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering: 
for he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed. For let 
not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. A double-minded man 
is unstable in all his ways. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted: 
but the rich, in that he is made low: because as the flower of the grass he shall pass 
away. For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withereth the grass, 
and the flower thereof falleth, and the grace of the fashion of it perisheth: so also 
shall the rich man fade away in his ways. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: 
for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised 
to them that love him.  
READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JUDE (1:1-25) 
Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that are sanctified 
by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called: Mercy unto you, and 
peace, and love, be multiplied. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of 
the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that 
ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints. 
For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this 
condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and 
denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. I will therefore put you in 
remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord, having saved the people 
out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed not. And the angels 

--- PAGE 3 ---
which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in 
everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Even as Sodom 
and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to 
fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the 
vengeance of eternal fire. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise 
dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Yet Michael the archangel, when contending 
with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a 
railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. But these speak evil of those things 
which they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things 
they corrupt themselves. Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and 
ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of 
Korah. These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding 
themselves without fear: clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; trees 
whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots; raging 
waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved 
the blackness of darkness for ever. And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, 
prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his 
saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among 
them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their 
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. These are murmurers, 
complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling 
words, having men’s persons in admiration because of advantage. But, beloved, 
remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus 
Christ; how that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should 
walk after their own ungodly lusts. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, 
having not the Spirit. But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, 
praying in the Holy Ghost, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy 
of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And of some have compassion, making a 
difference; and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the 
garment spotted by the flesh. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and 
to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the 
only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and 
ever. Amen.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera of the apostle, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
With the rod of grace * didst thou lure all up from the depths of vanity, * O right 
wondrous James, * obedient to the command of the Master, * Who enlighteneth thy 
mind wholly, * and hath shown thee to be an apostle, * an honored and divine 
proclaimer * of His unapproachable divinity, ** O most blessed one.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
The radiance of the Spirit * descended upon thee in the aspect of fire, * O blessed 
one, * and made a divine refuge within thee, * who with haste dost drive away the 
gloom of godlessness, * enlightening the world with the radiance of thine all-wise 
words, * O expounder of the mysteries, * adornment of the apostles, ** blessed 
eyewitness of Christ.  
Illumining those who sat in the darkness of ignorance * with the lightning flashes 
of thy preaching, * O glorious one, * thou didst show them to be children of our God 
and Master * for the sake of their faith. * Thou didst emulate His sufferings and 
death, * and wast thereby an inheritor of glory, * as one wise and divinely eloquent, ** 
O disciple of the Truth.  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Forsaking earthly things, thou didst follow after Christ, and signed with the 
inspiration of the Holy Spirit, wast sent by Him to the nations that had fallen into 
perdition, that thou mightest turn all mankind to the light of knowledge of God, and 
having completed the struggles of thy divine suffering and divers torments, thou didst 
commit thy soul unto Christ, O Apostle James. Him do thou entreat, O all-blessed 
one, that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
All my hope do I place in thee, O Mother of God. Keep me under thy protection.  
On the Aposticha of the holy apostle, these Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
Thou hast received invincible authority and power * over the demons, O apostle, * 
to drive away their dark princes * by the name of Christ. * Thou hast passed over the 
earth, * shedding light like the sun, * teaching all the nations, * O glorious one, ** and 
preaching the first salvific coming of Christ.  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto the 
ends of the world.  
Emulating the primal Goodness, * the essential and supremely divine Life, * thou 
wast a good man * in essence, O James, * and wast called the son of divine grace, * 
showing thyself to be * an earnest disciple of Christ * through the goodness of thy 
character ** and the purity of thy mind.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament proclaimeth the 
work of His hands.  
As a well wrought instrument * by the skill of God, * O Apostle James, * thou 
didst commit thyself to summon the nations, * by thy words and acts * teaching them 
to acknowledge Christ. * And thou didst enlighten all * to confess the true divinity of 
Jesus, ** the Savior of our souls.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
We faithfully celebrate the most honored day of thy memory, O glorious James, 
honoring thee not as the son of Alpheus, but as the apostle of Christ and preacher of 
His ineffable incarnation. Wherefore, ever standing with the incorporeal ones, with 
the choirs of the apostles and martyrs before the throne of the Master, pray thou 
earnestly to our Savior and God, that He save us.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Thou art the temple and portal, * the palace and throne of the King, * O most 
honored Virgin, * through whom Christ the Lord, my Redeemer, * Who is the Sun of 
righteousness, * hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in darkness, * deigning 
to enlighten those * whom He hath fashioned in His image by His own hand. * 
Wherefore, O all-hymned one, * as thou hast acquired a mother’s boldness before 
Him, ** entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be saved. 
At the blessing of the Loaves: Troparion, in Tone III:  
O holy Apostle James * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins 
** unto our souls. 
And, Rejoice O Virgin Theotokos ..., (Once) 
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin Theotokos; 
* for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in the flesh * He had 
received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in that He is the Lover of 
mankind.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT COMPLINE  
Canon of the venerable ones, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Having first cleansed thy soul with valiant virtues, O Andronicus, and been set 
afire by the embers of divine love, thou didst avoid the burning of the flesh; for thou 
wast ever divinely bedewed from on high.  
Submitting to the Master’s commands as once the patriarch Abraham did, O 
father, thou didst leave thy country and didst forsake thy kinfolk; and, far from wife 
and riches, thou didst dwell alone in the desert, O blessed one.  
Thou didst fulfill the commandment of the Lord, selling all that thou hadst and 
distributing it to the poor, and thereby acquired the precious pearl, which receiving, 
thou wast made abundantly wealthy with a rich outpouring of myrrh.  
Theotokion: Of His own will the Creator of Adam, Who holdeth all things in His 
hand, was formed in thy womb, O Theotokos, and was borne in thy hands. O the 
awesome mystery! The Lord of all the saints appeareth as a babe!  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Adam was driven from Eden because of the counsel of Eve, but thou, O wise one, 
believing the counsel of thy spouse, didst come to dwell within a garden of paradise, 
and with her dost ever rejoice, O blessed Andronicus.  
Mystically and wisely arranging all things to the good and directing mortals to 
salvation, the Word translated thy two beloved children from earth to the heavens, 
revealing to you the straight way.  
Putting aside fleeting and corruptible love and leaving it to those on earth, ye 
bound yourselves with spiritual love, O blessed ones; wherefore, ye now abide in the 
habitations of the righteous.  
Theotokion: May she who is without doubt greater than the cherubim and the 
seraphim, who ineffably gave birth unto God and transformed the curse upon 
mortals into blessing, be ever honored; for she is our hope.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
The sweat of thy labors, dripping down from thy flesh, was transformed into the 
sweet fragrance of myrrh, O most sacred Andronicus.  
Like a palm-tree of lofty stature, O father, thou didst flourish in the deserts, and 
didst bear as fruit for God the sweetest pangs of thy labors.  
With showers of tears thou didst bedew the land of the desert, showing thy soul to 
be fertile with the pangs of asceticism.  
Theotokion: Without leaving the Father’s bosom, the Lord dwelt within thy most 
pure womb, O Maiden, and hath restored the whole world.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
With songs let us all hymn Andronicus, ye faithful, and let us glorify Athanasia, his 
spouse.  
Thou didst in nowise give sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, as it is 
written, O Andronicus.  
Receiving thy labors as a right-acceptable offering, O blessed one, the Lord hath 
glorified thee with myrrh.  
Theotokion: Thou didst awesomely give birth to One of the Trinity, O Maiden, 
and didst feed with milk Him Who feedeth the nature of mortals.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
The weakness of thy nature in nowise hindered the recompense which thou didst 
receive for the pangs of thy suffering, O venerable Athanasia.  
Manifestly changing thy raiment, thou didst hide thy nature; wherefore, without 
wavering thou didst reach the end of the way of salvation.  
Recognizing thy husband as a traveler, thou didst follow him, in nowise uttering a 
word of conversation to him.  
Theotokion: We now offer thee the cry of Gabriel, O Maiden, crying out to thee: 
Rejoice! The Lord is with thee, O blessed one!  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable ones, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Taking the easy yoke of the Lord upon thy shoulders with all thy soul, thou didst 
follow after Him, O God-bearing Andronicus, and didst thoroughly despise the 
turmoil of the world, zealously making thine abode in the desert, where thou didst 
blamelessly finish the race of asceticism, O blessed father, uniting thyself to God. 
Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins 
unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Defending thyself with the power of the Spirit and the armor of the Cross, thou 
didst bring down, as though he were a foul bird, the author of evil, who of old 
boasted beyond measure that he would lay hold of all creation.  
Bearing thy cross upon thy shoulders, thou didst follow the Lord with all thy soul, 
and didst receive His divine glory, as a fulfiller of His commandments, O Andronicus.  
The grace of myrrh, which is ever poured forth for the faithful, revealeth thy 
boldness before the Lord, and is as fluid as water.  
Theotokion: That He might deify my nature, the most Perfect One, Who by His 
word brought forth all things, sustaining and strengthening them, ineffably became a 
babe and issued forth from thee, O pure one.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Watering the meadow of thy soul with streams of tears, thou didst reap the rich re-
ward of miracles.  
With the divine treatment of thy supplications, O favorite of the Lord, heal thou 
my soul, which hath been afflicted with the sores of my many offenses.  
Triadicon: O ye faithful, let us reverently hymn the beginningless and all-holy Trin-
ity, which hath brought all things into being from nonexistence.  
Theotokion: O Maiden, Daniel foresaw thee as an unquarried mountain from 
whence was cut the Stone Who hath crushed the temples of the idols.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Thou pourest forth the inexhaustible grace of myrrh and grantest release from 
illness to all who have recourse to thee with faith, O father Andronicus.  
Rejoicing, thou hast been translated from transitory things to the highest, making 
thine abode with the holy fathers. O father, be thou mindful of us who celebrate thy 
memory.  
Accept my hymnody, O venerable twain, and by your entreaty to God, grant me 
release from my transgressions, that He may thereby deliver me.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: Of old, the furnace which did not consume the three children 
prefigured thy womb, O pure Maiden; for thou didst receive the fire of the Godhead 
without being consumed.  
Stichera of the venerable ones, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”:  
Having set aside * the retribution of life, * having spurned wealth * and disdained 
fleeting pleasure, * ye took up the cross * like an easy yoke * and followed after 
Christ; * and have now wondrously made your abode in the resting-place of heaven. * 
Rejoicing therein, * be mindful of us who remember you faithfully * and with love 
and reverence celebrate ** your sacred and honored memory, O holy ones.  
Loving Thee, the Master, greatly, * with all their soul, * the ever-memorable 
couple * hastened after Thee; * and they rent asunder all beautiful things and 
unbreakable bonds * as though they were a spider’s web, * and thereby received Thy 
kingdom, O Immortal One. * Through their supplications, * O Compassionate One, 
* grant us cleansing from offenses, * and show us to be above the passions ** which 
ever trouble our souls, O Master.  
Ye were deprived * of your children’s loving companionship * through your great 
struggle, * remaining bereft of consolation in this life; * and ye uttered the cry * of the 
most valiant Job, exclaiming: * “The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away!” * 
Wherefore, ye did opportunely accomplish * the work ye desired * and have been 
shown to have joyfully passed over * to the most beloved holy places, ** O most 
sacred twain.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Rejoice, O tender root! * Rejoice, O divine staff of Aaron * which put forth the 
unfading Blossom, * O right fertile garden of paradise, * tree of life * blossoming 
forth from the root of Jesse, O pure Maiden, * and feeding mortals with the bread of 
understanding! * Rejoice, O most precious purple robe * of the King of all, O Bride 
of God, * radiant crown, * splendor of hierarchs! ** Rejoice, O only most pure one!  
Stavrotheotokion: When, of old, the unblemished ewe-lamb and immaculate 
Sovereign Lady, * beheld her Lamb * upon the tree of the Cross, * she exclaimed 
maternally, and marveling cried aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new 
and most strange sight I see? * How hath the thankless synagogue * betrayed Thee to 
the judgment-seat of Pilate * and condemned Thee to death, * Who art the Life of 
all? * Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, ** O Word!”  

--- PAGE 10 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III:  
O holy Apostle James * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins 
** unto our souls. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III.  
We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin Theotokos; 
* for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in the flesh * He had 
received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in that He is the Lover of 
mankind.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II:  
The glorious apostle pursued the nations, teaching the ends of the earth to 
worship Thee with the Father and the Spirit, O Christ God. For his sake establish 
Thou Thy Church, and send down thy blessing upon the faithful, O only Merciful 
Lover of mankind. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Through thee, O Ever-virgin Theotokos, * we have become partakers of the 
divine nature; * for thou hast given birth to God incarnate for our sake. ** 
Wherefore, as is meet we all reverently magnify thee.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Christ, the Sun of righteousness, emitted thee like a ray, enlightening the whole 
world, O glorious Apostle James; and with thy divine supplications thou dost ever 
illumine with the never-waning light of God, all who with faith celebrate thy holy 
memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O unashamed hope of those who place their trust in thee, O thou who alone 
supra-naturally gave birth to Christ our God in the flesh: With the holy apostles 
entreat Him, that He grant to the whole world, cleansing of sins and to all of us 
before the end, correction of life.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O apostle of Christ James, 
and we honor the pangs and labors wherewith thou didst struggle in the 
proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the 
work of His hands. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having caught reason-endowed fish in the net of divine words, thou didst bring 
them as first-fruits to our God; and desiring to be clothed in the wounds of Christ, 
thou didst show thyself to be an emulator of His sufferings. Wherefore, assembling as 
is meet, we honor thee, O glorious apostle, and cry out to thee together: Entreat 
Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy 
memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O most-pure Theotokos, * thou noetic portal of life, * deliver us who have 
recourse to thee in faith, * that we may glorify thy most holy birth giving, ** unto the 
salvation of our souls.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and 
their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN §67 (21 :15-25)  
At that time, Jesus showed Himself to His disciples, after He had risen from the 
dead, and saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou me more than these? 
He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed 
my lambs. He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou 
me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, 
Feed my sheep. He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou 
me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? And 
he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus 
saith unto him, Feed my sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, 
thou girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, 
thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither 
thou wouldest not. This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. 
And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, Follow me. Then Peter, turning 
about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast 
at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee? Peter seeing him saith to 
Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus saith unto him, if I will that he tarry till 
I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. Then went this saying abroad among 
the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall 
not die; but, if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?  

--- PAGE 12 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone IV:  
As an apostle and an initiate of the mysteries, as an excellent servant of the Master, 
the only Messiah, O all-praised and divine herald James, entreat Him to grant victory 
to our Orthodox hierarchs over all heresies, and cleansing from sins to those who 
celebrate thy most holy memory.  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclisis), with 6 Troparia; and that of 
the apostle, with 8 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor the soul of Alpheus, the 
disciple of Christ”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI:  
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
O James, disciple of Christ and seer of God, grant thy hand unto me who strives 
to praise thine honored feast, and by thy supplications shine forth light upon my 
heart.  
Watered with streams of divine wisdom, thou didst flow forth from the paradise of 
sweetness like a river, and hast truly and manifestly irrigated the face of the earth with 
torrents of piety.  
Thou hast been numbered among the most sacred choir of the disciples of Christ, 
O James, fulfilling the number twelve. Standing with them before the Master, be thou 
mindful of us.  
Theotokion: The Lord Who stretched out the sky and founded the earth hath 
revealed thee to us as an earthly heaven, O most pure Virgin, issuing forth from thee 
in the flesh.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth ..., 
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Manifestly receiving the radiance of the divine Spirit, thou didst reveal thyself to 
those in darkness as one splendid as the dawn, declaring to all the appearance of the 
noetic Sun.  
Dancing in a godly manner before the just and good King and treading the path to 
heaven, O blessed one, thou didst manifestly establish thy feet in righteousness.  
O James, thou didst have the beginningless Son of God, Who createth all things in 
His divine goodness, as thine instructor in the true mysteries, teaching thee the 
knowledge of the truth.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: O most pure Mary, thou hope of all who place their trust in thee, 
who hast given birth to the incarnate Word for our sake, deliver me from divers perils 
and misfortunes.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having the wisdom of thy teacher truly teaching thee things beyond 
understanding, thou didst render foolish the wisdom of the Greeks, O divinely 
inspired one; and thou wast a divine beacon to the nations, guiding the foolish with 
words of piety. Wherefore, delivered from delusion by thee, we hymn thee as is meet 
and faithfully call thee blessed, O divinely eloquent James. Entreat Christ God, that 
He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
O undefiled, blameless and all-immaculate Lady, thou cloud of the noetic Sun and 
golden candle-stand of the light of God: with the radiance of dispassion illumine my 
soul, which hath grown dim through the blindness of the passions, I pray; with 
torrents of compunction enlighten my polluted heart, and with tears of repentance 
cleanse me of the mire of my evil deeds, that with love I may cry out to thee: O Ever-
virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me forgiveness of my 
transgressions; for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope. 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
The Lord Himself, Who alone is holy, numbered thee among the honored choir of 
His disciples, O blessed one, foreseeing the honor and splendor of thy life.  
Full of the miracles of the divine Spirit, O herald of God, thou workest wonders, 
dispelling infirmities; and freeing all from the wickedness of the evil spirits.  
The effulgence of God which descended upon thy heart made it divinely radiant, 
O blessed one, and in a manner past understanding made it full of the gifts of the 
Spirit.  
 
Theotokion: Through thy divine birthgiving, O Virgin, the all-holy ranks of the 
angels have been united to the assemblies of mortals; for thou hast given birth to 
Christ the Savior, the Author of peace.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
As one who conversed with the noetic Sun, thou didst assimilate the rays thereof, 
O blessed one: And while He is by essence the primal Light, thou didst become a 
secondary luminary through grace, O glorious one.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Possessed of a most pure intelligence, and having acquired a radiant and pure 
heart, thou didst behold the incarnate God Who is incomprehensible to the mind.  
Every prophecy and every law inclineth toward thee, O most noetically rich 
disciple; for thou wast deemed worthy to see with thine own eyes Him Who of old 
was proclaimed by them.  
Theotokion: Behold, O Virgin, in accordance with the prophecy thou didst 
conceive in thy womb the Master and Lord Who is over all, and hast ineffably given 
birth to Him, O pure one, remaining an incorrupt virgin even after giving birth.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Thy beautiful feet truly proclaim the glad tidings of transcendent peace, and thy 
mind is excellent, O most honored disciple of Christ.  
Thou hast been deemed worthy to understand and preach the awesome mystery of 
the incarnation of God, O ever-memorable James, who hast received pristine rays of 
light from the Most High Himself.  
Shining with the splendors of ineffable light as is meet, O supreme apostle of 
Christ, do thou earnestly pray for those who celebrate thy most honorable memory, 
O glorious one.  
Theotokion: In that thou hast given birth to the good God Who hath dominion 
over all creation, O most pure one, do thou utterly remove the sores of mine 
offenses, rendering compassionate Him Who was born from thee.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”: 
With praises let us all bless the divine herald James, * who steadfastly instilled the 
dogmas of wisdom in the souls of the pious; * for, standing before the throne of the 
Master of glory, * he rejoiceth with all the angels, ** praying unceasingly for us all.  
Ikos: In so far as thou art the disciple and friend of Christ, and dost ever abide 
with the immaterial choirs, illumined with the light of the never-waning effulgence, do 
thou dispel the darkness of my mind, O all-blessed one, that I may hymn thy 
luminous memory, which all creation doth hymn, reverently celebrating today; for 
thou art the guide and beacon of all the faithful, O James, praying unceasingly on 
behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In Babylon the Children feared not the fiery furnace; * but cast into the 
midst of the flames * they were bedewed and sang: * ‘O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou.’ 

--- PAGE 15 ---
The multitude of the nations have thee as a divine seed illumined by the splendors 
and radiance of the Spirit; and it crieth aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Adorned with divinely given wisdom, thou didst destroy the wisdom of the world, 
O apostle, crying out with godly wisdom: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thy sound hath gone forth into all the earth like thunder, O Apostle James, 
proclaiming the incarnate Word to all lands, and preaching Him as is meet.  
Theotokion: Thou art holier than all the saints, O Virgin Mother, in that thou hast 
ineffably given birth to God; and hymning Him we all unceasingly cry aloud; O God 
of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Suffering affliction for the sake of the laws of their fathers, * the blessed 
Children in Babylon * scorned the foolish decree of the King. * Standing 
together in the midst of the flames, they remained unharmed, * and sang a 
song fitting for almighty God: * ‘O ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.’ 
Truly taught the mysteries of heaven as a sacred disciple, O blessed apostle, thou 
didst pass through the whole world, proclaiming the word of the Faith of Christ, and 
giving instruction through ineffable grace: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
As one rich and blessed, deemed worthy of all beatitude, as a converser and 
companion of the Master, enriched truly and well in his final portion, James chanted 
to the Lord in gladness: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
O blessed apostle, standing forth before the Savior as a most excellent intercessor 
for the world, ask that rich peace be granted from on high to the Churches, remission 
of sins to those who praise thee with faith and salvation for the souls of those who 
cry out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O only all-hymned Mother of God, thou hast been revealed to be the 
mediator of salvation for all, having given birth to God the Savior, the Word of God, 
Who hath delivered us from the ancient curse and given His blessing to those who 
cry aloud with faith: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Weep not for Me, O Mother, * beholding in the tomb the Son Whom 
thou hast conceived * without seed in the womb; * for I shall arise and shall be 
glorified, * and as God I shall exalt with glory unceasing, * those that with 
faith and love magnify thee. 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
O blessed one, thou hast appeared to the world like a flash of lightning, drawing 
those who from of old sat in the darkness and shadow of ignorance, toward the 
never-waning light of the incarnate only-begotten Son, Whose witness and true 
servant thou wast, and Whom we magnify.  
Receiving the breath of the tempest borne down from the heavens, and enriched 
by the Spirit’s tongue of fire, thou dost burn up the ungodly wisdom of the world like 
thorns, shining with the luminous rays of the proclamation of Christ, and dispelling 
the darkness, O divinely blessed one.  
O divinely eloquent Apostle James, accept the hymn of supplication which we 
offer to thee, celebrating Thy most honored and radiant memory. Deliver thy 
servants from their sins, O supreme apostle of Christ, praying earnestly, that we may 
magnify thee as is meet.  
Theotokion: In that thou didst receive the Word in thy womb without knowing a 
man, O most pure Virgin, thou didst remain incorrupt, giving birth for us to 
Emmanuel, Who is both God and man. Acknowledging Him as possessing two 
natures, we magnify thee.  
Exapostilarion of the holy apostle,  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
We acknowledge thee not as the son of Alpheus, but as the disciple of the Word, 
O James, glory of the apostles; for thou hast manifestly received the divine effulgence 
and the grace of miracles, driving away the infirmities of those who celebrate thy 
most sacred memory with faith. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
As thou hast compassion and great mercy, O all-immaculate Virgin Theotokos, 
look upon my lowliness, and dispel the storm of the passions and the assaults of grief; 
and deliver me from the fire of Gehenna by thy supplications, O pure one.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
With the rod of grace * didst thou lure all up from the depths of vanity, * O right 
wondrous James, * obedient to the command of the Master, * Who enlighteneth thy 
mind wholly, * and hath shown thee to be an apostle, * an honored and divine 
proclaimer * of His unapproachable divinity, ** O most blessed one. (Twice)  
The radiance of the Spirit * descended upon thee in the aspect of fire, * O blessed 
one, * and made a divine refuge within thee, * who with haste dost drive away the 
gloom of godlessness, * enlightening the world with the radiance of thine all-wise 
words, * O expounder of the mysteries, * adornment of the apostles, ** blessed 
eyewitness of Christ.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Illumining those who sat in the darkness of ignorance * with the lightning flashes 
of thy preaching, * O glorious one, * thou didst show them to be children of our God 
and Master * for the sake of their faith. * Thou didst emulate His sufferings and 
death, * and wast thereby an inheritor of glory, * as one wise and divinely eloquent, ** 
O disciple of the Truth.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Forsaking earthly things, thou didst follow after Christ, and signed with the 
inspiration of the Holy Spirit, wast sent by Him to the nations that had fallen into 
perdition, that thou mightest turn all mankind to the light of knowledge of God, and 
having completed the struggles of thy divine suffering and divers torments, thou didst 
commit thy soul unto Christ, O Apostle James. Him do thou entreat, O all-blessed 
one, that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
All my hope do I place in thee, O Mother of God. Keep me under thy protection.  
Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the holy apostle.  
Manifestly receiving the radiance of the divine Spirit, thou didst reveal thyself to 
those in darkness as one splendid as the dawn, declaring to all the appearance of the 
noetic Sun. (Twice) 
Dancing in a godly manner before the just and good King and treading the path to 
heaven, O blessed one, thou didst manifestly establish thy feet in righteousness.  
O James, thou didst have the beginningless Son of God, Who createth all things in 
His divine goodness, as thine instructor in the true mysteries, teaching thee the 
knowledge of the truth.  
Thy beautiful feet truly proclaim the glad tidings of transcendent peace, and thy 
mind is excellent, O most honored disciple of Christ.  
Thou hast been deemed worthy to understand and preach the awesome mystery of 
the incarnation of God, O ever-memorable James, who hast received pristine rays of 
light from the Most High Himself.  
Shining with the splendors of ineffable light as is meet, O supreme apostle of 
Christ, do thou earnestly pray for those who celebrate thy most honorable memory, 
O glorious one.  
Theotokion: In that thou hast given birth to the good God Who hath dominion 
over all creation, O most pure one, do thou utterly remove the sores of mine 
offenses, rendering compassionate Him Who was born from thee.  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III:  
O holy Apostle James * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins 
** unto our souls. 
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone II: 
With praises let us all bless the divine herald James, * who steadfastly instilled the 
dogmas of wisdom in the souls of the pious; * for, standing before the throne of the 
Master of glory, * he rejoiceth with all the angels, ** praying unceasingly for us all.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, § 131 (I COR. 4:9-16)  
Brethren: God hath sent forth us, the apostles, last, as it were appointed to death: 
for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools 
for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are 
honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and 
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain- dwelling-place; And 
labor, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we 
suffer it: Being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the 
off scouring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as 
my beloved sons I warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, 
yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the 
gospel. Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands. 
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §51 (10:16-21)  
The Lord said to His disciples: He that heareth you heareth Me; and he that 
despiseth you despiseth Me; and he that despiseth Me despiseth Him that sent Me. 
And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto 
us through Thy name. And He said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from 
heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over 
all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Not-
withstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather 
rejoice, because your names are written in heaven. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, 
and said, I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou hast hid these 
things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, 
Father; for so it seemed good in Thy sight.  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
