--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 4th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE VENERABLE PAUL THE SIMPLE, DISCIPLE OF THE 
VENERABLE ANTHONY THE GREAT  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel: “O marvelous wonder ...”: 
O wondrous Paul, * how like unto the angels thou didst live; * how thou didst 
humble thy soul like a babe; * how thou didst discomfit all the powers of Hades! * 
Thy patience was ineffable * and thy struggles glorious. * Entreat Christ God, O 
venerable one, ** on behalf of those who honor thy holy memory with love.  
Wondrous was thine obedience, O wise Paul, * whereby, borne aloft as on wings, * 
thou didst take flight in thy spirit, * attaining even unto the heavens, * where thou 
dost now abide in blessedness. * Pray thou unceasingly to Christ God * on behalf of 
those ** who honor thy holy memory with love.  
Having Christ dwelling within thy soul, O venerable one, * boldly didst thou say to 
Him: * On this place shall I remain immovable * until Thou dost obey me, O Jesus 
my Savior. * Wherefore, thou didst receive the fulfillment of thy petition in an instant, 
* and didst drive out an unclean spirit with authority. * Pray thou, O most marvelous 
wonderworker, ** for us who honor thy holy memory with love.  
 
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel: “Having set all aside ...,”: 
Heeding the Master’s voice * within thy soul * and having forsaken the world, * 
thou didst run after Him, * and emulated the angels, O blessed one, * abiding in the 
desert as one of the bodiless host * and emulating Christ Himself in obedience. * 
Wherefore, thou didst find, O most wise one, * recompense an hundredfold and 
eternal life. ** Pray thou on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI. 
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone III: 
Be glad, ye desert dwellers! Rejoice, ye venerable! Sing with the angels, ye 
righteous! Hold festival, ye monks and laymen! And leap-up in spirit, O great 
Anthony, beholding thy disciple exalted by God; Paul, wondrous in boldness, a 
mighty intercessor for the world.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone 8 :  
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Paul.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
ODE I  
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Come ye, and as is meet let us honor Paul, the lover of simplicity, the teacher of 
patience, and the instructor in humility.  
Most malicious Hades lamented, conquered by thee, O wondrous Paul, for by thy 
humility thou didst wound its head, O glorious one.  
Truly thou didst believe in the living God; wherefore, thou didst do most glorious 
things, healing afflictions and driving out demons by the blessed name of Christ, O 
Paul.  
Theotokion: Shining more radiantly than the sun in the beauty of thy virginity and 
revealing a dread wonder unto the world, thou art called the pure Mother of God. 
Wherefore, in fear and love we bow down before thee, O Theotokos and Queen.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
Thou didst arrive at the eleventh hour; yet, borne aloft on the chariot of divine 
love, thou didst ascend to the heavens of the virtues, O wondrous and most wise 
Paul.  
Desiring the honors of a more exalted rank, forsaking the world, as it were the 
land of Sodom, thou didst make haste to the mountain of the knowledge of God, in 
no wise looking back. Wherefore, thou didst escape the everlasting fire.  
Having the mind of Christ, O wondrous Paul, thou didst drive away all the 
cunningly wrought temptations of the devil by thy simplicity and obedience, repelling 
the enemy with that two-edged sword, and strengthening thy soul with unceasing 
prayer.  
Theotokion: O all-praised Virgin, unceasing boast of the desert dwellers, heartfelt 
hymn of those who keep silence: Be thou the salvation of us sinners!  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
His soul illumined with unwavering beams of light, the holy Paul said within 
himself: “Behold, evening approacheth; the day hath drawn to a close. Lo!, the 
eleventh hour of my life is come, and how is it that I strive but to work my field, 
when hitherto I have neglected to cultivate my soul? Wherefore, I shall make haste to 
follow after the disciples of Christ, fervently crying out to them: Receive me, O ye 
workers in the vineyard, that, having labored diligently, I may receive from the hands 
of the Lord the promised recompense and the image of the great King, Christ God, 
the Savior of our souls!”  

--- PAGE 3 ---
ODE IV  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Thou didst desire to reach the gates of heaven; therefore thou didst wait patiently 
at the gates of the great Anthony until he accepted thee as a disciple and fellow faster. 
Wherefore, thou dost abide with him in paradise.  
Acquiring the faith of Abraham, receiving in thine old age from God the promised 
fruit thereof, the gladness of life equal to that of the angels, thou didst mock all the 
wiles of the hater of mankind, O venerable father.  
Having drunk the cup of temptations more bitter than the waters of Marah, and 
loving the sweetness of the tree of the Cross with all thy heart, thou didst crucify 
thyself with Christ God in thine obedience. Wherefore, receiving gifts of grace from 
Him, thou hast wrought great and wondrous things.  
Theotokion: We hymn thee who didst reveal the fulfillment of the images and 
shadows, who didst give birth without corruption to the Expectation of our fathers 
and forefathers, O Virgin Theotokos.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
Adorned with gray hairs of radiant beauty, thou didst reckon thyself to be a witless 
disciple, being an elder in wisdom, but a child in simplicity. Wherefore, astounding all 
by thine obedience, O Paul, thou hast illumined the world as a beacon of virtue.  
Thou didst will to tread the narrow path and didst dry up the sources of the 
passions by the cutting off of thy will, shining forth in purity of heart like the sun, O 
right glorious Paul.  
Though thou didst reach the evening of thy life, yet, illumined with the unwaning 
light of the Spirit, without hesitation thou didst find the way of truth; and washing 
away thy spiritual blindness in the Siloam of life in the desert, thou didst with pure 
eyes gaze upon Christ, the Sun of righteousness.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O light and dwelling place of the Light! Rejoice, star that hast 
shone forth from Jacob! With the unwaning rays of thy mercy, O Theotokos, ever 
illumine thy servant.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thou didst remain harmless as a dove, and vanquished the ancient ruler of this 
world by thy simplicity and transcendent wisdom, banishing his foul servants to the 
abyss, and delivering Christians from them by thy prayer, O blessed one.  
Setting aright the crime of Adam and emulating the obedience of Christ, thou 
didst make thyself an heir of paradise and a partaker of the tree of life through the 
cutting off of self-will, and didst put to shame the most wicked counsel of the 
serpent.  
As a precious vessel of divine gifts and a resplendent abode of the Holy Spirit, 
hath Christ, the Judge of the contest, made thee manifest, O Paul; Him do thou 
unceasingly entreat, that, through thy supplications, He save our souls. 
Theotokion: O, how we have been subject to vanity! O, how we have been 
reckoned with those who are bereft of hope! How we have become servants of 
corruption, and have forgotten thee, our Lady! Forsake not us who are perishing and 
who call upon thee, the most pure Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Forsaking the crooked paths of the sin-loving world, * thou didst run with steps of 
obedience after Christ; * being an elder thou didst humble thyself as an infant; * 
wherefore, thou hast entered into the kingdom of heaven * in accordance with the 
Master’s word; * for which cause we cry aloud to thee: * Rejoice, O faithful servant of 
the Lord! * Rejoice, beacon of the virtues! ** Rejoice, O Paul, our venerable father!  
Ikos: Making thyself a disciple of Anthony, the wise instructor of monks, thou 
hast become an instructor for all who wish to live in sanctity; taught genuine 
simplicity by babes, thou dost show thyself to young and old as an image of 
transcendent wisdom; emulating the angels in thy life, thou hast received from God 
great power over the demons. Wherefore, hymning thy memory with love, we cry 
out: Rejoice, O faithful servant of the Lord! Rejoice, beacon of the virtues! Rejoice, O 
Paul, our venerable father!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
Like unto the pillar of fire, thy prayers reached to the heavens, O holy one, 
consuming the prince of the powers of the air, illumining all the world, and protecting 
us from misfortune.  
Not bowing down to the golden image of fleshly pleasure, but worshipping the tri-
hypostatic God in spirit, thou didst offer unceasing prayer unto Him. Wherefore, He 
Who is blessed and most glorious, Christ, hath united thee to Himself, O Paul.  
O, the wondrous humility and great patience! O, the Christ-like obedience! O, the 
divine gifts which thou didst reveal, O right laudable Paul! Marveling thereat, let us 
supremely bless and glorify Christ, as the Bestower thereof.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: From the divine lips of Jesus thou didst hear of their adoption, 
standing at the foot of His Cross, O Theotokos; therefore, by thine intercession 
deliver them from temptations, covering them with thy precious omophorion.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Accustomed to obedience and boundless abstinence, thou didst extinguish the 
flame of the passions, O Paul, and delighting in the coolness of dispassion thou didst 
cry out to Christ God: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Like an eagle in flight thou didst soar to the heavens in spirit, gazing fearlessly 
upon Christ, the Sun of righteousness, and revealing thy desires to Him in thy purity 
of heart; wherefore, quickly receiving the fulfillment thereof, thou didst cry out in 
thanksgiving: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
O most simple, most wise, most obedient, guileless, very patient Paul our father, 
what shall we call thee? With what manner of praises shall we praise thee? Yet in the 
compunction of our hearts let us cry out to Christ Who hath glorified thee: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Dispel from us the slumber of the eyes of our hearts, O Theotokos; 
free thou our mind which is held captive by sin; and sanctify our lips, that we may 
unceasingly cry out to thy Son and God: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Wondrous are thy works, O venerable father; and wondrous was thy life. 
Wherefore, celebrating thy memory with love and invoking thy name in prayer, we 
magnify thy struggles.  
Thou art a servant that hath entered into the joy of thy Lord; thou art a partaker of 
everlasting life; thou hast boldness, O father; wherefore, entreat the consubstantial 
Trinity on behalf of us who glorify thee with all our soul.  
Boldly standing before the throne of God, O Paul, remember those who honor 
thy memory and hymn thy struggles with love, that with thankful lips we may ever 
magnify thee.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, the strength of martyrs and patience of the venerable, 
the dominion of kings and exalted boast of virgins, the helper of Christians: 
commending our life to thine intercession, we magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
After the Exapostilarion. Glory ..., and this of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Come, ye who have forsaken the tumult of cities and towns, and let us make haste 
to the desert to see a wondrous and righteous man, a beacon of the virtues, who 
shone forth in simplicity and obedience, and acquired great boldness before Christ; 
and falling prostrate before him, let us cry aloud: Remember us at the throne of God, 
O thrice blessed father!  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone 8 :  
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Paul.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Forsaking the crooked paths of the sin-loving world, * thou didst run with steps of 
obedience after Christ; * being an elder thou didst humble thyself as an infant; * 
wherefore, thou hast entered into the kingdom of heaven * in accordance with the 
Master’s word; * for which cause we cry aloud to thee: * Rejoice, O faithful servant of 
the Lord! * Rejoice, beacon of the virtues! ** Rejoice, O Paul, our venerable father!  
 
