--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 4th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR HIEROTHEUS,  
BISHOP OF ATHENS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Receiving the grace of the all-holy Spirit, * O all-glorious Hierotheus, * thou hast 
now passed through all the earth, * teaching all to worship the Unity in three 
Hypostases: * the beginningless Father, * the Source of the Godhead, * and with Him 
the Son Who is co-enthroned and consubstantial with the Father, * Who was born of 
the Virgin ** and became a man bearing flesh.  
As one pleasing to God * thou didst offer up thy soul * as a sacred and divine gift, 
* and didst commit thy sacred body as a thing divine, * which halloweth the souls * of 
those who believe in God Almighty, * and poureth forth salvation upon the faithful. * 
Wherefore, we bless thy memory and burial, ** we love thy miracles and proclaim thy 
words.  
Thou didst behold * the twelve apostles * at the dormition of the most glorious 
Ever-virgin, * the most pure Theotokos, the Mother of the Lord, * and with thee was 
Dionysius, * who described the hierarchies. * With them we, the faithful, bless * thy 
most festive and most holy solemnity, ** O glorious Hierotheus.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
When thou wast present at the divine dormition of the Mother of God, O blessed 
herald of God, thou didst gladden the hearts of the faithful with divine 
proclamations, delighting the sacred company of the apostles, the preachers of God, 
and hymning the mysteries of God with divine ecstasy. Wherefore, having received 
boldness before Christ, O hierarch Hierotheus, pray thou on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb * beheld her Lamb * willingly 
led as a man to the slaughter, * she said, weeping: * “Dost Thou now hasten to leave 
me childless who gave Thee birth O Christ,? * What is this that Thou hast done, O 
Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine extreme goodness, * which 
is beyond understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of mankind!”  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Having learned goodness and been watchful in all things, * arrayed, as befitteth a 
priest, in a good conscience, * thou didst draw forth ineffable things from the chosen 
vessel; * and, having kept the Faith, thou didst complete a course like unto his. ** O 
hieromartyr Hierotheus, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos; and the canon of the holy hieromartyr, with 4 
Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “We honor thy luminous memory, O all-blessed 
one”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Having Paul, the disciple of the Master of the mysteries of heaven, the fisher of 
the world, as thy teacher, O God-pleaser, thou didst become a student of the highest 
vision.  
The tongue of Paul, manifestly moved by the Spirit to declare the mysteries of 
God, embraced thee, O blessed one, making thee a divine herald.  
Pierced through by the love of the Spirit, and noetically conversing with the 
Master with divine words, O most sacred one, thou didst set down sacred discourses.  
Theotokion: As thou wast a receptacle of the eternal Light of the divine 
magnificence, O pure Virgin Lady, remove from me the defilement and stain of every 
sin.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Having assembled with gladness, we all honor thee as a sacred recorder of 
hallowed words, proclaiming the word of piety, and glorifying thy sacred memory.  
Reaching out to the Master of all with might and authority, and divine love, O 
most blessed one, thou didst illumine thy mind with His radiance, enlightening thy 
soul.  
True to thy name, thou didst show thyself to be a sacred, godly, holy and divinely 
wise offering to the Almighty Creator of the ages, adorning the Church of heaven.  
Theotokion: He Who stretched out the heavens and holds together earthly things 
was held by thine arms in the flesh, and in the fullness of His divine nature, and hath 
shown thee to be the confirmation of all the faithful.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”:  
Taught by thee things strange and ineffable, we praise thee, the hierarch of Athens; 
for thou hast been shown to be a God-pleasing composer of hymns. Pray thou, O all-
blessed Hierotheus, that we be delivered from every sinful fall, that we may cry aloud: 
Rejoice O divinely wise father!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
Having instructed thy mind with the words of the apostles and shepherded the 
gatherings of the faithful, O venerable, thou didst offer thyself as a pure sacrifice to 
the King and Creator Who became incarnate for us of the Virgin Theotokos, O 
Hierotheus, and didst confess His resurrection in glory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
O fervent and invincible intercessor, * diligent and unashamed hope, * rampart, 
protection and haven * of those who have recourse to thee, * O pure Ever-virgin do 
thou, together with the angels, * entreat thy Son and God, ** that He grant peace, 
salvation and great mercy to the world.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee suspended on the Cross between two thieves 
of Thine own will, O Christ, Thy Mother, her womb rent asunder maternally, said: 
“O my sinless Son, how is it that Thou art unjustly nailed to the Cross like a 
malefactor, desiring to give life to the human race, in that Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
With divine proclamations thou didst adorn the choirs of the faithful and gladden 
the sacred assembly of the apostles, O divinely wise Hierotheus, divinely wondrous in 
thine activity and chanting: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
In every way didst thou wholly dedicate thyself to God O blessed one, 
approaching him in the sacred discourses of theology, pleasing Him in thy sanctity as 
a divine hymnographer, and manifest in sanctity as a wise herald of God, as rationally 
discerned by us here present.  
Now most clearly beholding in the most true divine vision of the effulgence, 
things divine and more sacred than all transitory indistinct images and shadows on the 
earth, O father, pray thou, that they be saved who chant with faith: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lover of mankind!  
Theotokion: O most pure and all-blessed one, who art adorned with the splendors 
of virginity; thou hast given birth to the infinite God Who became finite within thy 
womb, wherefore, we all truly praise thee, the Theotokos, and glorify thy birthgiving.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
In that thou dwellest together with the assembly of the angels, O father, and with 
them thou didst stand at the divine dormition of her who gave birth to the Bestower 
of life for us, the most holy and pure Mother of God, O divinely eloquent one.  
Having supra-naturally understood as an elder the visions of the Word, O all-
blessed one, thou didst confess Him to all who with faith accepted His effulgence and 
thy visionary theology, that they who love most valiantly might understand them.  
Radiant with the exceedingly rich beams of the supra-natural effulgence, and with 
the assurance of divine revelations, in purity thou didst undergo many transitory trials, 
and through vision learn things most wise and divine.  
Theotokion: Without knowing a man, O Virgin Maiden, through thy virginal blood 
thou didst conceive the Word Who is infinite in the essence of His divinity and 
became a man for the sake of mankind, taking form in a manner transcending all 
telling, law and nature.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Having mastered divine knowledge through divine studies, O father, thou hast 
manifestly left thy discourses as secondary words of sacred knowledge, illumining our 
souls.  
Truly blessed wast thou in thy purified soul, O divinely blessed Hierotheus, and 
thou didst love blessedness, thy one desire, and the beauties of the Savior.  
Gazing upon the most pure rays of divine splendor shining with noetic brilliance, 
O God-pleasing and blessed one, thou wast shown to share in their delight and 
radiance.  
Theotokion: In a true and regal manner we glorify thee, O Theotokos, for thou 
didst ineffably give birth to God, Who hypostatically united Himself to the flesh, O 
most holy Mother and Virgin.  
Kontakion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”:  
In that thou wast an unshakable pillar, O Hierotheus, * thou wast not afraid of the 
threats of the enemy, * but, hurled like a precious stone, * didst destroy the fortress of 
delusion, O father. * Wherefore, with His life-giving and divine right hand * the 
Master crowneth thee who hadst battled well. ** Him do thou entreat on behalf of us 
all.  
Ikos: Submitting to Thy law, O Christ, Thy disciples, proclaiming the word of Thy 
divine coming to all the nations, and ordained for all the Churches faithful pastors 
and preachers. Wherefore, Thou didst ordain also this pastor, whom Thou didst 
choose from childhood; and having enlightened him for Thyself as one blameless, 
Thou didst appoint him for this and assigned to him Thy flock, revealing him who 
prayeth for us all as a witness to Thy kingdom.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Through purity of life thou didst strive to see the holy of holies, O divinely blessed 
one, and didst wisely acquire the highest vision of God; and, chanting, thou didst cry 
out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
The sound of thy words and the eloquence of thy writings gladden those who 
honor thee with love, and instruct them in hymnody, teaching them to cry aloud: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst bless the unity of the Godhead which is known as a Trinity of 
Hypostases and is hymned in three hypostases, O divinely wise one; and, chanting, 
thou didst cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Transcending the laws of nature, O pure Virgin Mother, thou hast 
given birth to Him Who hath dominion over all things, visible and invisible, to 
Whom we chant together, crying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
The almighty activity of the Holy Spirit, making its abode within thy most pure 
soul, showed thee to be a God-pleasing preacher and divine herald hymning the 
Redeemer in sanctity and praising Him with faith: Ye priests hymn; ye people 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Having examined the ineffable structures of the mysteries of Christ with pious 
examination, thou didst clearly elucidate them with thy lofty eloquence and the most 
sweet composition of thy proclamations, crying out unceasingly: Ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Most noetically rich grace filled thee with divine inspiration and theology; 
wherefore thou hast poured forth doctrines like rivers, gladdening the choirs of the 
apostles, with whom thou now dost chant: Ye priests hymn; ye people supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
 
Theotokion: O most pure one who supra-naturally hast given birth to God, Who 
is able to give life to all things, raise up my soul, which hath been slain by sins and 
hath been harmed by the venomous sting of the serpent, yet crieth out: Ye children 
bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
As a lover of the most wise wisdom, thou hast now received, rejoicing, the 
magnificent crown of grace therefrom; and as thou art a member of the heavenly 
choir which leapeth before the Creator of all, pray thou, that those who praise thee 
may be saved from misfortunes, O Hierotheus.  
Thou hast made thine abode in the divine courts on high and inherited the 
everlasting mansions, and now holdest festival with the armies of the angels and the 
ranks of the apostles, with whom thou rejoicest in gladness. And, dwelling together 
with them, ask divine peace for those who honor thee with faith.  
Receiving excellent rewards, thou didst acquire their manifestation on earth, gazing 
toward God with constant love, O father Hierotheus. And now do thou earnestly 
pray, that He grant mercy and cleansing to those who with faith celebrate thy radiant 
and most sacred memory.  
Theotokion: As the Mother of the Creator of all, with thy maternal boldness 
beseech thy Son, that He save thy captive servants from the violence of tyrants, set at 
naught the slanders of the wicked, and grant peace and salvation unto those who 
hymn thee.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hieromartyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Thou didst make that which is worse subject to that which is higher, O God-
pleaser, all-wisely setting thy mind to oversee the passions. Wherefore, O Hierotheus, 
thou wast an instrument of theology and an apostle of Christ. O wise hierarch, pray 
thou for the world.  
Theotokion: Arriving at thy most pure dormition with the rest of the apostles, 
Hierotheus chanted a hymn to thee, the Maiden, divinely beholding in ecstasy what is 
strange and ineffable, in that He is truly pleasing to God. O Virgin Mother of God, 
show us also to be emulators of him.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Having learned goodness and been watchful in all things, * arrayed, as befitteth a 
priest, in a good conscience, * thou didst draw forth ineffable things from the chosen 
vessel; * and, having kept the Faith, thou didst complete a course like unto his. ** O 
hieromartyr Hierotheus, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
ODE III: Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII: 
Taught by thee things strange and ineffable, we praise thee, the hierarch of Athens; 
* for thou hast been shown to be a God-pleasing composer of hymns. * Pray thou, O 
all-blessed Hierotheus, that we be delivered from every sinful fall, ** that we may cry 
aloud: Rejoice O divinely wise father!  
ODE VI: Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
In that thou wast an unshakable pillar, O Hierotheus, * thou wast not afraid of the 
threats of the enemy, * but, hurled like a precious stone, * didst destroy the fortress of 
delusion, O father. * Wherefore, with His life-giving and divine right hand * the 
Master crowneth thee who hadst battled well. ** Him do thou entreat on behalf of us 
all.  
 
