--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 1st DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE ANANIAS OF THE SEVENTY  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER  
ROMANUS THE MELODIST  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy apostle, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
When, at the command of the Most High, * Saul was blinded * and held fast in 
darkness, * he came unto thee, * begging divine cleansing, * O thou who hadst 
received divine illumination; * then, as a wise hierarch, O all-blessed one, * thou didst 
make a son by adoption through baptism, * him who later adopted the whole world. * 
Wherefore, we bless thee with him * as an apostle of Christ, * O divinely wise 
Ananias: ** Pray ye, that we be saved!  
Having most gloriously learned things divine, * thundering forth, O blessed one, * 
awakening those sleeping in the graves of vanity, * who cast off mortality; * thou 
didst sound the trumpet * of the saving Word of God, * Who dwelt among mortals * 
and transformed * those held fast in Hades, * whom thou didst make into precious 
vessels * of Jesus the Master * and Savior of our souls, ** Who hath slain death.  
As a bearer of light, * and a preacher of God, * as a divinely chosen witness * to 
the sufferings of Christ * and a fellow heir and partaker * of the glory which is to 
come, * thou dost abide with the Master, * ever delighting in the effulgence which 
floweth forth * from the never-waning Light, * O divinely eloquent Ananias, * by thy 
supplications * deliver from dark misfortunes ** those who now celebrate thy 
splendid feast.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
The melodious harp * of the Spirit of God, * the nightingale, the cicada chanting 
divine hymns, * the flute of the Church, * hath set forth his melodious compositions 
before us all, ** gladdening thereby the divinely wise.  
The most radiant and luminous beacon, * the sweet-sounding harp * which hath as 
strings the goodly significant words of the Spirit, * doth chant, manifestly teaching the 
ends of the earth * to glorify with never-ceasing hymnody, ** the one effulgence of 
the Godhead.  
Having acquired boldness before the Master of all * and standing now, before 
Him, O father, * pray thou, that we who celebrate thy memory * and thy splendid 
festival * be delivered from misfortunes and perils, ** O divinely blessed Romanus.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., of the holy apostle, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone I: 
Instructed by a revelation from God, in that thou art an eyewitness of the Word 
and an initiate the mysteries of His wonders, thou didst enlighten the Apostle Paul, 
the chosen vessel and great receptacle of the Spirit, as an apostle before the disciples 
and a faithful observer of the new covenant, O venerable one. Wherefore, emulating 
Christ thy Teacher, thou didst shed thy blood, O Ananias, hierarch of Christ, 
becoming a confessor by suffering martyrdom. And, having finished thy course and 
kept the faith inviolate, thou dwellest now in the highest with the heavenly ministers 
of God. Pray thou, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Standing before the Cross of thy Son and God, * and beholding 
His long-suffering, O pure Mother, * thou didst say, weeping: * “Woe is me, O my 
Child most sweet! * How is it that Thou dost suffer unjustly, O Word of God, ** that 
Thou mightest save mankind?”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, and an additional Sticheron for 
the apostle, in Tone IV:  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  
Covered with stones as with flowers, O Apostle Ananias, thou didst show thyself 
to be a receptacle of sufferings, and shed thy blood for Him Who of His own will 
suffered in the flesh for our sake. Wherefore, Damascus boasteth of thy sacred 
festival today, and not it alone, but all the lands of the world; and manifestly 
proclaiming thy miracles, it crieth aloud: Pray thou to God, that He grant us 
forgiveness of our sins!  
Glory ..., of the venerable one, in Tone VI: 
Thou didst show thyself to be a first-offering of good works, a starting-point of 
salvation, O Romanus our father; for, composing angelic hymns, thou didst show thy 
life to be godly. Entreat Christ God, that He deliver from perils and tribulations those 
who hymn thee.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
 Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, she who gave Thee birth cried out: “What is this 
strange mystery which I behold, O my Son? How is it that Thou diest, suspended in 
the flesh on the tree, O Bestower of life?”  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Ananias, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins ** unto our souls 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Romanus.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia;  
and two canons for the saints, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy apostle, the acrostic whereof is: “Let the glory of Ananias be 
glorified” The composition of John the monk, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
O all ye faithful, let us open mouths of praise, and let us make radiant our tongues 
in commemorating the archpastor Ananias; and with him let us chant unto our God.  
The most glorious Ananias led the Church of Damascus to Christ, the most pure 
Bridegroom, as an undefiled bride. With her let us chant aloud to our God.  
Thou wast an original disciple, O Ananias; and didst restore the sight of the new 
disciple who before was a persecutor; and thou dost sing: Let us chant unto our God!  
Theotokion: The ranks of the angels and the generations of mortals unceasingly 
praise thee, O Mother who knewest not wedlock; for thou didst bear their Creator in 
Thine arms as a babe.  
Canon of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
By thy supplications, O wise and godly Romanus, send down upon us radiant 
beams of light from the heavens, that we may praise thy sacred memory with hymns.  
Offering thyself wholly unto Christ from thy youth, O Romanus, thou didst follow 
after Him, enlightening thy mind with luminous radiance from the heavens.  
Adorned with the beauty of the all-accomplishing and Holy Spirit, O wise 
Romanus, thou hast been revealed to the ends of the earth to be like a luminous star 
shining with the radiance of the virtues.  
Theotokion: From thee did the co-beginningless Word of God issue forth in latter 
times, O Theotokos; uplifting Adam, the first man, to salvation.  
ODE III 
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Following the commands of thy Teacher, O apostle, thou didst become a high 
priest and a martyric sacrifice.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
By thy supplications, O Apostle Ananias, render the Redeemer well-disposed to be 
merciful to those who hymn thee.  
When He appeared to thee, His face enshrouded in ineffable light, the Lord 
restrained all the savagery of the wild beast.  
Theotokion: All of us Christians have acquired thee as our refuge and bulwark; and 
we glorify thee unceasingly, O thou who knewest not wedlock.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Full of the true knowledge of piety and pouring forth divine preaching, thy mind 
became the dwelling-place of the Holy Trinity, O wise Romanus.  
Chanting divine hymns, thy precious tongue gushed forth torrents of streams, 
wisely explaining to us Christ’s ineffable nativity from the Virgin.  
Behold, thou dost lavishly nurture our thoughts with wise teachings and beautiful 
hymns; and thou dost fill them with most divine sweetness, O godly eloquent 
Romanus.  
Theotokion: Thou art more exalted than all the armies of heaven, O Virgin; for 
thou didst conceive their Creator, the Son of God, in thy womb, and, even after 
giving birth, remained ever virgin.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Adorned from childhood with the godly virtues of the Spirit, * O most wise 
Romanus, thou wast a most precious adornment of the Church of Christ; * for thou 
hast adorned it with most beauteous hymnody. Wherefore, we entreat thee: * Grant 
thy divine gift unto those who desire it, that we may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O 
most blessed father, thou beauty of the Church!  
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Enlightened by the knowledge of God, O Ananias, thou wast a priest and martyr 
of Jesus and a divine apostle. And having immersed in water the former persecutor 
Saul, who had been blinded by God, through deifying instruction thou didst show 
him to be a great enlightener of our souls. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Entreat 
Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love honor thy holy 
memory.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
Planted like a tree by the rippling waters of fasting, O blessed father, through 
God’s labor thou didst produce the fruits of thy pangs, which in time thou didst 
present to the Husbandman and Creator. Wherefore, we hymn thy holy memory, 
honoring thee, O venerable Romanus.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V:  
O fervent and invincible intercessor, * diligent and unashamed hope, * rampart, 
protection and haven * of those who have recourse to thee, * O pure Ever-virgin do 
thou, together with the angels, * entreat thy Son and God, ** that He grant peace, 
salvation and great mercy to the world.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee suspended on the Cross between two thieves 
of Thine own will, O Christ, Thy Mother, her womb rent asunder maternally, said: 
“O my sinless Son, how is it that Thou art unjustly nailed to the Cross like a 
malefactor, desiring to give life to the human race, in that Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV 
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Instructed by Thee, O Christ, the ever-memorable Ananias vanquished death in 
martyrdom and received honors from Thee.  
Thou wast a disciple of the persecuted Word, O ever-memorable Ananias, and the 
teacher of him who persecuted the pious.  
To the blinded Saul the Lord revealed thee, who wast hiding, O Ananias, and He 
showed thee forth as the mediator of his healing.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, entreat God, to Whom thou hast given birth, 
that He deliver all who hymn thee from every evil circumstance.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Thou wast a receptacle of the divine Spirit, O Romanus, and a fire-breathing 
mouth proclaiming divine hymns, delighting the souls of those who have recourse to 
thee.  
Thou wast like a heavenly harp and lyre, drawing every mind to thyself by thine all-
telling and beautiful hymns.  
The grace of the all-accomplishing and most holy Spirit wafted forth and dwelt in 
thy radiant soul, O all-famed one, and made thee a receptacle and wise herald of God.  
Theotokion: The serpent poured forth venom into the ears of our first mother; 
but thou, O pure one, hast shaken him off, having conceived Christ at the cry of the 
archangel and given birth unto Him.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
He Who in His mercy rested within thee, in that thou wast a right manifest 
apostle, O blessed Ananias, showed thee to be an ever-flowing fountain, a divine 
haven for the tempest-tossed, and a beam of light, rendered by the unapproachable 
Light, for those in darkness.  
He Who seeth hidden things and knoweth all things even before they come into 
being revealed to thee the hidden sun who before was a persecutor, but then became 
an apostle of the truth, which but a short time before he had sought to destroy.  
Unfathomable is the end of the attainment of thy dispensation; for thereby, O 
Savior, hath dread death been annihilated. Wherefore, Ananias, rejoicing, was slain for 
Thee as a victorious hierarch.  
Theotokion: As thou hast maternal boldness before thy Son, O most pure one, 
spurn not the thought of thy kinship with us, we pray; for thee alone do we Christians 
set before the Master, that He mercifully purify us.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
The grace of the Comforter, finding thee, O divinely wise Romanus, to be as a 
right magnificent sanctuary, a most pure vessel, made thee a temple adorned with 
light; and thou didst rejoice.  
Appearing to thee at night, the Ever-virgin, who truly gave birth to the incarnate 
Son of God, illumined thy soul and filled thy mind with divine understanding.  
Revealing thyself to all as most truly sweet through the writings of thy sacred 
words, O ever-memorable one, thou dost gladden all, illumining our mind and 
teaching to all the knowledge of the Savior.  
Theotokion: O pure, most pure Lady, who hast given birth to the Light, the eternal 
Word of the Father, by thy luminous supplications enlighten my mind and dispel the 
darkness of my soul.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Accustomed to serving the living God, O most sacred Ananias, thou didst destroy 
the manifold enmity of the mindless ones, teaching all to worship the one Godhead 
in three Hypostases.  
Taking the rudder of the Church in thy hands, thou didst move toward Christ, the 
Helmsman, O apostle Ananias; and with the Spirit steered it like a divine ship.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
O Master, Thou fashioner of the straight path, Thou didst command Thy glorious 
disciple to set out straightway to find the Thy most righteous and elect vessel of 
prayer.  
Theotokion: May we be delivered from grievous transgressions by thine entreaties, 
O pure Birthgiver of God; and may we obtain the divine effulgence of the Son of 
God Who became ineffably incarnate through thee, O most pure one.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Filled with enlightenment, and led by God up to the heights of the virtues, thou 
didst reject all earthly things, and became a heavenly pillar and beacon of piety.  
Thou didst cause the desires of the flesh to wither away, adorning thy soul with 
the most radiant beams of purity, and didst array thy comely beauty in the 
magnificence of the virtues.  
Hating transitory, vain, corrupt and fleeting pleasure, thou didst enter the temple 
of the Theotokos, and there didst sanctify thy mind, soul and body, O right glorious 
one.  
Theotokion: All the prophets, foreseeing with divine vision Thy most immaculate 
nativity from the Virgin, which would take place splendidly on earth in the latter 
times, O my Christ, manifestly proclaimed it.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “In supplications ...”: 
O Ananias, helper most fervent in supplications * and speedy heeder of those who 
petition thee, * accept our entreaty, * and beg Christ to have mercy upon us, ** for 
He alone doth rest in the saints.  
Ikos: Illumining the darkness and blindness of my heart with the light of Thine 
effulgence, O my Christ, grant me discourse, that with a pure mind I may praise the 
divinely radiant virtues and sufferings of the blessed apostle; for Thou art the Well-
spring of wisdom and the Bestower of good things, O greatly Compassionate One. 
Wherefore, having enlightened my tongue, accept this laudation in hymnody, O Thou 
Who alone dost rest in the saints.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Let the divinely chosen flock wisely blow the clarion-voiced trumpet, sounding 
forth the sufferings of the shepherd Ananias, and crying out to Christ, his Chief 
Shepherd: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Let the honored Church of Christ glorify thee, O Ananias, as the disciple of God, 
a faithful hierarch and a witness to the divine Passion, crying aloud: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Concealing himself, not out of fear of death, but out of love for thy flock, seeing 
the wolf become as tame as a lamb, Ananias cried out: O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Theotokion: Thou didst reveal Thyself, O Christ, incarnate from the Virgin’s 
womb for our salvation. Wherefore, knowing Thy Mother to be the Theotokos, we 
cry out in an Orthodox manner: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: In Babylon the Children feared not the fiery furnace; * but cast into the 
midst of the flames * they were bedewed and sang: * ‘O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou.’ 
Thou didst have Mary the Theotokos as thy tutor, instructing and teaching thee, 
and commanding thee to chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Thou didst shine forth in the world like the most radiant sun, O divinely wise 
Romanus, radiantly illumining those who cry out with faith: Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
God of our fathers!  
The sound of thy words hath filled the whole world and taught all to chant with 
comeliness unto Christ: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Now do all the generations of mankind call thee blessed as thou didst 
foretell, O pure Theotokos; and with faith they render thee glory, crying: Blessed is 
the Fruit of thy womb, O most pure one!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
The glorious Ananias expected to hear something terrible about the predatory 
power of the destroyer of Thy flock, O Master, but when he heard of his inexplicable 
conversion into a shepherd, he leapt for joy, crying aloud: Ye children bless; ye priests 
hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Let Thine all-glorious and blessed city rejoice today and leap up in the Spirit, 
having received thy goodly help, O glorious one; and, giving thanks to the Savior, let 
it cry: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
At the command of the Bestower of light, O all-honored Ananias, thou didst 
preach to Saul the light-creating power of Him Whom he had seen; and thou didst 
restore his sight, touching him with thy healing hands, and didst remove the darts of 
the serpent as though they were scales, crying: supremely Exalt Christ throughout the 
ages!  
Triadicon: The thrice-radiant Godhead, the single luminous Effulgence which 
doth emanate from the one nature in three Hypostases - the beginningless Father, the 
Word Who shareth the same nature as the Father, and the consubstantial Spirit Who 
reigneth with Them - Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O all-holy Lady, who savest those in need and intercedest fervently, 
take pity on all in grief, save me and raise me up who have fallen grievously, 
extending to me a helping hand before the end, that the night of death not overtake 
me as I sleep, that I may glorify thee as is meet throughout the ages.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Suffering affliction for the sake of the laws of their fathers, * the blessed 
Children in Babylon * scorned the foolish decree of the King. * Standing 
together in the midst of the flames, they remained unharmed, * and sang a 
song fitting for almighty God: * ‘O ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.’ 
Rejecting all the beauty, sweetness and glory of the world, thou didst cause thy 
soul to soar up to the choirs on high, to the glories and splendors of heaven, to 
ineffable beauties, to the habitations of paradise, to the light of the Godhead, crying 
out, O wise one: Thee do we supremely exalt O Christ, throughout the ages!  
Set afire with divine desire, thou didst make ascents in thy heart and didst acquire 
an incorporeal life while yet in the flesh. And emulating the angelic ranks, O wise one, 
even while in the world thou didst love the hymnody of heaven, O Romanus, crying 
out with faith: Thee do we supremely exalt, O Christ, throughout the ages!  
With the exalted tone of thy divine and most sweet discourses, O most blessed 
Romanus, thou dost gladden every thought of men, dost delight them as thou wert a 
server of rich foods, dost enlighten them with splendor and teachest them to cry 
aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: The most evil serpent, the slayer of mankind, deceiving me by 
offering to make me an equal with God, carried me captive away from the sweetness 
of paradise. But the Master of nature, the Son of God, hath come forth, incarnate 
from the Virgin Mary, and restored me to the heights, deifying me: Him do we 
supremely exalt throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy apostle  
Irmos: With never ceasing praises we magnify thee, * the Mother of God Most 
High, * who art higher than the most pure hosts, * and who beyond 
comprehension knew not wedlock, * yet hath truly given birth to God.  
Thou didst destroy the darkness of ignorance, O all-praised one, and didst shine 
forth upon Damascus the true light of the three Hypostases. As a loving father and a 
beloved archpastor, preserve it in the Orthodox Faith.  
Celebrating this annual solemnity, come ye, and, illumined radiantly with spiritual 
dignity, let us hymn the thrice radiant virtues of Ananias, the servant and preacher of 
the Trinity.  
O how far above mortal nature is thy dignity, O blessed Ananias! For as a disciple 
thou wast beloved, as a pastor thou hast found rest, and as a spiritual athlete thou 
hast been glorified with Christ, adorned with the crown of martyrdom.  
Theotokion: O most pure and most immaculate vessel of sweet fragrance, entreat 
Christ, to Whom thou hast given birth, that He grant our Orthodox hierarchs victory 
over all heresy and that thy people be delivered from the yoke of slavery; for without 
ceasing we magnify thee.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a mother 
who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth of God hath 
renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship and magnify thee 
* as the Bride and Mother of God. 
Thou hast joined the choirs of the incorporeal ones on high, O glorious one, 
where indescribable joy and everlasting delight abound, where the light of the 
Godhead and gladness abide, and where there is ineffable glory, O most blessed one.  
Making thine abode with the righteous amid divine glory, thou dost look upon its 
ineffable beauty, seeing never-ending sweetness, and the choirs of the patriarchs, thou 
dost behold the comeliness of heaven which is truly desirable, O wise and glorious 
Romanus.  
By thy supplications do thou deliver those who with faith celebrate thy radiant 
memory from all misfortunes, harm and the oppression of the alien one, O divinely 
wise and most blessed Romanus, and grant that they may receive the glory of heaven 
and the kingdom on high.  
Theotokion: The human race became subject to corruption and enslaved to sinful 
passions through the ancient fall of the first-formed man, O Virgin Theotokos; but 
the supremely good God Who was born from thee hath restored him in His 
compassion.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Exapostilarion from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., that of the holy apostle:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Damascus, whose might thou hast extended through thy martyrdom, now 
boasteth in thee, O Ananias, for, as an excellent disciple of the persecuted Christ, 
thou didst teach the persecutor of Christ. Pray thou to Him on our behalf.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O thy mysteries! O thy wonders! How is it that even after giving birth thou hast 
remained a virgin, as thou wast before birthgiving? Truly ineffable are all thy 
mysteries, O blessed Mary, Virgin and Mother!  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., of the holy apostle; 
The composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII:  
O Ananias, disciple of the Savior, glorious hierarch, glory of the martyrs, most 
radiant beacon, protector of our city: Pray thou earnestly, that Christ deliver thy flock 
from misfortunes and save our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician * and healer of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the holy apostle.  
Following the commands of thy Teacher, O apostle, thou didst become a high 
priest and a martyric sacrifice.  
By thy supplications, O Apostle Ananias, render the Redeemer well-disposed to be 
merciful to those who hymn thee.  
When He appeared to thee, His face enshrouded in ineffable light, the Lord 
restrained all the savagery of the wild beast.  
Theotokion: All of us Christians have acquired thee as our refuge and bulwark; and 
we glorify thee unceasingly, O thou who knewest not wedlock.  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Ananias, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins ** unto our souls 
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Romanus.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Adorned from childhood with the godly virtues of the Spirit, * O most wise 
Romanus, thou wast a most precious adornment of the Church of Christ; * for thou 
hast adorned it with most beauteous hymnody. Wherefore, we entreat thee: * Grant 
thy divine gift unto those who desire it, that we may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O 
most blessed father, thou beauty of the Church!  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone II:  
O Ananias, helper most fervent in supplications * and speedy heeder of those who 
petition thee, * accept our entreaty, * and beg Christ to have mercy upon us, ** for 
He alone doth rest in the saints.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and 
their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
A READING FROM THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES,§ 21 (ACTS 9: 10-19)  
In those days, there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and to 
him said the Lord in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I am here, Lord. And the 
Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight, and enquire 
in the house of Judas for one called Saul, of Tarsus: for, behold, he prayeth, And hath 
seen in a vision a man named Ananias coming in, and putting his hand on him, that 
he might receive his sight. Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by many of 
this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem: And here he hath 
authority from the chief priests to bind all that call on thy name. But the Lord said 
unto him, Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the 
Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel: For I will shew him how great things 
he must suffer for my name’s sake. And Ananias went his way, and entered into the 
house; and putting his hands on him said, Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that 
appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest 
receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Spirit. And immediately there fell from 
his eyes as it had been scales: and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and was 
baptized. And when he had received meat, he was strengthened.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §51 (10:16-21)  
The Lord said to His disciples: He that heareth you heareth Me; and he that 
despiseth you despiseth Me; and he that despiseth Me despiseth Him that sent Me. 
And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto 
us ‘through Thy name. And He said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from 
heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over 
all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. 
Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather 
rejoice, because your names are written in heaven. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, 
and said, I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou hast hid these 
things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, 
Father; for so it seemed good in Thy sight.  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
