--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 19th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY PROPHET JOEL 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR VARUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy prophet, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
The Spirit of God hath been poured forth * upon us, the faithful, * as, moved by 
Him, * the honored Joel said in prophecy; * disclosing the revelation of divine 
mysteries * and prophesying. * And we who have received His activity * are illumined 
with divine radiance ** and with the grace of God.  
Full of divine eloquence, * the wondrous Joel * doth issue forth from Thy house * 
like a well-spring watering men’s souls, O Master, * letting fall upon us the sweetness 
* which delighteth our thoughts, * in that he hath been exalted by the Spirit * and 
elevated by virtue ** to divine heights.  
With thy boldness as a prophet * and thy noetic closeness to God, O Joel, * by 
which thou dost behold heavenly visions, * do thou move Him to spare us * who 
with faith celebrate * thy memory, O glorious one, * asking remission of sins, * a 
share in divine delights ** and great mercy.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”:  
Beholding the sufferings * of the right victorious martyrs, * full of divine boldness 
* thou didst enter the arena, O Varus, and didst preach Christ, * Who became a man 
for our sake; * and thou wast not afraid of death * or the torments that lay before 
thee. * Wherefore, wounded and mercilessly dismembered, * thou didst rejoice * with 
perfect understanding, O wise one, * looking toward the glory which abideth ** for 
those who love God.  
Seeing thy flesh and blood * falling away, O spiritual athlete, * thou didst most 
valiantly endure, * as though another were suffering in thy stead. * Bound to a tree, 
thou didst endure most patiently * the laceration of the iniquitous; * and committing 
thy spirit into the hands of God, * thou didst astonish those who beheld thee * with 
thy steadfast opposition. * Wherefore, we honor thee, O wise Varus, * whose courage 
was so great, ** and who cast down the tyrant with thy pangs.  
The wondrous Cleopatra, * having embalmed thee with spices, * interred thee in 
the earth, * and raised up to thee a holy church, * celebrating thy feast, O wondrous 
Varus, * and entreating thee with faith. * Her children didst thou enroll in the noetic 
army, * adorning them with glory * and numbering them among the choirs of the 
saints, * whose portion do thou also grant unto us * who piously celebrate thy 
festival, ** O right wondrous martyr.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Rejoice, O root bedewed! * Rejoice, O staff of Aaron * who budded forth the 
never-fading * and ever-living Flower, O pure Maiden, * thou right fruitful garden * 
who shone forth from the root of Jesse * the Tree of life, * and dost nurture mortals 
with noetic bread! * Rejoice, O most precious robe of purple, * Bride of God, the 
King of heaven, most radiant crown, * adornment of hierarchs! ** Rejoice, thou who 
alone art most pure!  
Stavrotheotokion: When, of old, the unblemished ewe-lamb and immaculate Lady, 
* beheld her Lamb * upon the tree of the Cross, * she exclaimed maternally, and 
marveling cried aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new and most 
strange sight I see? * How hath the thankless synagogue * betrayed Thee to the judg-
ment-seat of Pilate * and condemned Thee to death, * Who art the Life of all? * Yet 
do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, ** O Word!”  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Varus O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia; and two for the saints, with 8 
Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy prophet, the acrostic whereof is: “I marvel at the prophecies of the 
Prophet Joel”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone II:  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
The choir of the prophets rejoiceth with us when thou who hast heavenly wisdom 
art praised, O divinely eloquent Joel. With them pray thou that we be saved, O 
blessed one.  
Announcing beforehand the words of God, O divinely eloquent one, thou didst 
foretell the grievous and righteous wrath which would befall thy vain-minded people 
because of their impiety.  
The wondrous, radiant and life-creating inspiration of the Spirit overshadowed 
thee, O most blessed prophet, and breathed into thee the knowledge of things to 
come.  
Theotokion: The tabernacle of witnesses prefigured thee who art signified in 
manifold ways, revealing Him Who immutably became incarnate through thee, O 
most pure Lady, Mother of God.  
Canon of the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise the sufferings of Varus 
and his great glory”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Thou hast appeared in the heights of the Church of Christ as a radiant sun, 
illumining the fullness of the earth with the brilliance of thy battles, O blessed Varus.  
Embraced by the sweet ardor of divine love, O all-blessed one, thou didst deny 
thyself and hasten wisely to all the tortures of the flesh, struggling mightily.  
Having sensibly bound thyself with the bonds of godly strugglers, O spiritual 
athlete, thou didst break asunder the bonds of delusion by thy mighty endurance of 
many torments.  
Theotokion: The transcendent Word made His abode within thy womb in a 
manner past all telling, O pure one, and, having been born in a godly manner, He 
hath led to Him the choirs of martyrs. With them we praise thee in hymnody.  
ODE III 
 Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Taught by thy wise dogmas, O prophet, we piously preach fasting and ministry, 
proceeding to the house of the Lord.  
Following thy teachings with all our heart and mind, we weep and seek out God in 
supplication, O praiseworthy one.  
Revealing to us the long-suffering of the all-compassionate Master, O prophet, 
thou hast also made plain His divine goodness and grace.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, thou didst conceive God and hast given birth 
ineffably to the Word incarnate, Who spake through the prophets and hath fulfilled 
that which they foretold.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Thou didst enter upon valiant struggles with mighty resolve, having made thyself 
steadfast by hope in the good things to come and by the all-wise teachings of the 
martyrs of Christ, O blessed one.  
Beholding the army of the holy spiritual athletes suffering lawfully, thou didst 
show forth their courageous strength, entering upon many and varied torments, O 
Varus.  
As a valiant warrior, O Varus, thou didst find thyself in the sacred regiment, and 
cut down multitudes with the battle-sword of courage, O wise one, being glorified 
with victories.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother of God, I beseech thee: By the effulgence of grace 
which is in thee, drive away the most profound darkness of my despair and the clouds 
of the passions.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy prophet, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O spiritual athletes of the Lord ...”:  
O divinely eloquent prophet, filled with the inspiration of the Comforter, thou 
didst make plain the enlightenment of the nations which would take place in later 
times. Wherefore, we now piously praise thee; and, celebrating thy memory, cry out to 
thee: Entreat Christ God on behalf of our souls!  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Beholding the honored sufferings of the martyrs, and venerating their fetters with 
love, thou didst hasten to ascend to the summit of witness, O most wondrous one; 
for, suspended upon a tree, thou didst endure wounds, until thou didst commit thy 
spirit into the hands of the Lord.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O Christ, 
Thy most immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the Father and the 
Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, wherewith Thou hast 
saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O Compassionate One?”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
O Lord, be Thou merciful unto those who offer Thee pure repentance, for Thou 
alone art compassionate and greatly merciful.  
As thou didst proclaim, O glorious one, the Spirit hath been poured forth from 
God upon the flesh of all who believe.  
The descent of the Spirit which made wise the disciples of the Lord filled thy 
divinely uttered words.  
Theotokion: Delivered by thy divine birthgiving from the dark belly of Hades, O 
most pure one, we call thee blessed.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Adorned with holy wounds, thou didst show thyself to be most comely and the 
beloved of God Who crowned thy head, O right wondrous Varus.  
Stretched out on a cross and again upon the ground; O glorious one, thou didst 
endure cruel pangs. Wherefore, in gladness thou hast inherited the life which is 
devoid of pain.  
The godly martyrs, seeing thee suffering lawfully, strengthened thee with words of 
patience, O blessed one; and having completed thy valiant sufferings with them, thou 
hast attained blessedness.  
With praises we crown the divine martyrs, for with divine wreaths the grace of 
God hath crowned them who cast down the conceited thoughts of the enemy.  
Theotokion: O Lady, from the mire of the passions and the passionate thoughts 
which alienate me from the one pure God lead me up, that I may bless thee with 
faith.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE V  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: The night is far spent, the day is at hand: * Thy light hath shone upon 
the world! * Therefore the ranks of angels sing Thy praises, * and all things 
glorify Thee, O Lord! 
The godly Joel hath manifestly foretold to all the coming of Christ, that He would 
come and save the human race from the falsehood of idolatry.  
Having penetrated wholly into the light which transcendeth understanding and is 
higher than thought, O glorious prophet, thou didst draw forth the grace of prophecy 
therefrom and preach righteousness.  
Pray thou for those who hymn thee, O most noetically rich Joel, and pray that they 
be saved from all tribulation and be found worthy of divine grace and radiance.  
Theotokion: O most holy Virgin, Sovereign Lady of the world, pray thou that 
those who confess thee to be the Theotokos be saved from countless sins and the evil 
circumstances of life.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Strengthened by divine inclinations, O Varus, with valiant mind thou didst endure 
unremitting laceration, rending apart the heart of the prideful one, the author of evil.  
The glorious martyr, seeing pieces of his flesh falling to the ground, rejoiced, 
looking toward eternal and divine rewards with splendor of mind.  
“I hymn, glorify and worship Thee, O Lord God, having been deemed worthy of 
the good things prepared for those who love Thee!” the martyr fervently cried aloud 
amid his suffering.  
Theotokion: In that thou hast truly been shown to be more holy than the 
cherubim and seraphim, O all-immaculate one, do thou now sanctify all who with 
faith call thee sacred, and save them by thy mediation.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: The great abyss of sin doth encompass me, * and, emulating the 
prophet, I cry unto thee: * Lead me up from corruption, O Lord!  
The well-springs of thy words drop forth divine proclamations, O glorious one, 
pouring forth spiritually nourishing sweetness, watering those who approach with 
faith.  
We know thee, O divinely eloquent Prophet Joel, to be a mountain of prophecy 
pouring forth sweetness, and an all-wise preacher of piety.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: O most pure Lady, who hast given birth to the never-waning Light, 
illumine the hearts of those who with faith glorify thee and Him Who was ineffably 
born from thee.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Thou didst disdain the words of the all-iniquitous enemy and patiently endured the 
unbearable pain of the flames, O much suffering Varus, thou intercessor for those 
who praise thee with faith.  
The most mindless tyrant did not cease inflicting wounds upon thee without pity, 
until thou didst commit thy sacred soul into the hands of God, made radiant with the 
beauties of thy struggles.  
Emulating Christ, thou wast uplifted upon a tree, and hanging thereon, thou didst 
surrender thy soul to God, Who crowned thee, having suffered valiantly, O spiritual 
athlete.  
Theotokion: O Lady, ever direct my lowly soul which is tempest-tossed on the 
deep of evils, and guide it to the calm haven, for with unwavering understanding it 
doth bless thee.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Following Christ and draining His cup, O martyr Varus, * thou wast crowned with 
the wreath of martyrdom * and having joined chorus with the angels. * Pray thou 
without ceasing ** on behalf of our souls.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: He Who of old extinguished the thunderous furnace * and bedewed the 
children with a noetic dew, * O God of our fathers, * Blessed art Thou.  
As thou didst foretell, O all-honored prophet, a watery well-spring hath issued 
forth from the house of the Lord.  
As the Prophet Joel foretold, Thou hast made a satisfying torrent, from a 
nourishing grain-bearing source. O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: He Who hath created all things, being born from the Virgin, hath 
saved the world, which piously chanteth: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
O Varus, the supremely good Cleopatra helped to bury thee, who wast illumined 
with gifts of thy struggles, finding through thee the glory of a proper faith, which 
thou didst fervently show forth in thine end.  
Shedding tears over thee and embalming thee with precious ointments, the most 
honored woman buried in the earth thee who buried wicked delusion, illumining us 
with rays of brilliance from thy grave.  
The ever-memorable one did not cease pleasing thee, the favorite of Christ, O 
wise and venerable one, until thou didst show thyself to be a mediator for her of the 
kingdom of heaven which she and her beloved son were deemed worthy of through 
thee.  
Theotokion: By thy mediation, O Virgin, restore me, who am crushed by my 
countless offenses, healing my soul and granting me the discourse to cry aloud: 
Blessed art thou who hast given birth to God in the flesh!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: Of old the Hebrew children were bedewed in the flames of the furnace, 
* and gloriously were the Chaldeans burnt up by the Lord therein, * let us sing 
unto Him saying: * bless ye and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages. 
By images of repentance, O glorious one, thou didst manifestly show forth the 
compassionate Lord Who accepts those who approach Him with faith and cry aloud: 
Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!  
As a servant of the Lord, O Prophet Joel, thou wast entrusted with the task of 
proclaiming His mysteries to the people who utter praise and chant: Bless the Lord, 
O ye works of the Lord!  
As Joel prophesied, rivers of miracles, which are the most glorious apostles of the 
Lord, pour forth forgiveness upon Judah, watering those who cry aloud: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, while thou didst remain a pure Virgin, thou 
hast given birth to Christ, the single hypostasis composed of two natures; and 
chanting to Him, we cry aloud: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Hearkening to a mother’s entreaties, O martyr, and splendidly enrolling her son in 
the army of heaven, with ineffable loving-kindness thou didst show that thy glory and 
that of the honored youth cannot be taken away.  
Cleopatra bore thee out of Egypt like riches beyond price. O martyr, lavishing 
precious gifts of healings upon all of Palestine, which honoreth thee with love.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
In gladness thou didst complete thy struggles, O valiant warrior of the Almighty, 
and hast been crowned by Him as a victor, O all-blessed Varus, thou great glory of 
the martyrs.  
Theotokion: Sins upon sins do I add, yet I do not fear the coming dread judgment. 
O pure one, overcome the blindness of my soul, and converting me, save me by thine 
intercession.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: O thou who art blessed in the heavens * and glorified on earth, * rejoice 
thou bride unwedded. 
As a prophet thou dost now dwell joyously with the prophets in the mansions of 
the heavens.  
From on high thou dost now watch over us who reverently glorify thee, O divinely 
eloquent and most noetically rich prophet.  
Through repentance Joel hath shown forth the short path of salvation with divine 
wisdom.  
Theotokion: Having given birth to the compassionate Master and Savior, O 
Mother of God, thou hast led us up who are fallen.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Manifestly girded about with divine power, O valiant sufferer Varus, thou didst 
cast down the might of the adversary; wherefore, we, the faithful, praise thee, drawing 
forth abundant healing from thy relics.  
Thy memory hath spread forth upon the ends of the earth like light, like the dawn, 
like the great sun, O all-famed one, illumining all with the radiant effulgence of thine 
honored struggles and driving darkness away from the hearts of all.  
The loving mother, beholding her son shining with thee in great glory, magnified 
the God of all, O martyr, and most earnestly glorified thee as a most great intercessor, 
having been manifestly enriched by thee.  
The land on which thy most patient body lieth, O wise one, hath been divinely 
sanctified. By thy supplications, O Varus, grant us remission of sins, amendment of 
life and deliverance from all difficulties.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: The Lord, manifesting Himself through thee, the cloud of light, O 
Virgin, wrought utter destruction upon the graven images of Egypt; and He hath 
deemed the multitude of His spiritual athletes worthy to endure, becoming emulators 
of His honored sufferings:  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Varus O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Following Christ and draining His cup, O martyr Varus, * thou wast crowned with 
the wreath of martyrdom * and having joined chorus with the angels. * Pray thou 
without ceasing ** on behalf of our souls.  
 
