--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 17th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY PROPHET HOSEA 
COMMEMORATION OF THE VENERABLE MARTYR ANDREW OF CRETE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy prophet, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
The Holy Spirit, Who proceedeth from the Father, * spake through thy tongue * 
of the advent of Christ * which would come to pass in later times, * unto the 
restoration of creation: * And now, beholding the fulfillment * of what was 
prophesied, ** we honor thy memory, O prophet.  
Espousing our nature, * which had willfully fallen away from Thee, * O Lover of 
mankind, * Thou didst deliver it from defilement, * joining it inseparably to Thyself 
through its union with Thee * which passeth understanding. * And Thy prophet, 
being an image of this, ** chastely took to wife a former harlot.  
O divinely eloquent prophet, * seeing thine utterances * now filled with grace, * 
standing before the God of all * pray thou for all who with faith * celebrate thy 
memory, * asking for them forgiveness of sins, ** peace and great mercy.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Having cleaved unto the Lord from childhood, O blessed one, * thou didst run 
the course until the end; * for, armed with the Cross, * thou didst set thy hands to the 
plough of the commandments of the Lord, * as it is written. * Him do thou entreat, * 
that those who with faith celebrate * thy most honored memory ** be delivered from 
corruption and misfortunes.  
Through faith thou didst become * a most precious stone * without being broken; 
* for, beaten and rolled upon the ground, * thou didst make the path of faith smooth, 
* O glorious one, rendering it easy of ascent; * by overturning the opinions * and the 
evil fame of Copronymus ** like a corrupt foundation, O father.  
Raised on the dogmas of the apostles * and the teachings of the divine fathers, * O 
blessed one, * thou didst venerate the visible image of the incarnate God * in sacred 
signs and honored depictions. * Wherefore, having suffered for them, * O glorious 
one, * thou wast revealed to be a teacher of piety ** and the adornment of martyrs.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O all-pure one, * who hath contained the infinite God in thy womb * Who, in His 
love for mankind, hath become a man, * and hath received our substance from thee, 
* deifying it: * disdain me not who am now sorrowing, * but quickly take pity * and 
free me from divers enemies ** and the malice of the evil one.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: 
Struggling first upon the mountain in fasting, * with the whole armor of the Cross 
* thou didst destroy the noetic hordes of the enemy, * and then manfully array thyself 
O all-blessed one for thy contest, * slaying Copronymus with the sword of faith. * 
And for both thou hast been crowned by God, ** O ever-memorable venerable 
martyr Andrew.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia; and two canons for the saints, with 
8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy prophet, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I hymn the divinely inspired words of Hosea”, the composition of Theophanes, in 
Tone I: 
Irmos: Let us sing a triumphant hymn unto God, * who came to Moses’ aid in 
Egypt, * and drowned Pharaoh with all his host: * for He hath been glorified. 
Truly standing before the Bestower of life as a prophet and speaker of divine 
things, O Hosea, pray thou earnestly, that He deliver from temptations those who 
faithfully praise thee.  
Having cleansed the eyes of thy soul from pollution, O glorious one, thou wast 
deemed worthy to splendidly gaze upon things which were to come, and thereby truly 
foretell things which had not yet come to pass.  
The wisdom of God, the source of foresight, showed the divinely eloquent Hosea 
to be an abundant river of prophecy pouring forth divine teachings.  
Theotokion: Out of Egypt the Father manifestly called Christ, Who had revealed 
Himself for our sake from the Virgin, as the God-seeing Prophet Hosea foretold of 
old.  
Canon of the venerable martyr, the acrostic whereof is:  
“With love I hymn the namesake of manliness”; 
 The composition of Joseph, in Tone II:  
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Having manfully enslaved the carnal passions to thy mind, as the namesake of 
manliness, O father, thou didst enslave the savagery of the tyrants and suffered 
lawfully. Wherefore, assembling together with faith, we call thee blessed.  
Noetically set afire like an ember by the fervor of the divine Spirit, thou didst melt 
the ice of the passions, extinguishing the alien fire of impiety with the torrents of thy 
blood, O wondrous and divinely blessed confessor Andrew.  
Having bound thyself with the love of Christ O father, accepting thy cross from 
the time of thy youth, rejoicing thou didst follow after Him, denying thyself through 
fasting, confession and a most perfect suffering.  
Theotokion: Though my soul is burdened with the sleep of despair, O most pure 
Virgin Mother, I hasten to thine aid. Rouse me to the watchfulness of repentance, 
delivering me from everlasting torment.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: Establish me, O Christ, upon the immovable rock of Thy 
commandments, * and enlighten me with the light of Thy countenance; * for 
there is none more holy than Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
Instructed in the divine teaching of the revelation of God, O prophet, impressed 
with the seal of the Holy Spirit thou didst manifestly proclaim the summoning of the 
nations.  
Thou wast deemed worthy to foresee the things of the future as though they were 
present, O divinely wise one, manifestly declaring the falling away of the Jews and the 
destruction of those bound by the law.  
Thou didst foretell that Israel would be delivered, not by battle, or the bow, or 
weaponry, but in the Lord God Almighty, signifying for us the incarnation of the 
Word.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O honored Virgin who didst conceive the Word incarnate 
Who hath delivered us from deception by His own holy blood and body.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
Having established the feet of thine understanding upon the rock of the love of 
Christ, O father, thou wast in nowise shaken by contrary winds, crying out to thy 
Creator: Thou art our God, and there is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!  
Pouring forth healings both before and after thine end, thou dost aid those who 
languish in infirmity, O venerable Andrew, driving away unclean spirits, and crying 
out to thy Creator: Thou art our God, and there is none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord!  
Drenched in the tears of fasting, thou didst adorn thyself with the blood of 
martyrdom, showing thyself to be wholly most comely; and hastening to Him Whom 
thou didst desire, thou didst cry aloud: Thou art our God, and there is none more 
righteous than Thee, O Lord!  
Theotokion: In a manner transcending nature, O all-immaculate one, thou hast 
given birth to God the Word, Who is consubstantial with the Father and assumed the 
likeness of our flesh; yet didst remain a virgin even after birthgiving. Wherefore, we 
bless thee with faith.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Today the imperial city doth celebrate * the resplendent feast of thy radiant 
memory, * summoning every city and land; * for it rejoiceth, possessing thy much-
suffering body as a great treasure, ** O martyr Andrew, beacon of Orthodoxy.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy prophet, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Having acquired a heart purified of the passions, O prophet, thou wast truly like a 
harmonious instrument of the Spirit, richly illumined by Him, O wise one, and 
receiving the knowledge of things to come. Wherefore, assembling together, we 
celebrate thy holy memory with faith, glorifying the Savior, O ever-memorable Hosea. 
Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who honor thy holy 
memory with love.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
O ye faithful, as is meet let us praise him who is wondrous in fasting and 
sufferings, as a preacher of piety and a mighty champion; for, fearlessly opposing 
Copronymus, he preached that the image of Christ ought to be venerated, in that he 
is the adornment of all fasters and a model of courage for the martyrs.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
He that sitteth upon the throne of the cherubim * and abideth in the bosom of the 
Father * doth sit in thy womb as upon a throne, O Lady; * for, being truly God 
incarnate, * He reigneth over all nations, * and with understanding we now chant to 
Him. * Him do thou also entreat, ** that thy servants be saved.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: I have considered Thy dispensation, * O Almighty One, * and with fear 
have I glorified Thee, O Savior.  
O Hosea, most divine eye of the Church, deliver those who praise thee from 
misfortunes. 
O most splendid and steadfast receptacle of the Spirit, pray that those who hymn 
thee be saved.  
Standing before the Judge of all as a prophet of God, by thy supplications deliver 
me from the passions.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: Thou hast surpassed the ranks of the angels, O Ever-virgin, having 
borne their Creator within thy womb.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Obedient to the commandments of Christ, thou didst reverently venerate His 
image, O father; wherefore, the all-iniquitous one slew thee with multifarious wounds.  
Perfumed with the sweet fragrance of the virtues, while lying in the tomb thou 
dost perfume the faces of those who call upon thee with steadfast heart, O venerable 
father.  
As a champion of the Orthodox, O right wondrous and venerable Andrew, with 
boldness thou didst denounce the most evil Copronymus who was accursedly 
infected with heresy.  
Theotokion: In that thou art fruitful, O all-hymned Theotokos, thou hast given 
rise to the grain of grace which feedeth all who in an Orthodox manner honor thee 
and the Word Who was incarnate through thee, O all-pure one.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: Seeking Thee early in the morn, * we sing Thy praises, O Christ God, * 
who for our sake became poor * and in Thy flesh * endured the Cross and 
death. 
Moved by mercy, thou hast taught us of the long-suffering, compassion and 
goodness of God, whereby He taketh pity on all, O divinely eloquent prophet.  
Having slain death, Christ arose, as thy wise prophecy proclaimed, O divinely 
eloquent one, granting life to the souls in Hades.  
By thy supplications, O Prophet Hosea, rescue me from the abyss of sin, in that 
thou hast blameless boldness before Christ, O most noetically rich and divinely wise 
one.  
Theotokion: The Lord and King of all, Who is co-beginningless with the Father, 
came under time through thee, O Virgin Theotokos, and showed Himself to have 
flesh.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
Hating the darkness of sin, O father, thou didst reveal thyself to be light through 
the splendor of dispassion; and with the rays of healings and the grace of God thou 
dost enlighten the faithful who approach thy divine shrine.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thou wast revealed to be a receptacle of the fullness of God, having lived a good 
life and suffered with valiant mind, O father; and now, lying in the tomb, thou dost 
remain whole and untouched by corruption, O blessed one, releasing all the faithful 
from their sufferings.  
Having contended bravely against the demons and against heretical men, O all-
blessed one, thou hast been deemed worthy of everlasting glory and crowns, O 
venerable Andrew. Wherefore, we, the faithful, ever call thee blessed.  
Theotokion: Having ineffably given birth unto Christ, thou didst bear in thine 
embrace Him Who taketh in His arms those inclined to evil and wretchedly in thrall 
to the wicked one, O all-immaculate Maiden. Wherefore, we, the faithful, ever call 
thee blessed.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: Thou didst save the Prophet from the sea monster, O Lover of 
mankind; * lead me up also I pray, * from the abyss of transgressions.  
Proclaiming things to come, O all-blessed Hosea, thou didst declare the descent of 
the Word unto mankind.  
As thou didst foretell, immortal Life hath led up from the regions of Hades those 
deadened through sin.  
O prophet, thou didst reveal the abolition of the prescriptions of the law, the 
falling away of the Jews and the entry of the nations.  
Theotokion: God the Word hath shone forth from thy womb, O all-immaculate 
one, having ineffably assumed flesh for our sake, in that He is compassionate.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
The iniquitous one cast thee into prison, O Andrew, but thou wast preserved by 
the Master, immutably obeying His divine will.  
Thou didst disdain thy body which was lacerated and covered with wounds, O 
blessed one, and, strengthened by God, didst endure, as though it were someone else 
suffering.  
Thou art revealed as a hidden and precious treasure, O father, lying before the 
pious, and dost enrich all who honor thee with miracles.  
Theotokion: Of old, the prophet perceived thee as a noetic lampstand holding 
Christ, the divine lamp, O pure one, whereby we have all been enlightened.  
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”: 
Out of love for thee, O divinely blessed one, * we chant hymns of praise as 
thanksgiving to the namesake of manliness, * to the teacher of the mysteries of piety. 
* As thou hast boldness before the Lord, save us from all evils, ** that we may chant: 
Rejoice, O ever-memorable father!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Ikos: Thou wast shown to be an angel of the truth from Crete, denouncing 
impiety with the voice of theology, O all-wise father; and beholding thee wounded, I 
fear suffering, crying out and exclaiming to thee such things as these: Rejoice, O 
mighty swordsman of God! Rejoice, faithful favorite of the Lord! Rejoice, opponent 
of the blasphemous foe! Rejoice, restraint of those who speak evil! Rejoice, for thou 
didst suffer for the image of Christ! Rejoice, for thou didst bridle carnal pleasures! 
Rejoice, for by fasting thou didst vanquish the princes of darkness! Rejoice, for with 
suffering thou didst oppose Copronymus! Rejoice, ever-flowing fountain of miracles! 
Rejoice, thou who hast illumined the earth with thy sufferings! Rejoice, O father, thou 
dwelling-place of the faithful! Rejoice, our intercessor and deliverer! Rejoice, O ever-
memorable father!  
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: Having prefigured the Trinity in the furnace, * the children of Abraham 
* changed the flame of fire into dew, * and chanting, cried aloud: * O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Having illumined thy mind with supra-natural enlightenment, O blessed Hosea, 
thou wast enriched with the knowledge of things to come, crying out to the Master: 
O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Having become like the prophets, thou didst multiply their visions, O immortal 
Savior, appearing in divers images to those who cried out to Thee with faith: O God 
of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thou art the well-spring of Israel, pouring forth the waters of salvation, 
proclaiming Christ, the River of peace, O Hosea; and to Him do we cry: O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: He Who shone forth from the beginningless Father became incarnate 
from thee in His ineffable mercy, O Maiden, Mother of God; and chanting to Him 
we cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
The lofty waves of wickedness did not shake the mind of thee who stood on the 
rock of the knowledge of Christ, O glorious Andrew; wherefore, thou hast manifestly 
become a tranquil haven for the tempest-tossed.  
The evil-minded one, darkened of mind, strove with foolish arguments to mislead 
thee who art adorned with the splendors of theology, O wise one, yet he showed 
himself worthy of ridicule and was filled with shame by thy boldness.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Thy mind, adorned with most divine inclinations, was shown to all to be a most 
radiant star, O right wondrous Andrew, illumining with miracles each of the faithful 
who praise thee.  
Theotokion: Thou wast the temple of the living God, wherein He Who dwelleth in 
the heavens made His ineffable habitation, O all-hymned Virgin, being pleased to 
become a man in His bountiful goodness.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: Praise ye the Lord Who preserved The Children * in the fiery flame of 
the furnace, * descending unto them in the guise of an Angel, * and supremely 
exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Incomprehensible gifts were given to the prophets by the divine Giver: the activity 
and knowledge of things to come, that they might hymn the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout the ages.  
Having acquired a divinely inspired mouth and a tongue of godly eloquence, O 
Hosea, thou dost hymn the illumining Light of piety, chanting: Hymn the Lord, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Prophesying by thy words and actions, thou didst denounce the adulterous people, 
O most noetically rich prophet, teaching them in images to chant: Hymn the Lord, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: God, the equally everlasting Word of God, appeared incarnate of the 
Virgin to those who cry out with faith: Hymn the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages!  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Having first mortified the carnal passions by struggles of fasting, O wise one, thou 
didst suffer mightily, reverently venerating the image of the Savior, the Ever-virgin 
and the saints.  
Those who raged insanely against Christ like savage wild beasts put thee to death, 
O father; wherefore, dragging thee along as they beat thee, they cast thee into a 
ravine, manifestly rendering thee a witness of the truth.  
Thou dost irrigate the faithful with miracles as with water, O all-blessed one, 
driving away the spirits of wickedness, and washing away our infirmities, having 
received the grace of healing from Christ our God on high.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to be more spacious than the heavens, O 
Virgin, having contained within thy womb God Whom naught can contain. Him do 
thou entreat, that He deliver those who piously hymn thee from soul-corrupting 
circumstances, O pure Lady.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: Rejoice, O boast of virgins! * Rejoice, O most pure Mother, * whom all 
creation * doth magnify * with divine hymns!  
Thou didst receive honor as a prophet, O all-blessed Hosea, having received a 
crown of splendor from God.  
Illumined by the light of Christ, O most excellent one, by thy supplications render 
Him merciful unto all who hymn thee.  
Having lived an angelic life, O Hosea, thou standest with the ranks of angels 
before the Master, praising Him with laudations.  
Theotokion: Desiring to save mankind, the Savior and Lord clothed Himself in 
our flesh through the most pure Virgin.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Behold, O venerable father, finishing thy course thou didst preserve unsullied the 
Orthodox Faith for which thou didst suffer lawfully, and hast received from on high a 
twofold crown, as an invincible martyr and an invulnerable ascetic.  
Like a sweet-smelling lily, like a rose didst thou manifestly blossom forth in the 
meadow of divine asceticism, O father; and, illumined as a martyr, thou dost spread 
thy fragrance like a cedar, O all-praised Andrew, adornment of monastics.  
Manifestly adorned with signs and wonders, thou didst lie, unharmed, before the 
sight of all, O all-blessed Andrew, and dost illumine the souls of those who with 
ardent faith have recourse to thee and ever bless thee.  
Celebrating thy holy memorial today, a festive day full of gladness, we cry out to 
thee with faith, O father: By thy holy supplications to God deliver us all from the evil 
circumstances of life.  
Theotokion: Thy womb became the dwelling-place of the Light Who illumineth 
the world with rays of divinity and hath utterly driven the darkness of ignorance away 
from the earth, O most immaculate Maiden. Wherefore, we glorify thee.  
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Exapostilarion of the venerable martyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples let us ascend ...”: 
Let us all praise the right victorious Andrew, celebrating his honored memory in a 
godly manner, that we may be delivered from our infirmities; for he hath preached 
the reverent veneration of the precious images of the Savior and of all the saints. 
Wherefore, receiving a crown in the heavens, he rejoiceth with the angels.  
Theotokion: O ye divinely wise, let us hymn the pure Virgin: the most holy 
mountain of God, the candle-stand, the jar, the table, the bridge, the staff and the 
lamp, the divine throne, the portal, the temple and bridal-chamber; for God, having 
become incarnate through her immutably and in a manner surpassing nature, hath by 
an ineffable union deified what He received.  
 
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV: 
Struggling first upon the mountain in fasting, * with the whole armor of the Cross 
* thou didst destroy the noetic hordes of the enemy, * and then manfully array thyself 
O all-blessed one for thy contest, * slaying Copronymus with the sword of faith. * 
And for both thou hast been crowned by God, ** O ever-memorable venerable 
martyr Andrew.  
ODE III, Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone III:  
Today the imperial city doth celebrate * the resplendent feast of thy radiant 
memory, * summoning every city and land; * for it rejoiceth, possessing thy much-
suffering body as a great treasure, ** O martyr Andrew, beacon of Orthodoxy.  
ODE VI, Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Out of love for thee, O divinely blessed one, * we chant hymns of praise as 
thanksgiving to the namesake of manliness, * to the teacher of the mysteries of piety. 
* As thou hast boldness before the Lord, save us from all evils, ** that we may chant: 
Rejoice, O ever-memorable father!  
 
