--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 15th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER EUTHYMIUS THE NEW  
AND OF THE HOLY VENERABLE MARTYR LUCIAN, PRESBYTER OF ANTIOCH 
THE GREAT  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 for the venerable one, in Tone IV,  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Thou didst traverse the narrow path * with an untroubled spirit, * sailing to those 
things which lead to life; * for thou wast the boast of fasters, O Euthymius, * having 
steadfastly set at naught * the pursuit of the demons. * Wherefore, thou hast been 
deemed worthy * to be an heir to the heavenly kingdom, ** delighting in never-
ending beauty.  
Thy most radiant life * astonished the angels * and manifestly frightened the 
savage demons; * and splendidly adorning the assemblies of the faithful, * thou didst 
ever command them to proceed forth * unto the heavenly dwelling place of Christ. * 
Him do thou entreat, * that those who celebrate thy most honored memory with faith 
** be delivered from corruption and misfortunes.  
While dwelling in the desert; * thou didst bring to Christ * hymnody and praise 
every day, O father, * offering up thy soul and mind to the one God, * like the great 
Moses * ascending to the impassable heights of sanctity. * Wherefore, having 
vanquished the invisible foe, * thou didst become a pure habitation ** and an 
instrument of the divine Spirit.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV, 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
Thou didst make the faithful steadfast, * enriching them with faith * and discourse 
of the knowledge of God, * that they might boldly endure * the rage of the tyrant * 
for the sake of the incorruptible life to come. * Wherefore, we call thee blessed, * O 
right glorious Lucian, ** and we celebrate thy divine solemnity today.  
Lengthy imprisonment * and a most violent death didst thou endure, O venerable 
one, * bound with bonds, * lacerated with sharp-edged shards, O blessed one, * and 
weakened by cruel starvation * and by long thirst. * Wherefore, thou hast manifestly 
received heavenly food * and been revealed to be an invincible martyr, ** O valiant 
spiritual athlete.  
The bosom of the sea, * having received thee, O glorious one, * and helped by 
wild beasts, like Jonah of old, * gave thee over to an honorable interment * upon dry 
land, after thirty days, * O most noetically rich God-bearer, * divine wellspring of 
healings, * nobly elect among martyrs, ** establishment of the Church, and 
intercessor for our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O venerable father, word of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; 
wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, having destroyed 
legions of demons, and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst 
blamelessly emulate. Possessed of boldness before Christ God, ask thou peace for our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth birth to 
Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son How is it 
that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone V:  
O venerable father, thou gavest no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine 
eyelids, until thou didst free thy soul and body of the passions and prepared thyself to 
be a habitation of the Spirit; for Christ, coming with the Father, made His dwelling 
within thee, rendering thee a favorite of the consubstantial Trinity. O great preacher 
Euthymius, pray thou on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing her Lamb hastening to the slaughter * the Ewe-
lamb eagerly followed Him crying aloud: * ‘Whence goest Thou, O my sweetest 
Child? * O most beloved Jesus, * sinless Lord, rich in mercy, * O longsuffering 
Christ, * why dost Thou so swiftly and so fearlessly proceed? * Speak to me Thy 
handmaiden, * O my well-beloved Son: * pass not by me, Thy Mother, without a 
word, * O all-compassionate God, ** who grantest the world great mercy.’ 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Euthymius.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Lucian O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, and two of the saints.  
ODE I  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is, “Rejoice, blessed glory of 
monastics,” in Tone II: 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Rejoice, O wellspring gushing forth a torrent of salvation, from whence we all 
draw forth the grace of the healing of transgressions of those who with love have 
recourse to thee, O ever-memorable one.  
Receiving holiness within the depths of thy soul from Christ God, O glorious one, 
thou wast revealed to be a chosen vessel of the grace of the Spirit, O father 
Euthymius.  
Thou didst spurn transitory things, O most wise father, that thou mightest show 
thyself to be a partaker of incorruptible life; and, drawing nigh unto God, thou dost 
unceasingly pray that we all be saved.  
Theotokion: Following the wise saying of thy lips, O all-immaculate one, and 
rejoicing, we call thee blessed who hast been for us the cause of ineffable beatitude.  
Canon of the venerable martyr, the acrostic whereof is, “I hymn thy glory, O all-
blessed Lucian,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord my God, * for Thou hast led Thy people out of 
the bondage of Egypt, * and hast drowned in the waters * the chariots and the 
might of Pharaoh. 
Shining forth in wisdom, grace and spiritual power, O Lucian, thou didst enlighten 
all, directing them to the knowledge of Christ, O martyr.  
He Who, in that He is compassionate, took upon Himself our weakness, defended 
thee with the sword of a proper Faith, rendering thee invincible in thine opposition to 
the enemy, O martyr.  
Thou didst draw up to the heights of heaven those who had fallen into the depths 
of heresy with the nets of thy divine words, O right wondrous spiritual athlete.  
Theotokion: Thou didst conceive the everlasting Word of the Father without seed 
by an utterance transcending words, O pure one, and gave birth unto Him for our 
redemption.  
ODE III  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thou didst show thyself to be a most radiant pillar, guiding the ranks of monastics, 
O divinely wise one, and a cloud overshadowing the chosen of God, casting into 
darkness the faces of the invisible enemies with the grace of the King of all.  
Thou standest before the face of thy Master, praying with untiring beckoning that 
thy flock be delivered from slavery to darkness and the tyranny of the passions, O 
venerable one, and God hearkened unto thy supplications.  
Having mortified the movements of thy flesh with mighty fasting, O divinely 
eloquent one, thou didst become a dwelling place for the Master. Him do thou 
beseech, that those who have recourse to thee be delivered from sorrows and the 
turmoil of the passions.  
Theotokion: Isaiah foresaw thee as a scroll upon which the Word was inscribed in 
the flesh, annulling the signature of the first-formed man which was signed by his 
transgression, granting us liberation from slavery.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
With the splendor of the virtues thou didst make thy soul a house of God, O 
martyr; and by thy supplication thou didst demolish the temples of the idols.  
Surrounded by dangers and suffering from the pangs of torments, O martyr, thou 
didst hymn Him Who, is the Accomplisher of good things in so far as He deemed 
thee worthy of such things. 
Giving thy body over to torments, O martyr, thou didst keep thy soul pure, and 
offered thyself to the Master as an unblemished sacrifice, O all-honorable one.  
Theotokion: Of the Virgin is a Babe born Who wrought the ages by His will. Her 
do we hymn and rightly bless as the Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone II,  
Spec. Mel.: “The grave and mortality ...”: 
With hymns let us all gloriously honor * as a most splendid luminary Lucian, * 
who shone forth in fasting * and later was radiant in suffering, ** and who prayeth 
unceasingly for us all.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII 
 Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Having renounced the flesh for the sake of Christ, and revealed thyself to be a 
leader of the people; and having heard words of mystic teaching, thou wast shown to 
be a standard of righteousness, mightily trampling down all the passions. Wherefore, 
thou didst utterly reduce the machinations of the demons to ashes, looking ever to 
the Lord, O God-bearing Euthymius. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of 
sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable martyr, in the same melody:  
Anointing the hearts of the faithful with the word of grace, O martyr Lucian, thou 
didst prepare to contend and vanquish the tyrant; and having well and truly finished 
the divine course, thou wast deemed worthy of the glory of the martyrs at the end. 
Wherefore, assembling together, we all honor thy holy death, glorifying the Savior. O 
all-famed spiritual athlete, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto 
those who honor thy holy memory with love.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O undefiled, blameless and all-immaculate Lady, thou cloud of the noetic Sun and 
golden candle-stand of the light of God: with the radiance of dispassion illumine my 
soul, which hath grown dim through the blindness of the passions, I pray; with 
torrents of compunction enlighten my polluted heart, and with tears of repentance 
cleanse me of the mire of my evil deeds, that with love I may cry out to thee: O Ever-
virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me forgiveness of my 
transgressions; for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.  
Divine desire set thee afire, kindling thy heart, and in the end thou didst attain thy 
desire, O divinely wise father, renouncing passionate attachment to earthly things, and 
becoming a fellow dweller with the ministering angels in the highest.  
The endearments of thy spouse didst thou trample underfoot in every way, O 
venerable one; for the love of the Creator entered into thee with fervor, and thou 
didst utterly reject dark desires for created things.  
To the pure pasture of abstinence didst thou lead thy flock, O father, and brought 
it to the placid wellspring of dispassion, having overcome the noetic beasts. Save it 
now also by thy supplications.  
Theotokion: Behold, all generations glorify thee as thou didst foretell, O Maiden; 
for thou didst become the palace and divine temple of the Creator, wherein the Most 
High made His abode, having clad Himself in flesh, that He might save us.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Thou wast revealed to be mighty against falsehood, O blessed one, and a teacher 
ever urging the faithful on to divine struggles; and in thine endurance of torments, O 
martyr, thou didst humble the feeble strength of the proud one.  
Being stretched out on a tree, lacerated with leathern thongs, oppressed by 
prolonged starvation and thirst, and cut apart with thin shards, didst thou endure, O 
right glorious martyr of Christ.  
Preaching the Law of God, thou didst convert the iniquitous, and show them how 
to drink of the cup of torment with zeal; with them hast thou made thine abode in 
the courts of our God, delighting in the tree of life, O most ever-memorable one.  
Theotokion: The divine Sun, shining forth from thy womb, O maiden, hath 
enlightened those who are in the darkness of polytheism and hath illumined those 
who are in the shadow of death. To Him do we cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, O 
Christ!  
ODE V  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
Paying heed wholly to God, O father, thou didst valiantly endure the darkness of 
night in desert places, bearing also the burning heat of day; and didst become a 
temple of the wisdom of God, adorned in many ways with the radiance of virtue.  
Engaging in fasting in thy youth, O father, thou didst not take the serpent of 
gluttony to thyself as a councilor; but having united thyself to God by hunger, 
unceasing supplication and purity, thou didst become a partaker of a better delight.  
Ascending into the clouds of the virtues, thou didst receive tablets inscribed by the 
hand of God, O blessed one, and didst teach multitudes of monastics to shun all 
material things, leading them up to the mountain of the knowledge of God.  
Theotokion: Thou wast revealed to Jacob, the ancestor of God, O pure one, as a 
ladder loftier than heaven, having the Creator seated thereupon; for through thee 
God revealed Himself incarnate, uniting those things which before were separated. 
Wherefore, we, the faithful, glorify thee as the Theotokos.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Having set afire, O venerable one, the thorns of the passions with the sweat of 
fasting, thou didst right knowingly extinguish the furnace of impiety with the streams 
of thy labors, O all-blessed one.  
Beset by frequent pangs, thou didst remain unbowed, lifting thine eyes unto God 
Who is able to save, O holy one; and rejoicing, thou didst place thy spirit into His 
hands.  
Thou didst reprove them of evil belief who were far from God, and, beset by long 
and cruel pangs, O glorious one, thou didst draw nigh unto Christ, upon Whose 
suffering thou didst’ meditate.  
Theotokion: Thou didst remain incorrupt even after giving birth, O pure one, and 
in that thou hast given birth unto God, thou hast freed all mankind from corruption; 
wherefore, in an Orthodox manner, with faith we call thee blessed.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: From within the sea monster Jonah cried unto the Lord: * “Lead me up 
from the abyss of Hades, I pray Thee; * for with a voice of praise as to my 
Redeemer, * in the spirit of truth * I offer myself to Thee.”  
Pierced through by the love of the Master, thou didst forsake all tangible things 
and didst follow after Him, manfully taking His easy yoke upon thy shoulder, O 
namesake of good courage.  
Taught knowledge of ineffable things, O blessed one, thou didst teach thy flock to 
meditate upon heavenly things, repelling the assaults of the passions with thy 
teachings.  
Thy life became similar to that of the hosts on high, O father, and gaveth thee 
boldness which thou hast ever held. Entreat Christ to deliver thy flock from the 
passions.  
Theotokion: Understanding thine ineffable mystery, O pure one, the prophet 
Habbakuk proclaimed thee beforehand to be an overshadowed mountain, for 
through thee the Creator became incarnate in His loving-kindness, lifting the ancient 
curse.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Thou didst traverse the deep of torments dryshod, and thy body was saved from 
the deep by the right hand of the Almighty, and was seen unharmed by those who 
love thee, O divinely blessed one.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
He Who delivered Jonah from his three-day sojourn in the belly of the whale, also 
saved thee from the midst of the seas after thirty days by the ministering creatures of 
the deep.  
Set afire by the love of Christ, O glorious one, before thy death thou didst oppose 
the tormentors, O all-wise one; wherefore, rejoicing, thou hast been deemed worthy 
of the kingdom of heaven.  
Theotokion: The most pure Word found thee alone to be a pure and undefiled 
dove, and it was His good pleasure to be born through thee, O most holy Mother of 
God, all-immaculate Virgin.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Crossing the tumult of the multitude dryshod, * thou didst mightily drown the 
incorporeal foe in the streams of thy tears, * O venerable and divinely wise 
Euthymius; * and receiving the gift of miracles, thou healest all sufferings. ** Pray 
thou unceasingly for us all.  
Ikos: Open thou my mouth by thy right acceptable supplications, O thrice-blessed 
and all-glorious Euthymius, as one who stands before God, that I may hymn thy 
godly life and worthily recount thy virtues, which thou didst venerably perfect on 
earth for the sake of Christ God, for thou wast shown to be a most splendid standard 
for monastics, having acquired a life equal to that of the angels, and having dwelt in 
truly impassable wastes, pray thou unceasingly for us all.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The bush which burned with fire on the mountain * and the dew-
bearing furnace of the Chaldeans * clearly prefigured thee, O Bride of God; * 
for, without being consumed, * thou didst receive the divine and immaterial 
Fire * within thy material womb. * Wherefore, we chant unto Him Who was 
born of thee: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou! 
Having acquired the character of Abraham, and become a sojourner from thy 
land, O most wise one, thou didst behold God Who promised thee a rich reward. 
Wherefore, fervently rejoicing, thou didst chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Set afire by the Spirit, O venerable one, thou didst destroy the snares of the 
enemy, and didst lay hold of the trophies of victory, protected by the sword of the 
Master Who for our sake was nailed to the Cross. Wherefore, fervently rejoicing, thou 
didst chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Thou didst make haste to the mountain of prayer, and entering the cloud of the 
Spirit, didst behold the back parts of God, receiving the glory of discernment, as an 
unshakable pillar, O father. Wherefore, earnestly pray that those who hymn thee be 
delivered from the temptation of the enemy.  
Theotokion: In times past, O most pure one, thou didst give birth in the flesh, in a 
manner transcending nature, unto the Son, and Lord of all, Who existed before all 
ages, the Fulfiller of the Law, the Wisdom and the Power, for the restoration of 
mortals. Wherefore, piously cry out to Him Who was born from Thee, O pure Virgin: 
O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
The persecutor, unable to bear the assaults of thy wise words, slew thee and cast 
thy body into the depths of the sea, winning for thee things which he doubted: The 
heavenly kingdom and divine glory, O thou of valiant mind.  
Not having worshipped graven images or bent thy knees before idols, cast into the 
fire of tribulation thou didst enter the tyrant’s furnace bedewed by the Spirit and the 
dew-bestowing power, O divinely wise martyr.  
Thou didst draw forth people slain and sacrificed in the abyss of pagan 
ungodliness by thy life-bearing words, O right wondrous one, chanting: O all-hymned 
Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O blessed one, blessed is the Fruit of thy blessed womb, Whom the 
hosts of heaven and the councils of mortals bless, and Who hath redeemed us from 
the ancient curse.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
With the streams of thy tears thou didst reduce fiery pleasures to ashes, and 
dispelling the fear of the flames of Gehenna, O wise father, having blended fear with 
the perfect love of thy Creator, throughout all ages.  
Having passed on to God like Enoch, thou wast received by Him, O father; and 
dwelling with the choirs on high, thou dost chant: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
As thou delightest now in incorruptible gifts and art filled with the radiance of the 
threefold Sun, O blessed one, by thy supplications deliver those who hymn thee from 
sufferings and darkness, that we may glorify Christ as is meet.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: Thou didst loose mortals from the ancient curse, O most pure one, 
having conceived God at the ineffable word of the archangel, for He becameth 
incarnate through thee in His tender compassion, O all-immaculate Lady. Him do we 
supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
With the bread of thy words thou didst strengthen those who were wasting away 
through spiritual starvation, instructing them to worship the one Lord, the Bread of 
our life. To Him do we all sing: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Having trampled down the cruel artifices of the deceiving foe by thy suffering, 
thou wast taken up to a most glorious height, O right glorious one, and attained unto 
the ranks of the angels, crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Oh! the strange things wrought by thee, O most steadfast Lucian! For the bosom 
of the sea, receiving thy holy body, was content not to harm it, and gaveth it up whole 
to the dry land; where it poureth forth streams of healing upon those who love thee.  
Theotokion: With both tongue and heart we proclaim thee to be the pure 
Theotokos, O Virgin, for thou hast given birth unto the Lord clad in the flesh and 
known in two natures. Him do all the hosts of heaven glorify throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Illumined by the beauty of fasting, arrayed in the robe of incorruption, and 
crowned with a wreath of the gifts of intelligence, O father Euthymius, thou standest 
before the Master of all, rejoicing.  
Thou hast made thine abode in the everlasting mansions, where the councils of the 
apostles, the multitudes of martyrs, the assembly of the venerable, and the choirs of 
the prophets dwell, O blessed, right glorious and divinely wise one, receiving from 
God the reward of thy pangs as is meet.  
Most resplendent wast thou, O divinely eloquent one, radiantly illumined with rays 
of the threefold Sun. Ask thou remission of sins, deliverance from evil and separation 
from the wicked for all who have recourse to thee with love.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Becoming incarnate of thee ineffably, O Mary, Birthgiver of God, the 
Master of all became a perfect man; and in being born He preserved thee a pure 
Virgin as thou wast before birthgiving. Him do thou beseech, that He save our souls 
from misfortunes.  
Canon of the venerable martyr  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
The day of thy sacred commemoration shineth with beams of the Spirit, dispelling 
the cloud of the passions, illumining the assemblies of the faithful and setting fire to 
the legions of the demons, do thou preserve us who celebrate it.  
Thou wast freed from the bonds of thy body, O blessed one, and rejoicing thou 
didst take flight to the heights of heaven; and hast revealed thyself to God the Creator 
as comely in the adornments of thy wounds. Before Him dost thou stand, rejoicing 
with the martyrs.  
The martyr Lucian hath brought us together today to praise his sufferings, his 
splendid feats, his utter courage, and the abundant grace of his miracles. Wherefore 
together, we all call him blessed.  
Theotokion: Thou was revealed to be the dwelling place of the highest Wisdom 
which surpasseth understanding, O pure Maiden, thou animate throne and portal. 
Wherefore, the assemblies of mortals and the armies of angels glorify thee, O thou 
who alone surpassest all.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Thou didst flee passionate attachment to the world as onerous, and laid waste to 
thy body by fasting. Having renewed the strength of thy soul, O venerable and ever-
memorable one, thou wast enriched with heavenly glory. Wherefore, cease thou never 
to pray to the Lord for us.  
Theotokion: Awesome is thine intercession, O divinely adorned Mary, and dread is 
thy glory throughout all the earth, O Theotokos, for in thee do we now boast, having 
thee as a mediatress before thy Son and Creator, that by thine ever-vigilant 
supplication we may all be saved.  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone II:  
O venerable Father, having diligently satisfied virtue from thy childhood, thou 
didst become an instrument of the Holy Spirit; and receiving from Him the ability to 
work miracles, thou didst exhort all to overcome pleasures. And now, illumined most 
brightly with divine light, do thou enlighten our thoughts, O father Euthymius.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Tree of the Cross. O Jesus, * she 
who kneweth not wedlock said weeping: * “O sweet Child, why hast Thou 
abandoned me * who alone gave birth to Thee, * O unapproachable Light * of the 
beginningless Father? * Hasten Thou, and glorify Thyself, * that those who glorify 
Thy divine sufferings ** may receive divine glory!” 
  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Euthymius.  
Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Lucian O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone II: 
With hymns let us all gloriously honor * as a most splendid luminary Lucian, * 
who shone forth in fasting * and later was radiant in suffering, ** and who prayeth 
unceasingly for us all.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Crossing the tumult of the multitude dryshod, * thou didst mightily drown the 
incorporeal foe in the streams of thy tears, * O venerable and divinely wise 
Euthymius; * and receiving the gift of miracles, thou healest all sufferings. ** Pray 
thou unceasingly for us all.  
