--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS PROBUS, TARACHUS & 
ANDRONICUS 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIERARCH COSMAS OF JERUSALEM, BISHOP 
OF MAIUMA, THE COMPOSER OF CANONS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Thy face shattered, thy neck wounded, * healthy bones broken by staves, * thy feet 
and head burned, * cruelly pricked with goads, * thine ears and lips cut away, * forced 
to drink vinegar, * cast to the wild beasts * and beheaded with the sword, ** thou 
didst rejoice, O martyr Tarachus.  
Beaten and pricked with goads, * thy sinews severed, * deprived of thy sight, * 
given to be food for the wild beasts, * exposed to the fire and beheaded by the sword, 
* thou didst endure, O blessed one, * adornment of the martyrs * and confirmation 
of the Church, ** O glorious spiritual athlete Probus, peer of the angels.  
Burned with fire, * beaten with leather scourges, * raked with claws, * thy sinews 
severed, * thy theologizing tongue cut out, * thy teeth savagely uprooted, O 
Andronicus, * having wrestled with wild beasts * and met thine end under the sword, 
** thou didst finish thy contest and receive thy crown.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
As one who sustaineth us with wisdom, * and nurtureth us with purity, * O 
treasury of understanding, * O most renowned theologian, O divine disciple, * and 
enlightener of the faithful, * do we praise thee, O blessed hierarch Cosmas, * 
entreating the Master through thee, * that we all be delivered ** from corruption, 
misfortunes and all harm.  
Thou didst live thy life in abstinence, * keeping vigils and fasting, * in chastity and 
humility, O glorious one, * and wast in all ways enriched * by the knowledge of 
transitory things below * and by heavenly splendors, O blessed one; * and thou hast 
manifestly thundered forth * the incomprehensible, awesome and great mystery ** of 
the King of all.  
Thou wast humble-minded and meek, * calm and goodly of speech, * kind and 
guileless, * chaste and righteous, most simple and wholesome, * O venerable Cosmas. 
* And as a hierarch revealed by God in sanctity, * thou didst shepherd thy flock, O 
divinely wise one, * on the verdure which groweth by the waters of salvation. ** 
Wherefore, we now call thee blessed.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone IV:  
Enlisting in Christ’s army, ye forsook all the beautiful things of the earth and, 
taking your cross upon your shoulders, followed Him throughout the most elaborate 
tortures, and did not deny Him before the rulers and many tormenters. The angels 
crowned your heads with wreaths of victory, O ye who are valiant of soul, and ye 
have entered into the great bridal-chamber with splendor. O Probus, glory of the 
martyrs, Tarachus, destroyer of the demons, and Andronicus, victory of the faithful: 
as ye have boldness before the Savior of all, pray ye for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., 
The composition of Andrew of Jerusalem, in Tone I: 
Probus, Tarachus and the wise Andronicus, the threefold company, equal in 
number to the Trinity, appearing like radiant stars from the East, summon creation to 
a sacred festival; for they gave their flesh to the wild beasts and, having stained the 
ground with their blood, join chorus with the angels in the heavens, bearing crowns, 
and entreating God, the Lover of mankind, on our behalf, that He grant us remission 
of sins and great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thine unjust slaying, O Christ, * the Virgin, 
cried out to Thee, weeping: * “O my sweetest Child! * How is it that Thou diest 
unjustly? * How is it that Thou Who hast suspended the whole earth upon the waters 
* dost hang upon the Tree? * Leave me not alone who am Thy Mother and 
handmaiden, ** I pray, O greatly merciful Benefactor!”  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone V: 
The hosts of heaven marveled at the corrections of the holy martyrs, * how in 
their mortal bodies they invisibly vanquished the incorporeal foe, * contending well 
with the power of the Cross. ** And they pray to Christ, that our souls find mercy.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Teacher of Orthodoxy, instructor of piety and chastity, * luminary of the Church, 
God-inspired instructor of Hierarchs, * O supremely wise Cosmos thou hast 
illumined all by thy teaching; ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia; and two canons of the saints, with 
8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I sing the glory of Thy martyrs, O Savior”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Adorned with the grace of martyrdom, O martyrs, with love ye stand in the 
heavens before Christ, the Bestower of crowns, illumined with the light of the 
effulgence of the threefold Sun; enlightening those who bless you with faith.  
O invincible martyrs; amid persecution ye showed yourselves to be valiant warriors 
by your valiant struggles, driving away all the vile delusion of impiety, in that ye are 
the confirmation of the Church and the might of truth.  
Dispelling the tempest of evil and the raging sea of impiety with a rational 
understanding and the tranquility of the Spirit, O all-wise ones, ye passed over to the 
havens of heaven, rejoicing.  
Theotokion: The Word Who is co-beginningless with the Father and the Holy 
Spirit desired to make His abode within the Virgin’s womb, immutably assuming 
flesh, and having suffering willingly, hath set the divine armies of the martyrs to suffer 
with faith.  
Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is  
“Let us wisely praise Cosmas, the composer of canons”, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Having adorned thy life with the light of the virtues, O father Cosmas, shining 
with the brilliance of the thrice-radiant Light, thou dost stand before thy Master. Pray 
thou that those who hymn thee find enlightenment.  
Thy character hath revealed thee to have a right fitting name; for thou hast been 
shown to be an adornment of hierarchs, the confirmation of monastics, O wise one, 
and the abode of wisdom.  
O most wise lover of wisdom, thou didst wisely purify thy soul, O renowned 
Cosmas, driving away the turmoil of the world as it were the gloom of darkness.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: Let us hymn the pure and immaculate Maiden Mary, reverently 
glorifying her together as the Mother of God, crying: Rejoice, O pure Bride of God, 
blessed Virgin Mother!  
ODE III 
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Mightily opposing the tyrant, O Tarachus, and steadfastly enduring the battering of 
thy face, and rendered valiant by the power of the Spirit, thou didst crush the jaws of 
the noetic lions.  
Lacerated and burned, thy breast pricked with goads, thy divinely glorious mouth 
beaten, with a lofty understanding thou didst endure also the wounding of thy back 
and belly, O martyr Probus.  
Suspended like a lamb, thou didst endure the pain of the cruelest of wounds, O 
martyr Andronicus, the burning of fire, the uprooting of thy teeth and the excision of 
thy theologizing tongue.  
Like thrice-radiant stars of noetic effulgence, illumining the whole of creation, ye 
banished the darkness of the falsehood of the idols, O ye most radiant martyrs and 
spiritual athletes. 
Theotokion: The all-transcendent Word, Who hath brought all things into being, 
selected thee, O pure one, as His good, beautiful and chosen one, desiring to make 
His abode within thine immaculate and God-pleasing womb.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
With beautiful hymns thou didst gladden the Bride of Christ, moving her to 
hymnody, manifestly setting forth the divine mysteries of Christ.  
Nurtured on the laws of Christ, O father Cosmas, thou didst sustain the flock 
entrusted to thee with Orthodox precepts.  
Having acquired within thee a soul burning with the fire of divine zeal, O 
venerable father Cosmas, thou didst burn up all heresies.  
Theotokion: The shadows have passed away and the truth of Christ hath shone 
forth, O Mother of God, for receiving flesh from thy womb, He hath saved us.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”: 
Adorned with the virtues, O divinely inspired Cosmas, * thou wast the adornment 
of the Church of Christ; * for thou hast embellished it with hymns, O blessed one. * 
Pray thou to the Lord, that we be delivered from all the wiles of the enemy, ** for we 
cry: Rejoice, O thrice-blessed Cosmas!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Having armed themselves like youths with mighty faith in the Holy Trinity, 
Andronicus, Probus and the all-wise Tarachus destroyed the might of the falsehood 
of polytheism and bound the people to divine love. Wherefore, receiving the honors 
of victory, they rejoice with the choirs of the incorporeal hosts. Let us cry out to them 
with faith: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with 
love honor your holy memory.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Having been raised in piety and faith and adorned thy mind and soul with wisdom, 
thou didst flee all earthly cares and, dwelling alone, setting thy mind on ineffable 
things, thou wast deemed worthy of great grace; wherefore, having adorned the divine 
Church of Christ with honeyed hymns and doctrines. O holy hierarch Cosmas our 
father, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love 
honor thy holy memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Having conceived the Wisdom and Word in thy womb without being consumed, 
O Mother of God, thou hast given birth for the world unto the Nourisher of all and 
Fashioner of creation; and thou didst bear in thine arms Him Who holdeth all things. 
Wherefore, I beseech thee, O all-holy Virgin, and glorify thee with faith: May I be 
delivered from transgressions, and, on the day of judgment when I shall stand before 
the face of my Creator, O pure Virgin Sovereign Lady, grant me thine aid; for thou 
canst do all things whatsoever thou dost will, O thou who art all-hymned.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Observing Thy law, O Word, and hating the laws of the iniquitous who 
commanded that Thou, the Creator, be reviled with demonic wiles, the martyrs 
received the peace of heaven, having endured all the threefold waves of torture.  
Thou didst love to bear the yoke of Christ, and, crushed by the yoke on thy neck, 
rejoiced. And having the Cross as a staff of mighty power, O all-blessed Tarachus, 
thou didst endure the blows of many rods, crying aloud: glory to Thy power, O Lover 
of mankind!  
Made powerful by the divine Spirit, thou didst manfully endure the painful 
breaking of thy tendons and the plucking out of thine eyes, O martyr Probus, most 
perfectly enlightened by knowledge of the Trinity, joining thyself to the choirs on 
high.  
As a youth, O martyr Andronicus, thou didst stand before the tribunal, mightily 
opposing the enemy, therefore, those who severed thy tendons, rendered thee more 
powerful, for thou didst crush the head of the alien one beneath thy foot as thou 
madest thy way on high.  
Theotokion: Thou alone didst bear in thy womb the incarnate God Who brought 
about all things. And the divine martyrs suffered without wavering, confessing Him in 
the arena, O all-hymned Virgin Theotokos, thou wonder of the angels and wounding 
of the demons.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Having first cleansed the eye of thy heart of the turmoil of the passions, O 
hierarch Cosmas, thou didst chant beautiful and salvific hymnody, enlightening the 
Church.  
O Cosmas, thy most praiseworthy and delightful hymns, adorned with dogmas and 
the beautiful melodies, have become the healing of all despair for those who love 
them.  
The Church, O all-blessed one, which had become ill because of the blasphemous 
and foolish edicts of Copronymus, was healed with thy writings, which thou didst 
melodiously chant.  
In that thy hymns are wondrous and full of understanding, O father, through them 
thou hast manifestly revealed to all the mysteries of Christ, which are truly awesome 
and most wondrous.  
Theotokion: Let us hymn the most holy Theotokos, who gave birth to the Word 
of God in the flesh, in two natures but a single hypostasis, as the godly Cosmas hath 
taught.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE V  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Ye were unwavering travelers of the narrow and hard way, cutting through the 
multitude of perils like the foam of the sea, O spiritual athletes, establishing your 
hearts upon the rock of faith like immovable pillars.  
Speaking divine things and theologizing the doctrines of salvation, thou didst 
endure the cutting away of thy lips, O martyr Tarachus, but with strength of mind 
thou didst shut the mouths which spake blasphemy against God the Creator.  
With thy four limbs stretched out, and covered with the wounds of many stripes, 
thou didst valiantly show uprightness of soul; wherefore, appearing, crowned, with 
thy fellow spiritual athletes, O Probus, thou dost now stand before the King of all.  
Theotokion: Thou wast greater than the hosts of heaven, O Virgin, having given 
birth to the co-beginningless and everlasting Word. And the spiritual athletes, 
illumined by His splendors, passed through the night of ungodliness.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Thy sound hath passed over all the ends of the earth, O wise Cosmas, gladdening 
with divine hymns those who praise thee.  
Thou didst say that, in a manner transcending the laws of nature, the most holy 
Theotokos gave birth to the supremely divine Word. Wherefore, we call thee blessed.  
Sweetly chanting wondrous hymns, thou didst hymn the ineffable nativity of the 
Master from the most pure Virgin, O most sacred one.  
Theotokion: The lightning-flash of thy birthgiving hath illumined the whole world, 
O all-hymned one, and the earth hath been moved from delusion to faith in Him.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Becoming a weapon of the Mighty One through faith, ye manfully wounded the 
hearts of the pagans, contending against them valiantly, O greatly renowned spiritual 
athletes. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 As of old the wild beasts cowered before Daniel in the pit, so now were they 
terrified of the faith of the mighty warriors in the arena, subdued by their honored 
sufferings.  
Tarachus, imitating Thy pierced side, O Master, was pierced in the side; and he 
was given vinegar to drink, and his head was cruelly burned with fire.  
Theotokion: Having conceived the Pre-eternal One in thy womb without seed, O 
pure one, thou hast given birth in the flesh to Him Who is incorporeal by nature, 
nourishing with milk Him Who nourisheth all, O Mother of God who knewest not 
wedlock.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Thy words were like sweet honey-comb, delighting the hearts of the pious who 
hymn the baptism of the Savior and Symeon’s encounter and departure.  
Not in words, but by material things, O blessed one, didst thou set forth in hymns 
the raising of Lazarus from the dead, the children’s praise and the hatred of the Jews.  
Thou didst adorn the elevation of the thrice-blessed Tree, chanting hymnody full 
of all gladness and joy in the hymns thereof, O all-blessed one.  
Theotokion: Following thy divinely inspired words, O Virgin Maiden, all of us, the 
generations of mankind, call thee blessed, for thou art the blessed Mother of the good 
God.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
The valiant warriors and martyrs of Christ, *Tarachus, Probus and Andronicus, * 
have revealed to us the glory of the Trinity; * for they denounced all the ungodliness 
of the tyrants, ** contending with valor and faith.  
Ikos: Valiantly emulating the sufferings of Jesus, Tarachus, Andronicus and the 
wise Probus suffered in the arena, rejoicing, denouncing the ungodliness of the 
iniquitous. Wherefore, honoring their memory with love, we praise them in hymns 
and faithfully proclaim their struggles; for wondrous is the Lord Who hath glorified as 
luminaries in the world those who have contended with valor and faith.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Rejoicing, thou didst endure the severing of thine ears, O glorious Tarachus, in 
that thou art a right obedient servant of Him Who inclined his exceedingly merciful 
ear and hearkened to the supplications of thee who cried aloud: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Afflicted with the wounds of torture, O martyrs, ye opposed the all-iniquitous ones 
with steadfast mind; and as victors ye chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thy spirit was filled with divine dew and coolness when they burned thy head with 
a river of fire, O Tarachus; and thou didst cry out like the children: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
With the drops of your precious blood, O saints, ye extinguished the burning 
embers of delusion, exuding for us the divine dew of grace, pouring forth waters of 
healing upon those who ever praise your memory.  
Theotokion: Without leaving the bosom of the Father, the most perfect Word 
emptied Himself into thy womb: and He is seen to be flesh and born as a babe. To 
Him do we chant, rejoicing, O Virgin: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Every soul is gladdened, upon reading thy hymns, O divinely wise father, and cries 
out with faith: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Truly thy tongue, O father, became the pen of the Holy Spirit, recording the great 
wonders of the Word like a swiftly writing scribe.  
The law of praise is vanquished in thee, O father, for there is nothing fit to serve 
as praise for thee who hast recounted the mighty works of the Master.  
Theotokion: What mortal tongue can worthily bless thee who hast given birth to 
God, O Bride of God? Wherefore, we cry out with faith: Rejoice, O pure Virgin! 
Rejoice, O exceedingly glorious one!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Illumined with wounds and the comely beauties of your goodly and wondrous 
suffering, ye all stand, crowned, before the Lord, richly filled with the light that shines 
there, and chanting continually with love: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
The all-mindless tyrant, raging within himself since he had been vanquished by 
your opposition, quickly commanded that you be slain with the sword who chant to 
the Creator and Redeemer: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Andronicus, Probus and Tarachus are honored as champions of the Trinity, right 
victorious martyrs, who dispelled the winter of ungodliness with the fervor of the 
Spirit, the foundation of the faithful, beautiful flowers of the noetic garden of 
paradise, havens for the tempest-tossed, immovable pillars.  
Theotokion: With the incorporeal ranks, the armies of martyrs, the apostles and 
prophets, we all piously hymn the only pure Mother of God, the Sovereign Lady who 
hath dominion over all creation, in that she is holier than the cherubim; and we 
supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Strengthened by the staff of thy dogmas, O glorious one, we who praise thee turn 
away from all the evils of heresy and piously chant to Christ, crying: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord!  
Being far above all in intellect, O Cosmas, thou didst describe the meal at which 
the Lord offered the life-bearing Mysteries, and the dread betrayal and inhumanity of 
Judas, which thou hast taught us to flee.  
Shining with the rays of immaterial light, O most venerable Cosmas, thou didst 
describe the most pure sufferings, burial, resurrection and transfiguration of Christ, 
teaching all to chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Thou didst spring forth as a rod from the root of Jesse, O most pure 
Virgin who gave birth to the Lord, the Flower Who perfumeth us with the myrrh-
laden scents of His sufferings; wherefore, we all bless thee, O Mary, Bride of God.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
With their corruptible bodies Probus, Tarachus, and Andronicus, the favorites of 
Christ, were enabled to undertake incorrupt struggles, and the valiant ones, emulating 
the angels, received the immutable kingdom of God.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Mystically kindled by the immaterial Fire, ye showed yourselves to be burning 
embers and consumed material falsehood, O great martyrs; and as ye shine forth light, 
ye illumine creation and save our souls from sufferings and misfortunes.  
Today the Church of Christ doth joyfully and radiantly offer this, your divine 
festival, as an annual celebration; and with you the prophets, apostles and all the 
martyrs rejoice, O victorious and greatly renowned spiritual athletes.  
Ye have been taken up into the splendid habitations of paradise, O passion-
bearers, clad in the splendid robes which ye wove with your multifarious torments; 
and ye stand before the throne of the Almighty, praying earnestly for all.  
Theotokion: Spare me, O Savior Who wast born and preserved her who gave birth 
to Thee incorrupt after birthgiving; that when Thou shalt sit to judge all my works, 
Thou mayest overlook mine iniquities and sins, in that Thou art sinless, as the 
merciful God and Lover of mankind.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
We magnify thee as one rich and noble, shining with rays of the virtues and 
illumining the faithful who honor thee with praises and chant in an Orthodox 
manner, O thrice-holy Cosmas.  
Shining with divine laws, and having guided thy flock to the life-bearing meadow, 
O blessed and venerable one, as is meet thou hast passed over to the heavens, reaping 
the fruits of thy pangs.  
The never-waning Light was revealed to thee who hast now been translated from 
transitory things and art rightly purified. And most manifestly and purely delighting 
therein, be thou mindful of those who honor thee, O right glorious one.  
Theotokion: Glorifying thee as it is written, we call thee blessed, O Theotokos, the 
most holy Virgin, who art more glorious than the seraphim and hast given birth to 
Christ Who shone forth beginninglessly from the Father.  
Exapostilarion from the Oktoechos; and this one of the holy martyrs: 
Spec. Mel.: “As the disciples watched ...”: 
With hymns of praise let us crown the three-member chorus of spiritual athletes, 
Tarachus, Probus and Andronicus; for they endured laceration, cruel wounding and 
pain, and reign with Christ.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed as more glorious than the cherubim and 
shown to be more exalted than the seraphim, as the one who gave birth to God 
incarnate, Who hath shown mankind how to walk the straight paths which lead to 
salvation.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone V: 
The hosts of heaven marveled at the corrections of the holy martyrs, * how in 
their mortal bodies they invisibly vanquished the incorporeal foe, * contending well 
with the power of the Cross. ** And they pray to Christ, that our souls find mercy.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Teacher of Orthodoxy, instructor of piety and chastity, * luminary of the Church, 
God-inspired instructor of Hierarchs, * O supremely wise Cosmos thou hast 
illumined all by thy teaching; ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Adorned with the virtues, O divinely inspired Cosmas, * thou wast the adornment 
of the Church of Christ; * for thou hast embellished it with hymns, O blessed one. * 
Pray thou to the Lord, that we be delivered from all the wiles of the enemy, ** for we 
cry: Rejoice, O thrice-blessed Cosmas!  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II: 
The valiant warriors and martyrs of Christ, * Tarachus, Probus and Andronicus, * 
have revealed to us the glory of the Trinity; * for they denounced all the ungodliness 
of the tyrants, ** contending with valor and faith.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §233 (GAL. 6: 10-17)  
Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §106 (LK. 21: 12-19)  
The Lord said to His disciples: Beware of men. They shall lay their hands on you, 
and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being 
brought before kings and rulers for my name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a 
testimony. Settle it therefore in you? hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall 
answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not 
be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, 
and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they Cause to be put to death. And 
ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your 
head perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
 
 
 
 
