--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 18th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE & EVANGELIST LUKE  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy evangelist, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you ...”: 
What now shall we call thee, O apostle, * Heaven, for thou hast proclaimed the 
glory of God; * radiance, for thou dost illumine * the world with light; * cloud which 
droppeth divine water as rain; * most divine cup of wisdom, * which poureth forth 
upon us * the wine which gladdeneth men’s hearts. ** Pray thou that our souls be 
saved. (Twice)  
What now shall we call thee, * O thou who art pleasing unto God? * golden ark of 
the law, which Christ hath devised; * river which floweth forth unto us out of 
paradise; * lamp shining forth a noetic light; * beacon illumining the whole Church; * 
living Bread of the divine table; * beaker of spiritual drink. ** Pray thou that our souls 
be saved. (Twice)  
What now shall we call thee, * O thou who didst behold God? * Most active 
servant of the mysteries of Christ; * wise chief artisan * who cutteth boards for grace; 
* one who hath set down the new law * surpassing that of Sion, * which was 
preached by thee. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
What now shall we call thee, O glorious one? * Strong treasury of heavenly gifts; * 
renowned physician of bodies and souls; * fellow laborer of Paul, * and his 
companion, * who settest forth the acts of the apostles. * Many are the names, O 
Luke, * which virtue hath devised for thee. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
What now shall we proclaim thee, * O divinely eloquent one? * Disciple, in that 
thou hast announced to us the glad tidings of Christ; * physician, in that thou healest 
the passions of the soul; * luminary who hast shone forth * the noetic light upon us; * 
foundation and ground of the Faith: * for thou hast written for us the most precious 
Gospel. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
What now shall we call thee, * O wondrous one? * True beholder of the wisdom 
of doctrine; * recorder of the acts and teachings of the apostles; * unshakeable pillar 
of piety; * indestructible bulwark of the Church. * Many are thy names, O Luke, * and 
greater yet thy gifts. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VI:  
O apostle of Christ and recorder of divine dogmas, foundation of the Church: with 
divine proclamations thou hast truly healed the hearts of all those in the gloom of 
ignorance, which have entered into the abyss of despair; and thou hast saved them 
from the tempest of threefold waves, as a follower and disciple of Paul, the chosen 
vessel. Wherefore, we entreat thee: beseech our Savior and God on behalf of those 
who ever celebrate thine honored memory with faith.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JOHN  
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen 
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word 
of life (for the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and show 
unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us) 
that which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have 
fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son, Jesus 
Christ. And these things write we unto you, that our joy may be full. This, then, is the 
message which we have heard of Him, and declare we unto you, that God is light, and 
in Him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with Him, and walk in 
darkness, we lie, and do not the truth; but if we walk in the light, as He is in the light, 
we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, 
cleanseth us from all sin.  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JAMES  
James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which 
are scattered abroad, greeting. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers 
trials, knowing this, that the testing of your faith worketh patience. But let patience 
have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, lacking nothing. If any of 
you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, Who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth 
not, and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that 
wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed. For let not that 
man think that he shall receive anything of the Lord. A double-minded man is 
unstable in all his ways. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted; but 
the rich, in that he is made low, because as the flower of the grass he shall pass away. 
For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withereth the grass, and its 
flower falleth, and the grace of the fashion of it perisheth; so also shall the rich man 
fade away in his ways. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he is 
tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to those who 
love Him.  
A READING FROM THE GENERAL EPISTLE OF JUDE 
 Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to those who are 
sanctified by God, the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called: mercy unto 

--- PAGE 3 ---
you, and peace, and love be multiplied. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write 
unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and 
exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered 
unto the saints. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old 
ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into 
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. I will, 
therefore, put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, that the Lord, having 
saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed 
not. And the angels who kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he 
hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. 
Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving 
themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an 
example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. But, beloved, remember ye the 
words which were spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; how they 
told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own 
ungodly lusts. These are they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. 
But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy 
Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus 
Christ unto eternal life. And of some have compassion, making a difference; and 
others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, hating even the garment spotted by 
the flesh. Now unto Him who is able to keep you from falling, and to present you 
faultless before the presence of His glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God, 
our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy evangelist, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice, boast of fasters ...”:  
Grace was poured forth from thy lips in tongues of fire, O apostle Luke, and thou 
wast shown to be a tongue of fire, emitting words of light like burning arrows against 
those who desire darkness, writing and teaching the precious Gospel with preaching 
worthy of the Light; and thou wast revealed to be a living fragrance unto those who 
truly desire life, as said Paul, whom thou didst have as thy teacher, but the smell of 
death for those who loved not life. Yet grant unto us peace, life, light and great 
mercy.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Through thy words, as thou didst say, we have come to recognize the 
confirmation of the words which thou didst utter in a most godly manner, O initiate 
of the mysteries, for, for our sake, thou didst put into writing those things which thou 
didst assuredly know from those who witnessed them and transmitted them to thee, 
as their peer and a servant of the Word incarnate, Whom thou didst behold in 
Emmaus after His arising, and Whose bread thou didst eat with Cleopas with burning 
heart. Fill thou also the souls of us who honor thee with His divine warmth.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  
Rejoice, thou who alone, rejoicing, hast recorded for us the archangel’s greeting to 
the pure one: Rejoice!, and the Baptist calling her, from his mother’s womb, the 
bearer of the Lord, and his conception and the incarnation of the Word, His 
temptations and miracles, words and sufferings, His Cross, death and arising, and His 
issuing forth, which thou didst behold; and the descent of the Spirit, the account of 
the acts, especially those of Paul, whose companion thou wast, as well as a physician 
and initiate of the mysteries and a luminary of the Church, which do thou preserve 
always.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O all-wise hunter, holy disciple, husbandman of the Savior and preacher of His 
sufferings: transcending creation with faith and gathering the nations out of deception 
and leading them to the good fragrance, thou didst attain unto the heavens. 
Wherefore, standing before the Judge of all, pray thou that He deliver us from our 
iniquities, and that we be freed from torment on the Day of Judgment.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
all-pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the primal 
curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O most pure 
one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign Lady, ** 
the intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 
Troparion of the holy evangelist, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Luke, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins 
* unto our souls  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone III:  
We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin Theotokos; 
* for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in the flesh * He had 
received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in that He is the Lover of 
mankind.  
Or this Troparion of the holy evangelist, in Tone V:  
The holy apostle, the all-hymned Luke, * who is acknowledged by the Church of 
Christ * as the recorder of the acts of the apostles * and the splendid author of the 
Gospel of Christ, * let us praise with sacred hymns, * as a physician who healeth the 
infirmities of all mankind, * and the ailments of nature, * who cleanseth spiritual 
wounds ** and prayeth unceasingly for our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone V:  
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of those 
who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * and who 
knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * Cease not to 
intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord”, the Troparion in Tone III:  
O holy Apostle Luke, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins 
* unto our souls (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone III:  
We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin Theotokos; 
* for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in the flesh * He had 
received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in that He is the Lover of 
mankind.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Come ye all, let us praise the apostle Luke as our helmsman; for he hath abolished 
the deception of idolatry and hath led men to the light of life and taught them to 
believe in the Trinity. Wherefore, reverently honoring him today, O ye faithful, let us 
glorify Christ our God. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Rejoice, O Mary, Virgin Mother, holy mountain, paradise of Eden, from whom 
Christ God, the Word seedlessly conceived, was born, through Whom life hath 
sprung forth for the world.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
When thou didst journey with Cleopas to the town of Emmaus after the 
resurrection, O all-sacred Luke, the Lord appeared before thee in a veiled manner 
when thou wast downcast; and, receiving the bread He gaveth thee, thou didst 
straightway recognize the Savior. Him do thou entreat, that He grant us great mercy. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
As an uncultivated vine, O Virgin, * thou didst sprout forth the most comely 
Cluster of grapes * Which poureth forth upon us the wine of salvation * making glad 
the souls and bodies of all. * Wherefore, ever blessing thee as the cause of good 
things, * with the angel we cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O apostle of Christ and 
evangelist Luke, and we honor thy pangs and labors wherewith thou didst 
struggle in the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the 
work of His hands.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice) 

--- PAGE 7 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Plying the depths of the noetic sea with the fisher’s rod of wisdom, O all-blessed 
Luke, thou didst draw forth the souls of the faithful from the deadly abyss. 
Wherefore, instructed by Paul, thou didst purify thy heart with the radiance of the 
Spirit, enlightening the nations with thy dogmas, and healing the infirmities of the 
passions with miracles, ever praying to Christ God for us, that our souls be saved. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Having thee O Theotokos as our hope and intercession, * we fear not the assaults 
of the adversary, ** for thou dost save our souls.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and 
their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, §67 (21:15-25) 
At that time, Jesus, having arisen from the dead, appeared to His disciples and said 
to Simon Peter; Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto 
him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my lambs. He 
saith to him again the second time, Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou me? He saith 
unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my 
sheep. He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jona, lovest thou me? Peter 
was grieved because he said unto him the third time, lovest thou me? And he said 
unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith 
unto him, Feed my sheep. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou 
girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou 
shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou 
wouldest not. This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And 
when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, Follow me. Then Peter, turning about, 
seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast at 
supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee? Peter seeing him saith to 
Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till 
I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. Then went this saying abroad among 
the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall 
not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone III:  
When thou didst journey with Cleopas to the town of Emmaus after the 
resurrection, O all-sacred Luke, the Lord appeared before thee in a veiled manner 
when thou wast downcast; and, receiving the bread He gaveth thee, thou didst 
straightway recognize the Savior. Him do thou entreat, that He grant us great mercy.  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraklisis), with 6 Troparia; and the 
canon of the holy evangelist, with 8 Troparia, in Tone VIII: 
 ODE I  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
Thou wast the most splendid chariot of God, bearing an all-holy name before 
men, O all-honored Luke, mightily drowning the chariots and mounted captains of 
deceit.  
Receiving a torrent of life, with showers of divine knowledge which fell from 
within thee thou didst irrigate a world made arid by the burning heat of ungodliness, 
O all-blessed Luke.  
Made bright as lightning by the shining of the Spirit and the purity of thy life, O 
thrice-blessed one, thou didst shine like a gift from God upon the whole world, 
illumining the hearts of the faithful.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O all-holy temple, fleece bedewed by God, sealed well-spring 
of the stream of immortality! O Sovereign Lady, preserve thy flock unharmed by all 
enemies.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as our God, 
* Whom the whole of creation doth hymn: * There is none more righteous 
than Thee, O Lord. 
Shining forth like the sun in thy preaching, O all-blessed Luke, thou didst adorn 
the foundation of the Church, causing the gloom of deception to vanish with the 
fervor of faith.  
Thou didst cut divinely beauteous tablets from the stone of the incarnation of 
God, O most noetically rich apostle, possessing a mason’s hammer in thy godly 
tongue and divinely inspired mouth.  
Entering into the all-luminous cloud, and being covered thereby, O most wise one, 
thou didst receive the new law inscribed upon thy heart by the finger of the Spirit.  
Theotokion: There is none as blameless as thee, O Lady, and none more pure than 
thee, O all-immaculate one; for thou didst hold God the Word, Who alone is greatly 
merciful, in thy womb.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy evangelist, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
As the companion of Paul thou didst patiently endure divers misfortunes, O all-
praised apostles of the word, finishing the course of faith in martyrdom, and dwelling 
now with him in the highest, O blessed one. Wherefore, having preached the Gospel 
of Christ to the world, and illumining the whole earth, O most honored Luke, do 
thou entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who celebrate thy 
holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O undefiled, blameless and all-immaculate Lady, thou cloud of the noetic Sun and 
golden candle-stand of the light of God: with the radiance of dispassion illumine my 
soul, which hath grown dim through the blindness of the passions, I pray; with 
torrents of compunction enlighten my polluted heart, and with tears of repentance 
cleanse me of the mire of my evil deeds, that with love I may cry out to thee: O Ever-
virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me forgiveness of my 
transgressions; for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope. 
ODE IV  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
As a steed of the King of all, O divinely wise one, thou didst roil the sea of the 
nations, sweetening brackish unbelief with the salt of God, O ever-glorious one.  
Drawing His bow, Christ loosed thee splendidly as a well-honed arrow, bright with 
beams of piety illumining our souls.  
With mystic skill, O all-blessed one, heal the passions of soul and body of those 
who hymn thee, excising the filth of sin, O thou who art all-wise.  
Theotokion: O Mary, Birthgiver and Bride of God, deliver me from cruel 
transgressions and misfortunes, and guide me to the haven of tranquility and salvation 
by thy supplications.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Thou wast shown to be like unto dew which falleth from the heavens, destroying 
the burning heat of deception by thy discourse.  
Conceiving the fear of God within thee, O apostle, thou hast given birth unto 
salvation for those astray.  
Ascending the mountain of the virtues, O all-blessed one, thou didst preach the 
Gospel of the kingdom unto all.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: Mary Theotokos, who knewest not wedlock, render the hopes of the 
enemy in vain, and gladden those who hymn thee.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Having drained the cup of wisdom of the knowledge of Christ God, thou gavest 
drink unto all, O Luke all-wise.  
Chosen as the companion of Paul, O all-blessed and divinely eloquent Luke, thou 
didst fish for the nations with the net of thy dogmas.  
Thou wast shown to be a cloud raining down upon us showers of life, O apostle, 
flowing forth from the well-springs of salvation.  
Theotokion: Thine Offspring, the Destroyer of idols, O Mary Bride of God, is 
worshipped with the Father and the Spirit.  
Kontakion of the holy evangelist, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”:  
Let us praise the godly Luke: * the true preacher of piety, * the orator of ineffable 
mysteries, * the star of the Church; * for the Word Who alone knoweth men’s hearts 
* chose him to be, with the wise Paul, ** the teacher of the gentiles.  
Ikos: Enriched with heavenly knowledge by the hand of the Master, thou wast 
entrusted with the portion of the gentiles, O all-praised one. Wherefore, setting thy 
life afire with discourse, O Luke, thou wast revealed to be a transmitter of the law to 
the nations greater than Moses. Through the Spirit thou didst explain the divine 
Faith, likening thyself to the divine tablets graven by the finger of God. Wherefore, 
Christ, Who alone knoweth our hearts, hath glorified thee.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In Babylon, the pious youths did not worship the golden image, * but, 
bedewed in the midst of the fiery furnace, * they chanted a hymn, saying: * O 
supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
As a faithful disciple of the ineffable mysteries of Christ God, O all-wise one, thou 
didst preach His divine Gospel to the faithful who said: O supremely exalted God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou wast shown to be adorned with the embellishment of the virtues, O all-
blessed Luke, illumined by the rays of divine majesty and crying out unceasingly to 
thy Creator: O supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Emitting radiant beams, like a torch in the midst of night, thou didst piously drive 
away the darkness of deception by the radiance of thy words, crying aloud: O 
supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Possessed of a life illumined with wise discourse, O Luke, beholder 
of God, thou didst manifestly describe the birthgiving of the Virgin and lovingly 
depict her in icons. To her do we faithfully offer veneration, glorifying Christ.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the mystery of the 
Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning bush: * praise ye and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
With the dew-bearing wisdom of thy words and showers of divine grace thou didst 
extinguish the furnace of deception, as a preacher and sacred preacher of the Lord, O 
divinely wise one.  
Beautiful were thy feet, O all-blessed one, who preached the Gospel of the Peace 
which most excellently passeth all understanding. Him do we supremely exalt and 
glorify throughout all ages.  
Christ, the Light of the world, the Lord of glory, the Effulgence of the essence of 
the Father, revealed thee as one enlightening those who sit in darkness. Him do we 
supremely exalt throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: The Lord, Who made His abode in the Virgin’s womb and, through 
her, renewed ancient Adam in a manner strange and past description, do we hymn 
and glorify throughout the ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: With never ceasing praises we magnify thee, * the Mother of God Most 
High, * who art higher than the most pure hosts, * and who beyond 
comprehension knew not wedlock, * yet hath truly given birth to God.  
In the preaching of the Gospel thou wast a proclaimer of the salvation unto all the 
world; and, breathing the inspiration of the Spirit, thou didst show thyself to be a 
sacred and greatly renowned trumpet, O all-honored one of sacred eloquence.  
Adorned with the acts of the Savior’s apostles, moved by God thou didst record 
them for the faithful, ever setting them forth as a lasting and inspired model, O all-
glorious and sacred preacher.  
Thou dost stand as one who hath attained the ultimate desire, O divine hierarch 
Luke; for standing before Christ, thou dost delight in the vision of the Divinity 
bestowed by Him. Wherefore, we all call thee blessed.  
Theotokion: We magnify thee, O Mother of God, who bore in thine arms the 
unapproachable God Who is hymned in the heavens by all the hosts, and Who ever 
granteth salvation to us through thee.  
 
Exapostilarion of the holy evangelist:  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples ...”: 
O Luke, apostle of Christ, initiate of ineffable mysteries and teacher of the gentiles: 
with the godly Paul and the most pure Theotokos, whose divine icon thou didst 
lovingly depict, pray thou, O seer of God, on behalf of us who bless thee and 
celebrate thy sacred repose, O all-wise preacher of the mysteries.  
Glory ..., another Exapostilarion: 
 Spec. Mel .: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”:  
We praise thee, the most excellent recorder of the divine Gospel, as the disciple of 
grace and follower of Paul; for thou didst proclaim the incarnation of the Word and 
His becoming a man, and His sufferings, O blessed one. Wherefore, assembling with 
faith, O Luke, we honor thee as is meet.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Ineffable was the birthgiving of the all-immaculate Bride, for, as thou wast a most 
pure temple, O Theotokos, thou hast given birth unto God the Word, Who by pre-
eternal counsel made His abode within thee. Wherefore, hymning thy birthgiving, we 
magnify thee as is meet, O all-immaculate one.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thee, the cloud of the Light ...”: 
O ye faithful, in hymns let us honor the Apostle Luke, the disciple of Christ, the 
most wise recorder of the Gospel, the beautiful chosen vessel, the animate image, the 
boast of all the Churches; for he preached the most glorious miracles of God, 
enlightening those on earth with the rays of theology for the sake of righteousness.  
Learning the healing of souls more than the skill of healing bodies, O wise one, 
thou wast sown to be excellent at both, inspired by the wisdom of God. And healing 
souls and bodies thereby, O all-blessed Luke, thou dost call all to knowledge, taking 
wing to the desire of God, and ever leading mortals into heaven, praying on behalf of 
all who praise thee.  
With the hook of the word hast thou drawn forth like fish unto the knowledge of 
God those who entered into the abyss of ignorance, and thou didst offer to Christ 
goodly food: an incorrupt life befitting honor O all-blessed and most sacred Luke. 
Wherefore, thou wast an apostle of Christ, a wise herald and extoller of the active 
workings of grace.  
The composition of Leo the Magistrate, in Tone VIII: Come, all creation, and with 
hymns let us praise the true physician of souls, the ever-memorable Luke, the disciple 
of the Savior; for with the anointing of the font of Christ he hath healed the sickness 
of ungodliness, and with the rivers of the divinely flowing waters of the gospel, which 
proceed from his mouth, he hath irrigated the living garden. Wherefore, his 
proclamation hath gone forth like prophecy throughout all the world, and he prayeth 
that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., in Tone I: 
Assembling, O ye faithful, like David let us cry out in hymns to Luke, the mystic 
orator of the Word: thy tongue hath been revealed to be the pen of a scribe, adorning 
the visage of Christ, the Chief-scribe, that the nations may understand the knowledge 
of God. Therein he preached the Gospel, recording also the actions of the apostles. 
Wherefore, standing before God in Trinity, he prayeth for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the holy evangelist.  
Shining forth like the sun in thy preaching, O all-blessed Luke, thou didst adorn 
the foundation of the Church, causing the gloom of deception to vanish with the 
fervor of faith. (Twice) 
Thou didst cut divinely beauteous tablets from the stone of the incarnation of 
God, O most noetically rich apostle, possessing a mason’s hammer in thy godly 
tongue and divinely inspired mouth.  
Entering into the all-luminous cloud, and being covered thereby, O most wise one, 
thou didst receive the new law inscribed upon thy heart by the finger of the Spirit.  
Having drained the cup of wisdom of the knowledge of Christ God, thou gavest 
drink unto all, O Luke all-wise.  
Chosen as the companion of Paul, O all-blessed and divinely eloquent Luke, thou 
didst fish for the nations with the net of thy dogmas.  
Thou wast shown to be a cloud raining down upon us showers of life, O apostle, 
flowing forth from the well-springs of salvation.  
Theotokion: Thine Offspring, the Destroyer of idols, O Mary Bride of God, is 
worshipped with the Father and the Spirit.  
Troparion of the holy evangelist, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Luke, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins 
* unto our souls  
Kontakion of the holy evangelist, in Tone II:  
Let us praise the godly Luke: * the true preacher of piety, * the orator of ineffable 
mysteries, * the star of the Church; * for the Word Who alone knoweth men’s hearts 
* chose him to be, with the wise Paul, ** the teacher of the gentiles.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS, §260 (4:5-9,14,18) 
Brethren: Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time. Let 
your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought 
to answer every man. All my state shall Tychicus declare unto you, who is a beloved 
brother, and a faithful minister and fellow servant in the Lord: whom I have sent 

--- PAGE 15 ---
unto you for the same purpose, that he might know your estate, and comfort your 
hearts; with Onesimus, a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They shall 
make known unto you all things which are done here. Luke, the beloved physician, 
and Demas, greet you. The salutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bonds. 
Grace be with you. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §51 (10:16-21)  
The Lord said unto His apostles: He that heareth you heareth Me; and he that 
despiseth you despiseth Me; and he that despiseth Me despiseth Him that sent Me. 
And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto 
us through Thy name. And He said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from 
heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over 
all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. 
Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather 
rejoice, because your names are written in heaven. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, 
and said, I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou hast hid these 
things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, 
Father; for so it seemed good in Thy sight.  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
 
