--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS MARTIN,  
BISHOP OF TOURS  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: 
Come, ye assemblies of Orthodox Christians and ye multitudes of the faithful, and 
let us glorify the holy hierarch, who hath shone forth from antiquity; and with fervor 
let us cry aloud: Rejoice, O blessed Martin, thou sacred adornment of the Church of 
Christ! (Thrice)  
O wise pastor of the city of Tours, intercessor for the lands of the West, and 
mighty bulwark of the kingdom of Christ: by thy supplications, as with shield and 
buttress, protect thy people who call upon thee with faith. (Thrice)  
Behold, Christ meeteth Martin in the guise of a beggar, testing his loving-kindness; 
and Martin cutting his own robe in twain, clothed the Beggar’s nakedness, cutting off 
love of self, arraying himself in the robe of brotherly love, and rejoicing in spirit. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Even before receiving the baptismal robe, O blessed one, thou didst clothe Christ 
in thy robe; wherefore, receiving grace in token of gratitude, thou didst work great 
and wondrous miracles, healing the sick, restoring the dead to life, kissing lepers and 
cleansing them, taking pity of men and beasts, and having the angels serving with 
thee. Pray thou for our souls, O most marvelous worker of wonders!  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 

--- PAGE 2 ---
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple 
mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time, for his soul 
pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This 
the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His 
grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera:  
In Tone VIII: Tell us, O Martin, how thou manfully endured the cold, how thou 
received reproach for the cloak thou hadst cut in twain! Wherefore, thou dost rejoice, 
saying: “I am warmed by the warmth of the Spirit; I am clothed with brotherly love as 
with a robe; and I consider reproach for the sake of Christ to be an honor! 
Wherefore, I rejoice in Him!”  
Desiring to deceive the blessed Martin, the most wicked enemy of the human race 
assumed the guise of Christ and sought to deceive the holy one into worshipping him; 
yet, recognizing this delusion, and protecting himself with humility of mind, he 
refused to believe the false one, and cried aloud: “Where are the wounds of the nails 
in my Lord? Where are the glorious marks of the suffering of the Redeemer? Thou 
shalt not deceive me, for I know thee, who art a liar from of old! Depart from me!”  
Emulating the great Elijah and the glorious Elisha, O Martin most bold, most 
fervent servant of Christ, thou didst raise up the dead and cause their souls to return 
solely by thy mighty prayer to the Master of life and death. Pray thou for us also, O 
holy hierarch.  
In Tone VII: Of old, the wicked disciple betrayed the Savior by a kiss and sold his 
own soul to the devil; but with a kiss Martin honored Christ in the guise of a leper 
and purchased life everlasting, healing the incurable ailment by divine love. 
Wherefore, come, let us venerate his struggles and, glorifying his honored memory, 
let us cry aloud: O merciful and holy hierarch, remember thy flock before the throne 
of Him Who is without beginning!  
In Tone II: “Wherefore dost thou lie upon the ground, in that thou art weak and 
infirm?” the brethren asked the blessed Martin, seeking to persuade him to lie upon a 
bed. And he answered them, saying: “Let me be now, for I desire to recline at the 
banquet of Christ, in His kingdom.”  
Come, ye faithful, and today let us praise Martin, the adornment of pastors, the 
faithful servant of Christ, the most glorious wonderworker, and unashamed advocate 
for the whole world.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Seeing thee to be a humble man, lacking in form and beauty, vainglorious people 
held thee in disdain, O blessed one; but, emulating Christ, thou didst endure their 
reproach, sweetly rejoicing therein. Yet thy struggles could not be hidden, for thy 
virtue shone forth more brightly than the sun; wherefore, those who before despised 
thee glorified thee. Then didst thou cry out, O wise one: “O Christ, King of all, 
protect my humble-minded soul, that I may not utterly stumble!”  
Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
The day of thy beauteous memorial hath dawned today, O most sacred one. And 
we rejoice in godliness, magnifying thee.  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of my heart shall be 
of understanding.  
O blessed Martin, was it not to a pauper by the wayside that thou gavest thy robe? 
How is it that thou beholdest Christ the Master clothed therein?  
Verse: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom * and his tongue shall 
speak of judgment.  
Lo! the invincible Martin cometh to the battle, heeding the call of an earthly king, 
showing true courage, and praying that peace be granted to the world.  
Glory ..., in Tone III: 
Children and youths now hasten together, joyously lighting torches, and weaving 
hymns of praise into a wreath for the right glorious Martin, glorifying his sacred 
memory and splendid festival, and asking his help on the day of wrath.  
Both now ..., in Tone III:  
We sinners dare to hymn the Virgin Theotokos, who is more honorable and 
splendid than the ranks of the incorporeal ones, who is glorified by all creation, who 
truly shineth forth near God, and with love helpeth the whole world.  
After the blessing of the loaves, this Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Martin our father, ** entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved. (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Martin our father, ** entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn in Tone IV:  
Full of apostolic zeal, thou didst crush the idols to dust, and make a vile pagan 
temple into a church of God, guiding the heathen to the true Faith, O Martin, 
preacher of grace; wherefore, thou wast deemed worthy to behold in a vision the 
apostle of the gentiles with the preeminent Peter, receiving the power of their spirit as 
Elisha did from Elijah, to fish for men and lead a new people to Christ. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV:  
O ye faithful, let us bless the Theotokos, * our helper, the fervent aid of those 
amid misfortune, ** by whom we have been delivered from foreign bondage.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Teaching all piously to venerate the tree of the Cross, thou didst cut down at the 
root the oak-trees mindlessly worshipped by the heathen and didst overthrow the 
temple of their idols, for which thou wast dragged away to be slain, O long-suffering 
Martin; but the swordsman who was to execute thee suddenly fell at thy feet, 
paralyzed by an invisible power. And the people, beholding this, were filled with fear, 
and cried out to thee fervently: “Great is the God Whom thou dost preach! Teach us 
also to worship Him, and save our souls!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone V:  
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of those 
who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * and who 
knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * Cease not to 
intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring. 
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Martin, 
and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God on our 
behalf.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  

--- PAGE 6 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Seeing the heathen languishing in the darkness of ignorance, wholly lacking in 
knowledge of the one true God, thou didst preach unto them Christ God, Who said 
“I am the Light!”, and didst call upon Him in prayer to destroy their abominable place 
of sacrifice. And, lo! that very day the Lord sent a tempest, which leveled the druidic 
temple and crushed their vile idols, bearing witness to the power of thine entreaty and 
to thy fervent Christian love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
We ever thank and magnify thee, O most pure Theotokos, * and bowing down, we 
hymn thy birthgiving and unceasingly cry aloud, * O thou who art full of grace: do 
thou Save us, * O most merciful Virgin, * in that thou art good, do thou snatch us 
from the demons * at the hour of trial, and the dread sentence, ** that we, thy 
servants, may not be put to shame.  
Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 35 FROM THE MIDPOINT (JN. 10: 1-8)  
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He 
that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, 
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of 
strangers. This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things 
they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves 
and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Full of courage and the omnipotent grace of God’s priesthood, thou didst travel 
through the land of Gaul, preaching salvation unto the darkened people and exposing 
the impotence of their abominable religion. And the heathen, perceiving the divine 
power which abode in thee, forsook their false deities and cleaved unto Christ, Who 
through thee most gloriously saved their souls from death.  
Canon of the supplication to the most holy Theotokos (the Paraclisis), with 6 
Troparia, including the Irmos, in Tone VIII. And this canon of the holy hierarch, 
with 8 Troparia, in Tone VI: 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Illumined by divine radiance and dancing in the light of the thrice-righteous 
Monarchy, O wise Martin, enlighten those who with piety honor thy luminous 
memory.  
The Creator of all, Who knoweth all things before they happen, foreseeing the 
uprightness of thy heart, took thee from an earthly army and enlisted thee among the 
choirs of angels, O blessed one.  
My soul is slain by the sting of sin, O rather, yet by thy life-bearing supplications 
move the Life of all to raise me up to hymn thy godly memory.  
Theotokion: O Maiden and Sovereign Lady most favored by God, who didst bear 
the Bestower of light Who enlighteneth the earth which hath been cast into darkness 
by many passions: illumine mine accursed soul!  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Since thou didst mount to the summit of most noble deeds, O wise one, Christ 
hath raised thee up to sit upon a throne in the highest, from whence in a sacred 
manner thou dost enlighten all creation with the brilliance of thy wonders.  
As a child of the day and of the light, O holy hierarch, when thou didst behold as a 
naked beggar Him Who covereth Himself with light as with a garment, thou didst cut 
thy cloak in twain and cover Him.  
The carnal passions faded out in thee, and thou didst thus become a most pure 
abode of the Trinity. Wherefore, I beseech thee, O holy hierarch: By thine 
intercessions quench the passions of my soul.  
Theotokion: O pure palace of God, most holy Virgin, I entreat thee: Cleanse and 
enlighten my wretched soul, which hath been sullied by carnal pleasures and 
imaginings.  
Sessional hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
When the emperor of the West heard report of thy virtues and wondrous works, 
he would fain have met with thee; but his consort clung to the vile heresy of Arius, 
and confounded her husband’s goodly desire. Then, for the sake of thy flock and the-
ruler’s salvation, thou didst resort to fasting and fervent prayer, O holy hierarch, and 
our merciful Savior opened unto thee the doors which had been shut. Then the 
Sovereign, greeting thee as was meet, hearkened unto thy wise counsel and received 
edification from thee.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
As he contemplated that which was beyond nature * Joseph was struck with 
wonder O Theotokos, at thy conception without seed. * He contemplated the 
mysterious dew upon the fleece, * the bush un-burnt by fire, * Aaron’s rod which 
budded. * Thus thy Betrothed and guardian bore witness and cried unto the priests 
saying: * A Virgin beareth a child, ** and after child-birth remaineth yet a virgin. 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Delighted by thy godly life, the Most High bestowed upon thee the grace of most 
glorious wonders, O wondrous hierarch, whereby thou hast been revealed unto the 
ends of the earth as marvelous.  
Resurrected by thine intercessions, the dead man who had been slandered beheld 
his accuser struck dead, O holy hierarch; and he magnified thy grace, O father.  
Accept us who hymn thy divine memory, O holy hierarch, and deliver us from 
sufferings, perils and temptations; for with faith we now have recourse unto thy 
protection.  
Theotokion: With drops of thy loving-kindness, O immaculate one, sprinkle thou 
my soul, which is withering in the burning heat of sin; and grant that I may produce 
the fruits of repentance.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Having forsaken earthly riches and transitory glory which fadeth away, O blessed 
Martin, thou hast acquired heavenly riches and eternal and immutable glory, wherein 
be thou mindful of us.  
One who had endured a cruel death by hanging was raised up from the dead as 
from sleep by thy life-giving supplication; and he won this life and that which is to 
come.  
Thou didst restore to life him who - O the horror! - had been struck dead by a 
serpent, O father. So also by thy supplications restore life even unto me, who have 
been slain by the sting of sin.  
Theotokion: Shining from afar, thou wast revealed unto Moses as a burning bush, 
O Lady; and having given birth unto the divine Fire, thou wast shown to be 
unconsumed even after giving birth. Wherefore, do thou burn up the roots of my 
passions.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
O Martin, thy relics pour forth healings upon those who reverently approach 
them, and the legions of the demons are put to flight; but the choirs of the faithful 
who fervently raise up hymns unto thee are bedewed with grace.  
Full to overflowing with the vivifying waters of the Most holy Spirit Who 
accomplisheth all things, O Martin, thou dost give life unto those who were slain by 
the deception of the evil one, purifying them with the healing waters of the Savior.  
The woman whom thou didst free from everlasting punishment blessed the Lord, 
O Martin, and, dispensing with her wealth, she exchanged it for the bliss of heaven.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, in that thou didst bear the hypostatic Wisdom and 
Power of the Father, with godly wisdom and divine power fill thou the hearts of all 
who hymn thee with faith.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: 
Thou didst flourish in the virtues like a palm tree, * and in thy miracles didst 
multiply like a cedar, O wondrous father, * bedewing the ends of the world, * and 
burning up legions of the demons. ** Wherefore, entreat the Lord on our behalf.  
Ikos: In proclaiming the glad tidings of man’s salvation, O most merciful hierarch, 
thou wast not daunted by the threats of the Druids and their deluded followers; but, 
having armed thyself with the pure confession of Christ, thou didst courageously 
show their vile graven images to be common stones, powerless against the might of 
the Most High, and thereby thou didst bring multitudes of the heathen to the 
knowledge of God. Wherefore, mindful of thine apostolic zeal, we beseech thee: 
Entreat the Lord on our behalf.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Shining forth more brightly than the sun, thy memory, O all-hymned Martin, 
dispelleth the night of the passions, enlightening the faithful, who chant unto Christ: 
O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
As an emulator of thy Lord, O father, thou didst save the harlot who had recourse 
unto thee with faith, and didst present her to Christ as a pure bride who chanted with 
faith: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Blessing thee, the ends of the world give utterance to thy praises, O all-hymned 
Martin, and celebrate thy memorial, chanting with faith unto Christ Who hath made 
thee wondrous: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: O thou who art full of divine grace, thou art a new heaven more 
spacious than the other, for thou didst contain the Creator of heaven and earth. 
Entreat Him, that we who honor thee may be deemed worthy of the good things of 
heaven.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Of old, Christ transformed water into wine by His divine power; and by His 
energy, O wise Martin, thou didst transform a living dove into one of gold. O 
awesome wonder!  
Beholding a dead ass restored to life by thy supplications, O glorious one, he who 
did not trust in the resurrection believed on God Who is risen from the dead, now 
liveth eternally.  
O father, by thy supplications free from all want and difficulty, temptations and 
perils, those who in memory of thee piously chant: Thee, O Christ, do we supremely 
exalt throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Dry up the raging flood of my passions, O Virgin Lady, and rain 
down upon me streams of tears, freeing me from the punishment of eternal fire, that 
I may glorify thee throughout the ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Arraying thyself in the might and power of Christ, thou didst repel the impotent 
strength of the enemy, O glorious Martin, and art therefore called a most powerful 
defender of the faithful, freeing them from tribulations, perils, temptations and 
difficulties.  
Adorning the temple of heaven like a sacred and divine treasure, O holy hierarch, 
thou standest before the great Light, chanting with the incorporeal beings: Holy, 
Holy, Holy art Thou, O consubstantial Trinity, Thou Creator of all!  
Triadicon: The Way, the Truth and the Resurrection, the Light and Life art Thou, 
and the joy of the saints. Wherefore, through their intercession lead all along the 
narrow way, and grant unto them life and the never-waning light, O Thou only Lover 
of mankind.  
Theotokion: Thou art shown to be the most beautiful temple and the most pure 
palace of the Word, O pure one. And hastening to thy holy temple we praise thee 
with love, and cry aloud: Fulfill our entreaties which are for the good, O Sovereign 
Lady.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch: 
Hearken, ye who love the feasts of the Church, and rejoice with the faithful of the 
city of Tours and the land of France, in the memory of the merciful hierarch Martin, 
by whose tireless labors and steadfast faith, God hath been fittingly glorified.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Virgin Mother of the Lord, thou delight of the angels, joy of holy hierarchs and 
the venerable, intercessor for all Christians: Help us and deliver us from everlasting 
torment.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O most glorious wonder! * Though born and reared in a pagan household, * the 
most holy Martin the chosen vessel of God’s mercy, * was filled with zeal and love 
for Christ * when he beheld the lives and virtues of the Christians; * and though 
forcibly enrolled in the army of an earthly king, * the blessed one did not fail to 
declare his allegiance * to the King of heaven in the font of holy baptism. ** By his 
supplications, O Lord may our souls be saved. (Twice)  
O most glorious wonder! * When yet a catechumen unenlightened by divine grace, 
* thou, O Martin, didst see a naked pauper by the side of the road, * all but dead in 
the winter’s cold; * and, taking pity on his wretchedness, * thou didst cut thy cloak in 
twain to clothe him. * Then those who passed by mocked thine appearance; * but 
Christ God appeared to thee in a vision and declared to thee ** that it was Him 
Whom thou hadst so clothed.  
Long didst thou, in thy humility, refuse sacred ordination, * O most blessed father 
Martin, * preferring the life of a simple monk: * yet a lamp is not hidden, but set on a 
stand to give light unto all. * Wherefore, desiring to have a man of such sanctity as 
their bishop, * the faithful of Tours brought thee to their city by subterfuge, * and 
compelled thee to accept hierarchal consecration. * And, bowing to the will of God 
and His people, ** thou didst serve them with great holiness and zeal.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Having foretold the hour of thy departure from this life, O holy hierarch Martin 
our father, confident of the mercy and love of the Savior, thou didst drive away the 
primeval foe of the human race, crying: “Thou hast no share in me! The bosom of 
Abraham will receive me!” Since thy repose the Lord hath glorified thy precious body 
with incorruption and a countless multitude of signs and wonders and healings have 
poured forth therefrom in torrents without end. Wherefore, with hymns we glorify 
thee as the favorite of God who as a faithful servant hast manifestly entered into the 
joy of thy Lord.   

--- PAGE 12 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  
Great Doxology. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the holy hierarch.  
Since thou didst mount to the summit of most noble deeds, O wise one, Christ 
hath raised thee up to sit upon a throne in the highest, from whence in a sacred 
manner thou dost enlighten all creation with the brilliance of thy wonders. (Twice) 
As a child of the day and of the light, O holy hierarch, when thou didst behold as a 
naked beggar Him Who covereth Himself with light as with a garment, thou didst cut 
thy cloak in twain and cover Him.  
The carnal passions faded out in thee, and thou didst thus become a most pure 
abode of the Trinity. Wherefore, I beseech thee, O holy hierarch: By thine 
intercessions quench the passions of my soul.  
O Martin, thy relics pour forth healings upon those who reverently approach 
them, and the legions of the demons are put to flight; but the choirs of the faithful 
who fervently raise up hymns unto thee are bedewed with grace.  
Full to overflowing with the vivifying waters of the Most holy Spirit Who 
accomplisheth all things, O Martin, thou dost give life unto those who were slain by 
the deception of the evil one, purifying them with the healing waters of the Savior.  
The woman whom thou didst free from everlasting punishment blessed the Lord, 
O Martin, and, dispensing with her wealth, she exchanged it for the bliss of heaven.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, in that thou didst bear the hypostatic Wisdom and 
Power of the Father, with godly wisdom and divine power fill thou the hearts of all 
who hymn thee with faith.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Martin our father, ** entreat Christ 
God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: 
Thou didst flourish in the virtues like a palm tree, * and in thy miracles didst 
multiply like a cedar, O wondrous father, * bedewing the ends of the world, * and 
burning up legions of the demons. ** Wherefore, entreat the Lord on our behalf.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
THE 1st EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS §151 (I COR. 12: 7-11)  
Brethren: The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. 
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom to another the word of 
knowledge by the same Spirit; to another faith by the same Spirit· to another the gifts 
of healing by the same Spirit· to another the working of miracles; to another 
prophecy; to another discerning of spirits, to another divers kinds of tongues; to 
another the interpretation of tongues: but all these worketh that one and selfsame 
Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Give heed, O my people, to my law; incline your ear unto 
the words of my mouth.  
Verse: I will open my mouth in parables, I will utter dark sayings which have 
been from the beginning.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN §36 (10:9-16)  
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: I am the door: by me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 
know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
