--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 11th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE PHILIP OF THE SEVENTY, ONE OF 
THE SEVEN DEACONS  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER THEOPHANES THE 
CONFESSOR HYMNOGRAPHER, BISHOP OF NICAEA  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
O blessed Philip, * who as one full of wisdom and divine grace * wast numbered 
among the seven deacons, * thou wast chosen with Stephen * to minister to the needs 
of the saints. * Wherefore, beholding him slain, * thou didst hasten to Samaria * at 
the command of God, O glorious one, * preaching the word of God * and 
enlightening those who before were in darkness, O all-wise one, * whom thou didst 
make children of the day ** through the Spirit of God.  
Beholding the divine signs wrought by thy hand: * the recovery of sight by the 
blind, * the healing of the paralyzed, * the expulsion of unclean spirits * where they 
lived, * the people marveled, O Philip, * and came to thee for spiritual cleansing, * 
brought suddenly from unbelief to faith. * Wherefore, when they heard of this, * the 
divine choir of the apostles were gladdened, ** for multitudes of Samaritans were led 
to God.  
Being thyself a chariot of the Word, * O divinely eloquent one, * beholding the 
right wondrous eunuch of Candace * riding upon a chariot, * questioning and in 
doubt, * thou didst overtake him * and didst reveal to him * the discourse and 
manifestation * of things desired, O blessed one; * and, believing, he asked of thee 
divine cleansing. * And when he had received it, * the Creator of all made him a 
divine preacher, ** the first among the martyrs of all Ethiopia.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
Radiantly didst thou shine forth, * O glorious Theophanes, * in the firmament of 
faith * like a star most bright, * dispelling all the darkness * of the heretics * with the 
rays of thy light * and illumining with thy divine teaching * those who turn to thee 
with faith and love. * Wherefore, with love * we celebrate thy radiant feast: ** Pray 
thou with boldness on behalf of our souls.  
Having armed thy soul * with labors of fasting, * thou didst put an end to the 
cavorting of the flesh, * O most sacred father, * and made thy mind a dwelling of the 
divine Trinity, O glorious one. * Thou wast raised aloft * to where the armies of the 
martyrs, * the assemblies of hierarchs * and ineffable beauty are, * and with them dost 
thou now rejoice, * standing in glory before Christ, ** praying with boldness on 
behalf of our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
With the divine streams of thy tears, O hierarch, * thou didst drown the encamp-
ments of the demons * as though they were helpless; * and by thy continual 
beseeching of God * and thy mighty ascents * thou didst cast down to the earth * 
prideful exaltation * and didst ascend * to the splendid mansion of heaven, * wherein 
thou dost abide with the angels, * standing before Christ, ** praying with all the 
company of the blessed ones.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
Having stumbled * because of mine evil disposition, * and been enslaved to 
wicked deception, O Bride of God, * wretch that I am, I flee to thine all-wondrous 
loving-kindness * and thy fervent aid, * O most holy Maiden. * Deliver me from the 
bonds of temptations and grief, * O most immaculate one, * and save me from the 
assaults of the demons, * that I may glorify thee, * and hymn and bow down before 
thee with love, ** magnifying thee, O Sovereign Lady, as ever-blessed.  
Stavrotheotokion: When, of old, the unblemished ewe-lamb * and immaculate 
Sovereign Lady, * beheld her Lamb * upon the tree of the Cross, * she exclaimed 
maternally, and marveling cried aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new 
and most strange sight I see? * How hath the thankless synagogue * betrayed Thee to 
the judgment-seat of Pilate * and condemned Thee to death, * Who art the Life of 
all? ** Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, O Word!”  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Phillip, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins ** unto our souls 
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Teacher of Orthodoxy, instructor of piety and chastity, * luminary of the Church, 
God-inspired instructor of Hierarchs, * O supremely wise Theophanes thou hast 
illumined all by thy teaching; ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, and two for the saints.  
ODE I  
Canon to the holt apostle, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the divine glory of Philip,” 
the composition of the venerable Joseph, in Tone VI:  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Illumined with the most splendid radiance of Christ, O wise one, thou wast shown 
to be a secondary luminary in thy partaking of divinity, bearing a lamp before the 
faithful in a sacred manner, O glorious Philip.  
In a sacred manner hath the super-essential Word, Who brought about our entire 
being, appointed thee His sacred disciple to deliver the gentiles from profane 
darkness, O wise one.  
By the imposition of the hands of the sacred disciples thou wast chosen to be a 
sacred deacon with Stephen and the others, in that thou wast full of the Spirit of God, 
O Philip all-wise.  
Theotokion: He that wrought all things out of nothingness had thee as the cause 
of His incarnation, O pure Mother of God. Wherefore, we, the faithful, bless thee as 
is meet.  
Canon to the venerable one, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
By thy prayers drive thou away the gloom of my mind, O hierarch of Christ, that 
with songs I may hymn thy sacred and radiant memory, O glorious one.  
From Zion didst thou flow like a river, O glorious one, and with exceedingly 
divine streams hast thou given drink unto the assemblies of the faithful, crying aloud: 
Let us chant unto God a song of victory!  
Having illumined thy soul with divine splendor, O Theophanes, thou didst utterly 
consume the delight of the passions with the fire of abstinence, truly chanting: Let us 
chant a song unto Christ!  
Theotokion: With the most splendid rays of the light of thy Son illumine thou my 
darkened soul, O Theotokos, and still thou the turmoil of the passions by thine 
intercessions, O pure one.  
ODE III 
Canon to the holy apostle  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sons of light didst thou make of those who were in the darkness of unbelief, O 
blessed one, declaring the glory of the Word in awesome signs, like a lofty heaven.  
Proclaiming in a sacred manner Christ Who shone forth from the tribe of Judah, 
O blessed one, with the light of grace thou didst show Him forth Whom Moses and 
the prophets foretold of old.  
With words flowing with sweetness thou didst prevail upon those long cast off 
through ignorance, to reject soul-destroying poison and accept the grace of salvation, 
O divinely inspired Philip.  
Theotokion: O Maiden, thou wast shown to be a mystic candlestick truly bearing 
the Light which, in His extreme goodness, doth enlighten those who before were held 
fast in the night of ignorance.  
 Canon to the venerable one  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Thou wast shown to be full of the divine Spirit, O wise one, richly nourishing the 
hearts of those who look to thee with the sweetness of piety and the living word.  
Shining forth with the commandments of divine splendor, O all-blessed one, thou 
didst drive away the gloom of heresy, chanting unto Christ, the Bestower of life: Holy 
art Thou, O Lord!  
Ascending the mountain of divine virtues, O hierarch, and entering into the divine 
darkness, thou didst unite thyself with God and receive the tablets of wisdom, the law 
of grace.  
Theotokion: Lo! the ladder of Jacob which he once beheld set up, whereon God 
established Himself, hath been shown to be the pure, radiant and virginal Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the Highest ...”: 
Thundering forth the divine incarnation of Christ, * thou didst utterly denounce 
the incorporeal foe, * O wondrous Theophanes. * Wherefore, we all piously cry out 
to thee with faith: ** Pray thou unceasingly on behalf of us all!  
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Shown forth as an expeller of demons and as a beacon enlightening those who are 
in darkness, thou didst reveal the Sun Who shone forth from the Virgin; and having 
destroyed the temples of idols, thou didst raise up churches to the glory of God. 
Wherefore, we honor thee and radiantly celebrate thy divine memory, and together 
we cry out to thee: O apostle Philip, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of 
sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., that of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Thou hast appeared today, O venerable one, as another sun, that of the Church, 
illumining her with the lightning flashes of thy divine words, as a disciple of the Lord, 
O Theophanes.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Stretching forth thy most pure arms, * O Virgin and Mother * shelter those who 
put their trust in thee * and who call out to thy Son exclaiming: ** O Christ grant 
unto us all Thy great mercy. 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding thy Son lifted up upon the Tree, O most pure one, 
with thy maternal womb wounded with pain, thou didst piteously cry aloud: “Woe is 
me! How is it that Thou hast set, O my timeless Light?”  
ODE IV  
Canon to the holy apostle  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Simon, seeing thee working wonders and great signs, O Philip, accepted baptism 
hypocritically, without abandoning his wickedness; wherefore he hath been given over 
to damnation.  
Those who lived in the city of Samaria, beholding thee wielding great powers, O 
Philip, preacher of Christ, accepted the light of divine knowledge with gladness.  
God, said the angel of the Lord unto thee, directed the way of the sacred 
Ethiopian, O Philip, that he might come to know the way of the Word’s incarnation.  
The most sacred eunuch of Candace, beholding thee who didst admonish him, 
was baptized at thy hand, O Philip, and filled with the Holy Spirit, he became a divine 
preacher  
Theotokion: Thy Son, incarnate of thy pure blood and begotten, O all-immaculate 
one, hath made children of men sons of God. Wherefore, we glorify thee.  
Canon to the venerable one  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Having cleansed thyself through fasting, O all-wise father Theophanes, thou didst 
become wholly filled with light, and wholly contained by God, through partaking of 
the Holy Spirit.  
Famished with starvation, cast into cruel imprisonment, thou didst endure torment 
like a martyr, O all-blessed one, rejoicing in the Lord in a pure conscience.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Gleaming with admonitions, thou wast sharpened as a sword tempered by the 
divine Spirit of Christ, which cutteth apart the machinations of the heretics.  
Theotokion: Thou was shown to be a most radiant beacon, a divine table, the 
dwelling-place of God, the ark and the rod, which put forth in the world the Blossom 
of Christ, O Virgin Mother 
ODE V  
Canon to the holy apostle  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Fearing not the wrath of the iniquitous, O Philip, thou didst truly walk among 
wolves like a lamb, bringing them to piety through the word of grace, O most blessed 
one.  
Emmanuel was led like a lamb to the slaughter, as the glorious Isaiah doth say. 
And the sacred eunuch of Candace, unable to understand this, was taught by thee, O 
Philip.  
Thee have we known as a disciple of sacred eloquence, one of the seven chosen 
deacons, a divine foundation of the Church, a beacon for all who are in darkness, O 
Philip.  
Theotokion: Confessing thee truly to be the Theotokos with all our heart, we are 
delivered from temptations and vexations by thine intercessions before the Lord and 
God of all, O divinely blessed one.  
Canon to the venerable one  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
With thy radiant splendors, O most sacred father, thou didst destroy the gloomy 
darkness of the heretics, illumining and enlightening the ends of the world with the 
light of divine knowledge.  
With cruel wounds the defenders of the impious wounded thee who art right 
wondrous, whom the ranks of angels have embraced as a hierarch of Christ and a 
divine martyr.  
Thou hast been a radiant guide for those who are astray, O father, a helmsman for 
those who sail the sea, firm ground for those who are tossed about by the assaults of 
cruel enemies, and an immovable rampart.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou hast been revealed to be the glory of mortals and 
a refuge for sinners, the comeliness of Jacob whom God loved and wherein He chose 
to dwell.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE VI  
Canon to the holy apostle  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Full of spiritual waters, like a river issuing forth from the divine Eden, gently 
watering the ends of the earth and giving drink to the hearts of the faithful, wast thou 
revealed to be O right wondrous one.  
When thou didst open thy lips, O disciple of Christ, they were filled with divine 
knowledge; and when thou didst pry open the maw of the evil one, thou didst rescue 
countless multitudes of those he had swallowed, saving them, O apostle.  
The might of the invisible foe was cast down, and he perished when with the 
might of the Spirit thou didst preach Christ crucified, Who called the nations to 
Himself, O Philip.  
Theotokion: O Christ, Thy most holy Mother gave birth to Thee, the Author of 
creation, outside the laws nature, and in a manner transcending the natural order, 
truly remaining an undefiled Virgin.  
Canon to the venerable one  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Like the sun, thou didst emit rays of divine splendor, O most blessed one, praising 
the sufferings, bonds, wounds and wondrous struggles of the martyrs, O hierarch of 
Christ.  
Praising the most pure Lady with thy tongue in a pure manner, O divinely wise 
one, thou hast chanted splendid discourses which gladden the assemblies of the 
faithful and the hearts of the wise.  
With the writing revealed upon thy most honorable and pure countenance, O wise 
one, thou dost obliterate the writings of the impious and their abominable and 
godless commands, proclaiming the veneration of the icon of Christ.  
Theotokion: God, Who hath created and Who sustaineth all things by His own 
will, and is infinite in His divine essence, was borne in thine arms, and contained 
within a body, O most pure one.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
The most wondrous fisher of nations, * converser with the disciples of Christ, * 
Philip, forechosen from among the apostles, * doth today bestow a wealth of healing 
upon the world, * protecting those who praise him from evil circumstances. * 
Wherefore, together we cry aloud to him: ** Save us all by thy prayers, O apostle!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Ikos: Declaring the glory of God like the heavens, O thou who wast an eyewitness 
of Christ, thou didst draw far-off nations to the faith, that they might draw close to 
God. Wherefore, like Moses the giver of the Law, thou hast enriched thy flock, O all-
famed one; for of old he divided the sea and led his people across, and afterwards in 
the desert fed them with heavenly bread; but thou, delivering all creation in Christ 
from a cold and cruel lack of faith, hast led up to the heavenly mansions on high 
those who cry: Save us all by thy prayers, O apostle!  
ODE VII  
Canon to the holy apostle  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
The supremely Divine One hath led thee, O Philip, as a horse which troubleth the 
sea of the nations, crusheth the heads of the foe and chanting unto Him with song: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having become an imparter of mysteries, O wise Philip, thou didst teach lands 
and nations, concerning the mystery hidden before all the ages, and cleansing them of 
abominable mysteries.  
Thou didst appear as a most magnificent star, O glorious Philip, and the 
adornment of Tralles, wherein thy precious body doth lie working most glorious 
wonders for the enlightenment of those who piously bless thee O wise one.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin Mary, saved by thee day and night from the 
harmful attacks of the enemy, all manner of temptations and defilements of soul, we 
call thee the Theotokos.  
Canon to the venerable one  
Irmos: In Babylon the Children feared not the fiery furnace; * but cast into the 
midst of the flames * they were bedewed and sang: * ‘O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou.’ 
Dividing the word of truth, subjected to persecution, O hierarch Theophanes, 
thou didst endure the trial of wounds chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
The streams of thy dogmas, O wise one, have overwhelmed the sea of the impious 
who do not chant unto Christ our God: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The rivers of thy words which flow with honey, O Theophanes, have filled with 
divine gladness the souls of those who in songs chant unto our exceedingly glorious 
God.  
Theotokion: The Son of God, Who was incarnate in thy womb, O Virgin Mother, 
hath now appeared, working a great mystery within thee. To Him do we chant with 
gladness: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon to the holy apostle  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Using the divine word as it were salt, O all-blessed one, thou didst cleanse the foul 
stench and heal the hearts of all, that they might honor and glorify the Trinity 
throughout the ages.  
The legs of the lame were strengthened at thy word, O wise one, and vile and 
unclean spirits lamented, unable to endure the grace given thee.  
Those who of old lived in Samaria, beholding the many wonders wrought by thee 
through the power of the Spirit, the Source of grace, received a ray of grace from thee 
O Philip.  
Theotokion: O pure Virgin, strengthen thou my soul which is vexed by the malice 
of the assailant, O thou who by divine condescension hast received within thyself 
Him Who animates all things, yet thou thyself hast remained as thou wast.  
Canon to the venerable one  
Irmos: Suffering affliction for the sake of the laws of their fathers, * the blessed 
Children in Babylon * scorned the foolish decree of the King. * Standing 
together in the midst of the flames, they remained unharmed, * and sang a 
song fitting for almighty God: * ‘O ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.’ 
Truly holding to the law of the fathers, O all-blessed one, thou didst spit upon the 
senseless command of the most iniquitous ruler who was destroying those who 
piously venerated the image of the Lord, which He assumed when He manifested 
Himself unto the world through the Virgin Maiden. Him do we supremely exalt 
throughout all ages!  
A divine intellect, a most harmonious harp of the most holy Spirit, a melodious 
nightingale, the summit of the faithful, pillar and ground of Orthodoxy, the 
firmament of the Church, boast of monks, the glory and strength of the fathers wast 
thou revealed to be, O wise Theophanes, hymning Christ throughout the ages.  
A vial of myrrh of the most holy Spirit wast thou shown to be in the outpouring of 
thy myrrh-scented and wise teachings, O father, destroying the fetid corruption of 
falsehood; and with thy manner of life perfuming the honored Church, crying out 
unceasingly: With hymns do we supremely exalt Thee O Christ throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou wst revealed to be that most fertile mountain of God 
which thy forefather David described of old, chanting prophetically, from whence 
Christ, the Cornerstone, was cut, Who hath crushed all the might of idolatry. Him do 
we unceasingly hymn and supremely exalt throughout the ages!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE IX  
Canon to the holy apostle  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Beholding things for which thou didst wait from of old, and having received a 
divine and unchallenged authority, O divinely eloquent Philip, thou didst teach all 
concerning it. Adorn thyself and dance, delighting in divine enlightenment and 
consolation!  
Like a lamp, like a star, like the great sun, thou hast circled the world with thy 
luminous rays, announcing thy divine proclamation. And having come to Tralles, a 
city of Asia, and becoming a leader there, O blessed one, thou didst repose therein.  
To those near and far away didst thou proclaim the Cross, death and Resurrection 
of the Redeemer, being thyself a starry heaven shimmering with divine radiance, O 
Philip, radiant and wondrous apostle of Christ.  
The earth covered thy much-suffering body, which emitteth the radiance of 
healings, and heaven possesseth thy sacred spirit, which doth rejoice with the 
apostles. With them do thou remember us who praise thee, O wise one.  
Theotokion: Every breath doth offer thee a cry of thanksgiving, sounding forth 
with gladness, saying: Rejoice, thou fiery throne of the Most High! Rejoice, most 
spacious field of God! Rejoice, O pure one, magnificent crown of the apostles!  
Canon to the venerable one  
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a mother 
who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth of God hath 
renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship and magnify thee 
* as the Bride and Mother of God. 
He who fought against thee and Christ’s church, like a manslayer lacking the 
ability to see, laid temptations for thee. Yet thou didst valiantly remain unmoved, and 
with a manly mind opposed the impious emperor, exhorting him to worship the 
image of Christ, O Theophanes.  
Adorned with the ineffable beauty of the Trinity and bedecked with splendors, O 
divinely wise one, thou dost shine forth, truly standing before the throne of thy 
Creator and God, where the voice of those who keep festival is heard, O most 
noetically rich and God bearing father Theophanes.  
Thou hast received honor for thy struggles, as is meet, and now, crowned, thou 
dost rejoice with the angels in the heavens, where the assembly of prophets and 
apostles, the truly great army of martyrs and the choirs of patriarchs dwell. Remember 
thou us, O father Theophanes.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: O Virgin Birthgiver of God, blessed and exceedingly glorious pure 
Mother, who knewest not wedlock, who dost fight on behalf of faithful kings as they 
battle against barbarians and dost protect us from all the curses of the enemy, grant 
us victory, that, hymning thy Son, we may magnify thee.  
Exapostilarion of the holy apostle:  
Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars ...”: 
O apostle of Christ, throughout all the world have thy proclamations gone, 
whereby thou didst preach God to us. Him do thou entreat on our behalf, that He 
shine upon us His noetic light.  
Glory ..., that of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Thou hast been revealed to the Church to be a divine light, O Theophanes, 
illumining it with the splendor of thy hymns and with the light of thy face whereon 
thou didst bear the wounds of Christ as an adornment. Cease thou never to pray to 
Him on behalf of thy flock, O father.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
The garment given me of old in the font of baptism have I defiled with the 
wantonness of the passions, and, wretch that I am, I am afraid, mindful of the hour 
of the divine and truly dread Judgment. O all-immaculate Virgin, intercede for me and 
deliver me from the awful threat.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of 
the holy apostle. 
Sons of light didst thou make of those who were in the darkness of unbelief, O 
blessed one, declaring the glory of the Word in awesome signs, like a lofty heaven.  
Proclaiming in sacred manner Christ Who shone forth from the tribe of Judah, O 
blessed one, with the light of grace thou didst show Him forth Whom Moses and the 
prophets foretold of old.  
With words flowing with sweetness dost thou prevail upon those long cast off 
through ignorance to reject soul-destroying poison and accept the grace of salvation, 
O divinely inspired Philip.  
Theotokion: O Maiden, thou wast shown to be a mystic candlestick truly bearing 
the Light which, in His extreme goodness, doth enlighten those who before were held 
fast in the night of ignorance.  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle Phillip, * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins ** unto our souls 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Teacher of Orthodoxy, instructor of piety and chastity, * luminary of the Church, 
God-inspired instructor of Hierarchs, * O supremely wise Theophanes thou hast 
illumined all by thy teaching; ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Thundering forth the divine incarnation of Christ, * thou didst utterly denounce 
the incorporeal foe, * O wondrous Theophanes. * Wherefore, we all piously cry out 
to thee with faith: ** Pray thou unceasingly on behalf of us all!  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV: 
The most wondrous fisher of nations, * converser with the disciples of Christ, * 
Philip, forechosen from among the apostles, * doth today bestow a wealth of healing 
upon the world, * protecting those who praise him from evil circumstances. * 
Wherefore, together we cry aloud to him: ** Save us all by thy prayers, O apostle!  
 
Prokeimenon of the apostles, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into 
all the earth, * and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
READING FROM THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES (8:26-39)  
In those days; the angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, saying, Arise, and go 
toward the south, unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza, which is 
desert. And he arose and went: and, behold, a man of Ethiopia, a eunuch of great 
authority under Candace queen of the Ethiopians, who had the charge of all her treas-
ure, and had come to Jerusalem for to worship, was returning, and sitting in his 
chariot read Isaiah the prophet. Then the Spirit said unto Philip, Go near, and join 
thyself to this chariot. And Philip ran thither to him, and heard him read the prophet 
Isaiah, and said; Understandest thou what thou readest? And he said, How can I, 
except some man should guide me? And he desired Philip that he would come up and 
sit with him. The place of the Scripture which he read was this, He was led as a sheep 
to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his 
mouth: in his humiliation his judgment was taken away: and who shall declare his 
generation? And the eunuch answered Philip, and said, I pray thee, of whom speaketh 
the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man? Then Philip opened his mouth, 
and began at the same Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus. And as they went on 
their way, they came unto a certain water: and the eunuch said, See, here is water: 
what doth hinder me to be baptized? And Philip said, If thou believest with all thine 
heart, thou mayest. And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of 
God. And he commanded the chariot to stand still: and they went down both into the 
water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him. And when they were come 
up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw 
him no more: and he went on his way rejoicing.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
READING FROM THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (10:1-15)  
At that time, the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two 
before, his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come. Therefore 
said he unto them, the harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few: pray ye 
therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his harvest. 
Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Carry neither purse, 
nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by the way. And into whatsoever house ye 
enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace 
shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again. And in the same house remain, 
eating and drinking such things as they give: for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Go 
not from house to house. And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat 

--- PAGE 14 ---
such things as are set before you: and heal the sick that are therein, and say unto 
them, the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But into whatsoever city ye enter, 
and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, Even 
the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you: 
notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. 
But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that 
city. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had 
been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great while 
ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre 
and Sidon at the judgment, than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to 
heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell.  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
 
 
 
