--- PAGE 1 ---
THE SUNDAY ON OR AFTER THE 11th DAY OF THE MONTH OF 
OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY FATHERS OF THE SEVENTH ECUMENICAL 
COUNCIL  
Be it known: that, on the Sunday following the eleventh day of this month, we 
celebrate the memory of the three hundred and sixty-five fathers of the Seventh 
Ecumenical Council, the second convened in Nicaea, the task whereof was the 
repudiation and eradication of the godless teachings of the Christ-hating and 
Christian-persecuting iconoclasts Copronymus and those of like mind with him: the 
wretched bishops and unholy hierarchs, and their godless and vile synagogue.  
Should the eleventh day of October fall on a Sunday itself, the service to the holy 
fathers of the Seventh Ecumenical Council is chanted on that very day. If it fall on 
Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday, the service is chanted on the preceding Sunday; if 
on Thursday, Friday or Saturday, on the following Sunday.  
The service of the saint appointed for that Sunday is omitted and is chanted 
whenever the ecclesiarch shall decide.  
ON SATURDAY AT LITTLE VESPERS:  
We chant the Stichera to the Resurrection and to the Theotokos as usual.  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 4 from the Oktoechos, 3 to the Resurrection 
and 1 by Anatolius; and 6 Stichera of the holy fathers, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel: “The despairing ...”: 
The Patriarch Germanus the New, taking the honored councils of the fathers, 
brought them together in one single canon, recording and holding their dogmas; and 
these valorous intercessors for salvation doth he present to the Lord, and to the flock 
and its pastors. (Twice)  
The Scriptures of the Law appointed the honored number seven for the Hebrew 
children, who were held fast serving the law in shadows; but the fathers who, by the 
command of God Who created all that exists in six days and blessed the seventh, met 
at the sevenfold Councils, rendering them most honorable, having thereby laid down 
the foundation of the faith.  
O ye thrice-blessed fathers! from things that are material ye have clearly taught 
unto all the Trinity, as the cause of the creation of the world; for by three, and then 
four councils, having set forth the most lofty discourse, ye expounded clearly 
orthodox doctrine, using the four elements, to elucidate the understanding of the 
Trinity, Who hath created these things and fashioned the world.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
A single bending of the greatly renowned Prophet Elisha over the prone son of the 
woman who had rendered him service was sufficient to breathe life into him; yet he 
returned and bent over him seven times, proclaiming beforehand, as a seer of things 
to come, your Councils, whereby ye have brought to life the mortality of God the 
Word, slaying Arius and those who labored with him.  
Who hath rent Thy garment, O Savior? It was Arius, Thou hast said, who 
separated the Trinity’s authority of equal honor into divisions. He hath denied Thee 
to be one of the Trinity. He hath taught Nestorius to not say “Theotokos.” But the 
Council in Nicaea hath proclaimed Thee, O Lord, to be the Son of God, co-
enthroned with the Father and the Spirit.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Let us praise today the mystic trumpets of the Spirit, * the God-bearing fathers 
who in the midst of the Church * chanted the harmonious hymn of theology, * that 
the Trinity is one and immutable in essence and divinity; * the destroyers of Arius, the 
champions of the Orthodox, * who ever pray to the Lord ** that our souls find 
mercy.  
Both now ..., the Dogmatic Theotokion, in the tone of the week.  
After the Entrance, the Prokeimenon of the day, and three lessons:  
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS  
And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained 
servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto 
Dan. And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote 
them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus. And he 
brought back all the goods, and also brought back again his brother Lot, and his 
goods, and the women also, and the people. And the king of Sodom went out to meet 
him, after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlomer and of the kings that were 
with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which is the kings dale. And Melchizedek king of 
Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the most high God. 
And he blessed him, and said: Blessed be Abram of the most high God, possessor of 
heaven and earth: and blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine 
enemies into thy hand.  
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY 
Behold, I have set the land before you: go in and possess the land which the Lord 
sware unto your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give unto them and to their 
seed after them. And I spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you 
myself alone: the Lord your God hath multiplied you, and, behold, ye are this day as 
the stars of heaven for multitude. (The Lord God of your fathers make you a 
thousand times so many more as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promised you!) 

--- PAGE 3 ---
How can I myself alone bear your cumbrance; and your burden, and your strife? Take 
you wise men, and understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make 
them rulers over you. And ye answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast 
spoken is good for us to do. So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, 
and made them heads over you, captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, 
and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and officers among your tribes. And 
I charged your judges at that time, saying, hear the causes between your brethren, and 
judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with 
him. Ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the small as well as 
the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face of man; for the judgment is God’s.  
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY 
Behold, the heaven and the heaven of heavens is the Lord’s thy God, the earth 
also, with all that therein is. Only the Lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them, 
and he chose their seed after them, even you above all people, as it is this day. 
Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stiff necked. For the 
Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a 
terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward: he doth execute the 
judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and 
raiment. Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. 
Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God; him shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou cleave, 
and swear by his name. He is thy praise, and he is thy God, that hath done for thee 
these great and terrible things, which thine eyes have seen.  
At the Litiya, the Stichera of the temple, and then:  
Glory ..., in Tone III: 
O holy fathers, ye were careful preservers of the Tradition of the apostles, for, 
having taught in an Orthodox manner the consubstantiality of the Holy Trinity, in 
Council ye cast down the blasphemy of Arius; and having denounced both him and 
Macedonius, who contended against the Spirit, ye condemned Nestorius, Eutyches 
and Dioscorus, Sabellius and the mindless Severus. We beseech you to pray that our 
life may be kept undefiled in the Faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
By the will of the Father and without seed * thou didst conceive through the 
divine Spirit the Son of God * Who hath existed from the Father without a mother 
from before the ages, * and Who for our sake came forth from Thee in the flesh 
without a father, * and Him hast thou suckled as a babe. * Wherefore, cease not to 
beseech Him, ** that our souls be delivered from tribulations. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
On the Aposticha: Glory ..., of the fathers, in Tone IV:  
O ye assemblies of the Orthodox, * let us celebrate today with faith and piety * the 
annual memorial of the God-bearing Fathers * who, in the illustrious city of Nicaea, * 
came together from the whole inhabited world. * For with pious mind they refuted 
the godless dogma of the grievous Arius, * and by synodal decree banished him from 
the Orthodox Catholic Church. * And they instructed all to openly confess the 
consubstantial and co-eternal Son of God, * Who existed before the ages. * This, in 
exactness and piety, did they set forth in the Symbol of Faith. * Wherefore, following 
their divine doctrines and believing with assurance, ** we worship, in One Godhead, 
the Father, Son and all-holy Spirit, the Trinity one in essence. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to 
thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of 
our souls! 
At the Blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” Twice, 
and then that of the fathers, in Tone VIII: 
Most glorious art Thou, O Christ our God, * Thou hast established our Holy 
Fathers as luminaries upon the earth * and through them hath instructed us all in the 
true faith. * O Most merciful One, glory be to Thee. (Once) 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Resurrection (Twice);  
Glory ..., the Troparion of the fathers, in Tone VIII: 
Most glorious art Thou, O Christ our God, * Thou hast established our Holy 
Fathers as luminaries upon the earth * and through them hath instructed us all in the 
true faith. * O Most merciful One, glory be to Thee. (Once) 
Now and ever..., the Theotokion, in Tone VIII.  
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
Four Canons: The canon of the Resurrection, with 4 Troparia, including its Irmos; 
that of the Cross and Resurrection, with 2 Troparia; that of the Theotokos, with 2 
Troparia; and that of the fathers, with 6 Troparia, in Tone VIII, the acrostic is: 
 “I hymn the Seventh Council of the blessed ones”:  
The composition of Germanus II, Patriarch of Constantinople.  
ODE I  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
O Lord, grant unto me, as one who who desires to hymn the Seventh Council, an 
assemblage of the seven gifts of the Paraclete, Who, with tongues of fire, made it wise 
causing all sacrilegious blasphemy to fall silent.  
From the beginning the number seven hath been greater than others, for originally 
the all-accomplished cessation of the divine creation of all was on the seventh day, 
and now an end hath come to all heresies at the Council of the same number.  
Of old in Nicaea the choir of the fathers vanquished with a pastoral staff Arius, 
who contended against God, and thus taught the Church to walk in accordance with 
Orthodox teachings; and now, as a champion, it hath put to shame the iconoclasts 
therewith as well.  
Theotokion: As the fathers piously taught, confessing in faith the Virgin’s womb 
which, without pain, hath given birth in the flesh to the Incorporeal One, so we also 
worship it, inscribing its image upon pillars and venerating it with honor.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth ..., 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Initiated into the mysteries of Christ; the divine chief shepherds drove the cohorts 
of Antichrist, who wished to trouble the Church of Christ, far from the pious, that it 
not be shaken.  
The company of the fathers, drawing forth streams of teaching from the 
wellsprings of salvation, gave the thirsting people of Christ to drink thereof, and 
washed away the turbid streams of filth.  
The Seventh Council of the Christ-loving fathers, whose defenders were the 
imperial Irene and Constantine, was held in the splendid city of Nicaea against those 
who in truth despise Christians and prosecuted them.  
Theotokion: Let all the impious who do not honor the precious icon of the 
Theotokos depart, for they do not proclaim her to be the one who hath given birth to 
Christ as a man; wherefore let them be sent into the fire, to burn without being con-
sumed.  
Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection.  
Then, the Sessional Hymn of the holy fathers, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
O ye truly most blessed and divinely eloquent fathers, ye have appeared on earth as 
most radiant luminaries of the truth of Christ in the world, stifling the heresies of 
sacrilegious blasphemies and quenching the fiery tumults of the impious. Wherefore, 
as ye are hierarchs of Christ, pray that we be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Go thou quickly before us, O pure Virgin Mother. Rescue us from the enemies 
who blaspheme against thee. Destroy all the sacrilege of heresies. Set at naught their 
assaults by thy might, that they might understand that thou alone art the Mother of 
God, who by thy prayers dost save the congregation of the Orthodox.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
 The god-like fathers, bearing the word of God as an arrow and sword, with the 
sign of the Cross, together slaughtered all of the enemies who do not honor the 
images of Christ, the Theotokos, and of all the saints.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
As at the blast of the seven trumpets the walls of Jericho fell upon the completion 
of the seventh circuit, so by these seven Councils, the entire multitude which hath 
risen up against God hath been cast down into the abyss, at the assembly of the 
divinely sounding trumpets of the Spirit.  
Showing forth youthful diligence, and aflame with divine zeal, the multitude of the 
fathers, like Elijah, hath slain the abominable priests. Wherefore, with boldness they 
have taught all to worship the icon of Christ with love.  
Theotokion: Thou art my hope, O all-pure one. Thou art my hymn. Thou art my 
refuge, thou art my restoration, O thou who without seed hast given birth to God, 
the incarnate Word of the Father. Wherefore, I bow down without hesitation before 
thine icon, strengthened by thy might.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Deliberating together with exalted thought, the honored fathers committed the 
iconoclasts to anathema, as ones who conjectured strange things. And they 
commanded that honor be rendered unto the icon of Christ, as is fitting.  
Now is the time for gladness! Now is the day of salvation made manifest! Let us 
therefore be glad, and let us cry out to Christ with joy: Grant us Thy peace, through 
the prayers of the fathers of the Seventh Council, O Lover of mankind.  
Theotokion: For the sake of His compassionate mercy, the Son of God was 
immutably born from the Virgin, taking what was foreign to Him as His own, and, 
being in His essence uncircumscribable, willingly appeared circumscribed in this 
form.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Let the mountains rain down sweetness and joy, for the multitude of heretics, who 
pour forth the bitter poison of the removal of the holy icons, have been driven out.  
Let heaven and earth celebrate together the magnificence of the daughter of God; 
for she is magnified, rejecting those who would diminish it. 
Theotokion: The Son of the Mother, Who was first begotten of the Father 
without mother, and was born in a divine manner without a father, and hath granted 
me renewal. Wherefore, fashioning an image of her that gave birth and of Him who 
was born, I venerate it.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Kontakion of the holy fathers, in Tone VI:  
The Son Who ineffably shone forth from the Father * hath been born in two 
natures from a woman, * and beholding Him we reject not the depiction of the form 
thereof. * But, tracing it with reverence, we honor it in faith. * Wherefore, the 
Church, embracing the true Faith, * doth venerate ** the icon of the incarnation of 
Christ.  
Ikos: The all-compassionate God, Who doth ever desire to rouse us to the perfect 
memory of His incarnation, gifted the notion to mankind, that His precious form be 
depicted with pigments upon icons; that, beholding these in visible objects, we may 
believe that which we have heard spoken, clearly comprehending the activity, the 
names, features and sufferings of holy men and Christ, the Bestower of crowns, Who 
presenteth these crowns to holy athletes and martyrs. And the Church, most diligently 
holding fast to the true faith for their sake, venerates the icon of the incarnation of 
Christ.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The heresiarchs have been vanquished by the dogmas of the divinely eloquent 
men who rightly render the honor they accord to images, to the prototypes, as Basil 
the Great hath said. O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Today the temples, adorned with splendid icons, are rendered beautiful; 
wherefore, in the churches the world doth raise a song unto Him Who is more 
comely in beauty than all men, and it singeth: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
The light hath exceedingly outshone the darkness, and the impious have been 
driven away. Wherefore, all things are filled with the light of Christ, the Bestower of 
light, and cry aloud with gladness saying: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O most pure Lady, who alone art the hope of salvation for all, who 
in an awesome manner gave birth to Christ, the King of kings, and bore in thine arms 
as a babe, Him Who is depicted and worshipped, as the fathers say.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Most strictly doth the company of the fathers set as law for those who honor God 
the restoration of the proper worship of the sacred icons of Christ; and as their right 
dutiful children, the lovers of piety celebrate their yearly commemoration and with 
love venerate the icon of Christ.  
Seven times the haughty ones cast down the humble, and tried to quench the 
lovers of virtues, calumniating their divine acts. But the fathers of the Seventh 
Council who assembled in Nicaea straightway pulled down their conceit with a 
sevenfold swiftness.  
The blows and wounds inflicted by the childish are like play arrows against the 
mature, as saith the Psalms, for with divine power the tongues of those who utter 
blasphemies against the Most High are stopped, as are those who do not acknowledge 
the Father, and the Son and the Holy Spirit to be One God, the sole Cause of all.  
Theotokion: Of His own will, for mercy’s sake, the Creator fashioned Himself into 
a man through thy pure blood, preserving thee, even after thy birthgiving, all pure and 
immaculate, thereby cleansing the image of God which had been defiled within man. 
Wherefore, though God in essence, yet having become a man by nature, He is 
depicted on icons in company with thee.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
O thou only unapproachable and supreme God, Thou Who holdest all things 
together by Thy might and counsel, most able Ruler and King of all: Establish the 
Church, preserving it in Thine Orthodoxy, by the prayers of the all-glorious fathers 
and denouncers of heresy.  
Ye were deemed worthy of great honors on earth, O holy ones of heavenly 
wisdom, for with love ye honored the image of Christ. And now, having cast off the 
shadow and the covering of the flesh, ye gaze directly upon His countenance and 
counted worthy of yet greater honors.  
Though we be chastened by the hosts of uncivilized barbarism which Thou hast 
loosed against us, yet do Thou Thyself crush their assault and audacity, and ally 
Thyself with right-believing Orthodox hierarchs who place their trust in Thee, O 
Thou who canst accomplish all things, by the right assured prayers of the holy fathers 
whose memory we keep.  
Theotokion: The mind of man can in no wise comprehend the mystery of thine 
awesome birthgiving, nor can the exalted intelligence of the angels; for, in a manner 
transcending nature, thou hast given birth to God incarnate. Wherefore, knowing 
thee to be the Theotokos and depicting thee with Him, we magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
The Exapostilarion of the Resurrection,  
Glory ..., that of the fathers:  
Spec. Mel: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
O ye fathers of heavenly mind, who assembled at the Seventh Council, ever bring 
your earnest prayers unto the Trinity, that we who hymn your divine Council may be 
delivered from all heresy and eternal judgment, and may receive the Kingdom of 
heaven.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Through the supplications of Thy Mother, O supremely good Lord, and of the 
fathers who assembled at the seven Councils, establish Thou the Church and 
strengthen the Faith; and when Thou comest to earth to judge all creation, show us 
all to be heirs of the Kingdom of heaven.  
N.B. The Theotokion of the Exapostilarion of the Resurrection is not recited. 
On the Praises: 8 Stichera; four of the Resurrection, and four of the holy God-bearing 
fathers, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel: “Having set all aside ...”:  
Having combined their spiritual art, * and reviewed the heavenly and precious 
Symbol of Faith * through the divine Spirit, * the honored fathers * inscribed it with a 
divine writing, * wherein the right glorious, * most noetically rich and truly divine 
wise ones * teach most clearly * that the Word is co-beginningless * and equally 
everlasting with Him that begot Him, * thus following most carefully ** the teachings 
of the apostles. (Twice)  
Verse: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers, * and praised and glorified 
is Thy name unto the ages of ages.  
Having received * all the noetic radiance of the Holy Spirit, * as preachers of 
Christ, * the divine defenders * of the teachings of the Gospel * and the traditions of 
the pious, * inspired by God, * proclaimed their most supra-natural decision; * and 
having manifestly received from on high * the revelation thereof, * being illumined, 
** they expounded the Faith taught by God.  
Verse: Gather together unto Him His holy ones * who have established His 
covenant upon sacrifices.  
Having mustered all their pastoral skill * and then being moved to wrath most just, 
* as champions, * as most true servants of Christ * and most sacred keepers * of the 
mysteries of divine preaching, * the divine pastors drove forth * the savage and 
pernicious wolves, * casting them out * of the fullness of the Church; * and they fell, 
as it were, to their deaths ** as ones afflicted incurably.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., the composition of George of Nicomedia. in Tone VIII: 
The choir of the holy fathers, which hath gathered from the ends of the earth, 
hath taught the single essence of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and hath carefully 
committed to the Church the mystery of theology. Praising them in faith, let us bless 
them, saying: O divine legion, divinely eloquent swordsmen of the Lord’s command, 
most radiant stars of the noetic firmament, unassailable towers of the mystical Sion, 
sweet-scented blossoms of paradise, golden mouths of the Word, boast of Nicaea and 
adornments of the whole world: pray ye on behalf of our souls!  
Both now ..., Theotokion “Most blessed art thou, O Virgin Theotokos ...” 
Great Doxology and Dismissal.  
Then, the usual departure to the narthex.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Evangelical Sticheron.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
At the Beatitudes, 10 Troparia: 6 ofthe Resurrection, and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the holy fathers.  
Initiated into the mysteries of Christ; the divine chief shepherds drove the cohorts 
of Antichrist, who wished to trouble the Church of Christ, far from the pious, that it 
not be shaken.  
The company of the fathers, drawing forth streams of teaching from the 
wellsprings of salvation, gave the thirsting people of Christ to drink thereof, and 
washed away the turbid streams of filth.  
The Seventh Council of the Christ-loving fathers, whose defenders were the 
imperial Irene and Constantine, was held in the splendid city of Nicaea against those 
who in truth despise Christians and prosecuted them.  
Theotokion: Let all those who do not honor the precious icon of the Theotokos 
the impious depart, for they do not proclaim her to be the one that hath given birth 
to Christ as a man; wherefore let them be sent into the fire, to burn without being 
consumed.  
After the Entrance, Troparia of the Resurrection,  
Troparia of the holy fathers, in Tone VIII: 
Most glorious art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast established our fathers 
upon the earth as luminaries, * and hast thereby guided us all to the true Faith! ** O 
greatly Compassionate One, glory be to Thee!  
Kontakion of the Resurrection,  
Glory ..., of the holy fathers, in Tone VI:  
The Son Who ineffably shone forth from the Father * hath been born in two 
natures from a woman, * and beholding Him we reject not the depiction of the form 
thereof. * But, tracing it with reverence, we honor it in faith. * Wherefore, the 
Church, embracing the true Faith, * doth venerate ** the icon of the incarnation of 
Christ.  
Both now ..., to the Theotokos, in Tone VI. 
O protection of Christians that cannot be put to shame, * O mediation unto the 
creator unfailing, * disdain not the supplicant voices of sinners, * but be thou quick, 
O good one, to help us who in faith cry unto thee; * hasten to intercession and speed 
thou to make supplication, ** thou who dost ever protect, O Theotokos, them that 
honor thee. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Prokeimenon of the Resurrection: 
Then of the holy fathers, in Tone IV: the Hymn of the Fathers: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord God of our fathers, * and praised and glorified is Thy name unto 
the ages.  
Verse: For righteous art Thou in all which Thou hast done for us.  
 
Epistles: first, that of the day, and then that of the fathers:  
THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (13:7-16) 
Brethren: Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto 
you the word of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. 
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. Be not carried about with 
divers and strange doctrines: for it is a good thing that the heart be established with 
grace; not with meats, which have not profited them that have been occupied therein. 
We nave an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle, for 
the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high 
priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might 
sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth 
therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. For here have no 
continuing city, but we seek one to come. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of 
praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name. But 
to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well 
pleased.  
Alleluia: first, of the Tone, and then of the fathers, in Tone I: The God of gods, 
the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath called the earth from the rising of the sun 
and unto the setting thereof.  
Verse: Gather together unto Him His holy ones who have established His 
covenant upon sacrifices.  
 
Gospels: of the day, and of the fathers 
READING FROM THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (17:1-13) 
At that time; Jesus, lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come; 
glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee: as thou hast given him power over 
all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. And this is 
life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom 
thou hast sent. I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou 
gavest me to do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the 
glory which I had with thee before the world was. I have manifested thy name unto 

--- PAGE 14 ---
the men which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gavest 
them me; and they have kept thy word. Now they have known that all things 
whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee. For I have given unto them the words 
which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have known surely that I 
came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me. I pray for them: 
I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine. 
And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am no more in the world, but these 
are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name 
those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are. While I was with 
them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gavest me I have kept, 
and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition that the Scripture might be fulfilled, 
And now come I to thee; and these things I speak in the world, that they might have 
my joy fulfilled in themselves.  
 
Communion Verse: Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the 
highest.  
Communion Verse of the Fathers: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is 
meet for the upright.  
 
