--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 28th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, DEMETRIUS, 
METROPOLITAN OF ROSTOV, THE WONDERWORKER  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
As thou wast faithful in a little, * O Demetrius, * the Lord set thee over many; * 
and thou hast entered into the joy of thy Lord, * where, standing before Him, ** thou 
dost pray on behalf of our souls. (Twice)  
Thou didst dedicate thy childhood * to learning, * thy youth to the struggles of 
monasticism, * and thy manhood to the benefit of all; * wherefore we all now honor 
thee ** among the saints. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone I 
As thou didst forsake the world and all the beautiful things in it, so didst thou 
forsake thy rule over the brethren, and didst make thine abode again in Kiev, nigh 
unto the cave, from whence by thy labors thou didst produce for us the pearl of the 
lives of the saints.  
Both now ..., in Tone I:  
O my brethren! * let us celebrate today a pure festival, * Let creation leap for joy, * 
let mankind dance, for the holy Theotokos hath called us together, * the unsullied 
treasury of virginity, * the rational Paradise of the second Adam, * the temple of the 
union of the two natures, * the solemn festival of the salvific reconciliation, * the 
bridal chamber in which the Word hath wedded the flesh, * the illumined cloud 
which truly carried incarnate Him who rideth upon the Cherubim. * By her 
intercessions, O Christ God, ** do Thou save our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Come, ye children of the Church of Russia, let us bless our teacher, who instructed 
us during his lifetime and edifieth us after his death, for he is honored as the good 
shepherd of our souls.  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of heart shall be of 
understanding.  
The great hierarch Demetrius, the divinely inspired instrument of the all-holy 
Spirit, the denouncer of vain-minded schisms, who poureth forth a stream of the 
grace of God from his much-healing relics, and doth unceasingly mediate and pray to 
God for our souls.  
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Hearkening to the voice of the Lord calling thee to Himself, O Demetrius, thou 
wast prepared for thy departure from this life. Thou didst not slumber in the evening 
or at midnight, at daybreak or in the morning, waiting for the Lord to come to thee, 
until, meeting Him, thou didst enter unto Him in everlasting joy; and there, standing 
before Him, thou prayest that He grant unto us a life of holiness and a Christian end.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Rejoice, O Demetrius, thou boast of hierarchs, glory of priests, rule of monks and 
confirmation of the Church.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Who can worthily praise thee, and call thee blessed as is meet, * O Maiden Bride 
of God, * for through thee redemption hath come into the world? * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto thee and say, * ‘Rejoice, thou who hast made Adam divine 
and brought together that which was separated. * Rejoice!, thou who hast enlightened 
mankind * by the radiant Resurrection of thy Son and our God; ** Wherefore we, the 
race of Christians, unceasingly magnify thee. 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O lover of Orthodoxy and uprooter of schisms, * healer of Russia and new 
advocate before God: * by thy writings thou didst heal the minds of the foolish. * O 
blessed Demetrius, thou harp of the Spirit, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls be 
saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 4 in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
On earth, O holy Demetrius, * thou didst strive to make that which is base * 
subject to that which is higher, * and to make the flesh subject to the spirit; * 
wherefore, thou didst receive * the arch-pastoral staff, * wherewith thou didst 
shepherd well * those who were right submissive, * and didst drive far away the 
disobedient. * And now standing in the heavens * as a priest, ** thou dost join chorus 
with the angels. (Twice) 
During thy lifetime, * O holy hierarch Demetrius, * thou didst gird thy loins with 
love, * and, putting trust in Christ * on thy feet as though shoes, * thou didst adorn 
the lamp of faith with the oil of good works; * wherefore, thou hast entered * into the 
bridal-chamber of heaven with the wise, * where, standing before Christ the Master, * 
do thou pray that, * when the cry cometh at midnight, ** we may be ready to go forth 
to meet Him. (Twice) 
4 Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Having adorned thy soul * with the virtues, * and finished the race of this 
transitory life * in the fear of God, * thou hast found grace before God, * O holy 
Demetrius; * and, standing now before the throne * of the Lord, ** pray thou that 
our souls be saved. (Twice) 
O good shepherd, * fervent emulator of the Good Shepherd, * the Son of God: * 
hearken unto us sinners, * who call thine unceasing mediation to our aid, * and 
entreat the all-merciful God on our behalf, * that we may escape all evils and perils, * 
and receive eternal blessedness, O holy hierarch Demetrius, ** that with thee we may 
glorify and hymn the Holy Trinity. (Twice) 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
With praises let us bless the holy hierarch Demetrius, the great bishop, the 
Chrysostom of Russia, who, having been made a chosen vessel of the all-holy Spirit, 
hath been revealed to be a member of the choir of the friends of God! And he 
prayeth that peace and length of days be granted to all Orthodox Christians, victory 
and triumph over their enemies, might to their native lands, and great mercy to the 
world.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth forth 
from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, * twofold in nature 
but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect 
man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O unwedded Mother, ** 
that our souls find mercy!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace, but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON.  
When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is 
immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the 
Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. 
For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that 
ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of 
God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master 
of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is 
a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image 
of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more 
beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the 
light, she is found pre-eminent. She hath delivered from pain them that please her, 
and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them 
from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that 
godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall 
judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, 
reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his 
holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our 
strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing 
to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and 
denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have 
the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a 
reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like 
other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery 
and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. 
Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine 
him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his 
forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall 
he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wicked-
ness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither 
bethought they that Thou alone art God, who hast the power of lIfe and death, savest 
in time of tribulation and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and merciful, 
givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Come, ye councils of the Orthodox, let us hymn the holy hierarch who hath 
guided us to the knowledge of God by his teaching, the all wondrous well-spring of 
wonders, the most radiant beacon of the Church, the most wise teacher of Rostov, 

--- PAGE 6 ---
the most comely adornment of all Russia; for he delivereth us from all evil 
temptations and misfortunes, and prayeth for our souls.  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of heart shall be of 
understanding.  
Thou didst well tend the flock of the reason endowed sheep of Christ on the 
pasture of piety, O hierarch; wherefore, forsake not the children of thy Church after 
thy repose, but visit them; and, standing with the hierarchs before the Holy Trinity, 
pray that all those who with love honor the uncovering of thy precious relics, may be 
saved, O all-famed Demetrius.  
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
The Lord hath glorified thee with signs and wonders, O holy hierarch Demetrius’ 
for thou dost drive away evil spirits, heal the passions, and enlighten the souls of the 
faithful who have recourse to thy holy reliquary, O thou who art a converser with the 
angels, a peer of the apostles, a champion of Orthodoxy, and co-enthroned with the 
hierarchs.  
Glory ..., of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Let us rejoice, ye councils of Russia, rendering praise and blessing to Demetrius, 
the wonderworker of Rostov; for he labored greatly for us in the writing of spiritually 
profitable books, whereby those who have wandered from the true path of piety have 
been directed to the Truth, and the hearts of the Orthodox have been made steadfast 
in the right Faith. To him let us cry aloud: O most wise teacher, entreat Christ, that 
instructed by thy doctrines, we may receive everlasting life.  
Both now ..., the Theotokion in Tone IV:  
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O most immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to 
thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of 
our souls! 
At the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O lover of Orthodoxy and uprooter of schism, * healer of Russia and new 
advocate before God, * by thy writings thou didst heal the minds of the foolish. * O 
blessed Demetrius, thou harp of the Spirit, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls may 
be saved. (Twice)  
O Theotokos and Virgin (Once) 

--- PAGE 7 ---
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O lover of Orthodoxy and uprooter of schism, * healer of Russia and new 
advocate before God, * by thy writings thou didst heal the minds of the foolish. * O 
blessed Demetrius, thou harp of the Spirit, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls may 
be saved. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII;  
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
Like a palm-tree hast thou blossomed forth from the earth in incorruption, and 
like the cedar in Lebanon hast thou been multiplied in miracles; thou hast been 
exalted in revelation, standing like a city upon a mountaintop, and like a lamp thou 
hast shone forth in thy memory as from under a bushel. And all of us, beholding the 
things fulfilled in thee, glorify Him Who hath magnified thee among His saints. As 
thou hast boldness before Christ the Lord, pray thou, O Demetrius manifest in 
holiness, that He save and enlighten our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI:  
Thou wast likened to the venerable ones of old, sanctifying thy life with eighty 
years of service to God, for which cause thou wast a great monk, priest, teacher and 
hierarch, and now a wonderworker, and intercessor for our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Polyeleos, and this Magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch father 
Demetrius, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou entreatest Christ God for 
us.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
Thou didst shine forth in thy virtuous life, O holy hierarch Demetrius, adorning 
thy ways with beauty, abstinence and tender compassion, and adorning the Church of 
Christ with thy golden-worded teachings. Wherefore, standing before the throne of 
the Almighty, O ever-memorable one, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of 
sins unto those who with love celebrate thy most honored memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 35 (JN. 10: 1-8) 
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: He 
that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, 
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of 
strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things 
they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, 
verily, I say unto you: I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before Me are 
thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by me if any 
man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
O holy hierarch Demetrius, thou good and faithful servant, who increased the 
talant entrusted to thee by thy Master: grace hath poured forth in thy lips, for with thy 
teachings thou hast adorned the Church, and made plain the truth of Orthodoxy 
putting the surmising of schismatics to shame. Wherefore, after thy departure, as 
during thy lifetime, strive thou that, convinced by thy miracles, the vain-minded may 
come to their senses and with us glorify God in three Hypostases.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy hierarch, with 8 Troparia, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
Standing before the Holy Trinity with the angelic ranks, O great hierarch 
Demetrius, pray for us sinners, that we may receive the remission of our sins.  
Having enslaved thy body to thy spirit by all manner of asceticism and abstinence, 
and achieved incorruption in the body, imparting a healing power to its essential clay, 
O holy father, teach us also not to serve mammon.  
Tending the flock entrusted to thee by Christ, the Chief Shepherd, and driving the 
soul-destroying wolves away from the fold by thy divinely inspired teachings, O holy 
hierarch Demetrius, look down now and see that vain minded schisms in nowise 
disturb the tranquility of the Church. And entreat God, the Lover of mankind, that 
we may all, with one mouth and one heart, praise His loving-kindness.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: Understanding thee to be chosen and all-pure, O all-immaculate one, 
the Son of God became thy Son, and hath made children through the grace of 
adoption, those who honor thee as the Theotokos.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth ..., 
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Established firmly upon the rock of the Faith of Christ, thou wast firm in the 
confession of Orthodoxy, and didst unceasingly denounce the ungodly.  
Thou didst not cease to call out for the lost sheep of the flock of Christ, reproving, 
entreating and counseling them, even though not all heeded thy voice.  
The children of the Church who had remained unshaken within its bosom, didst 
thou encourage; and we, attending to thy teachings with sweetness, cry aloud: There is 
none as holy as our God!  
Theotokion: O pure and all-immaculate one, thou hast given birth unto Him Who 
hath delivered mankind from disobedience and by His blood hath washed away the 
ancestral sin of Adam.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Emulating the holiness of the fathers of old, when thou wast eight years of age 
thou didst dedicate thy life to the service of God; wherefore, thou didst become a 
great monk, priest, teacher, and hierarch, and now a wonderworker and advocate for 
our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Nurtured from childhood in proper learning, thou didst not turn the acuity of thy 
mind to vain-minded ideas, O holy hierarch Demetrius, but to the edification and 
confirmation of the Orthodox, and to the reproof and chastisement of the 
incorrigible. Wherefore, thou wast revealed to be a worthy successor of the throne of 
the apostles.  
The healing shrine of thy relics poureth forth inexhaustible healing, and those who 
have recourse unto them with faith find deliverance from evils.  
For the love which thou didst cherish for Christ and the saints thou hast been 
glorified with the gift of miracles and healings; wherefore, we bow down before thee 
and beseech thee as a favorite and friend of God, that thou remember us in thy holy 
prayers before Him.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Entreat God, the Lover of mankind, for us, O most holy Lady, that 
He remember not our iniquities, but rather that He deal with us according to His 
mercy.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
O holy hierarch of Christ, preserve thy homeland un-assailed by the enemy, and 
grant victory and triumph over its adversaries to our civil authorities.  
O Demetrius, favorite of God, protect us from all the machinations of the wicked 
devil, that we may traverse the path of this life without stumbling, in fulfillment of the 
commandments of God.  
O father Demetrius, burn away the darkness of sin from the eyes of our souls, and 
enlighten us with the knowledge of the will of God, that we may finish our race well 
in the light of His commandments.  
Theotokion: O immaculate Virgin who gayest birth to the true Light, shine upon 
us the light of divine knowledge, for our salvation.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
With the eye of thy compassion look upon the billowing of sin which doth assail 
us, O holy hierarch of Christ, and guide our voyage to the calm haven of God’s 
loving-kindness.  
O father Demetrius, be thou for us a good helmsman, and leave us not to perish in 
our sins, but as thou thyself wast tempted therein as a man, help us who are tempted, 
O holy Demetrius, and be thou a helper and mediator for us before the greatly 
merciful God, that He lead our life up from corruption.  
Theotokion: With mouth and heart we magnify thee, the Mother of God. Do 
thou, who hast reconciled the whole of the human race with God, and deprive us not 
of thine aid.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Let us bless Demetrius, the golden-worded teacher, the radiant star of Russia, * 
who shone forth from Kiev, and through Novgorod and Seversky reached Rostov, * 
illumining the whole land with his teachings and miracles; * for he wrote down for 
posterity, those things which are for our edification, * that, like Paul, he might win all 
for Christ, ** and save our souls through the right Faith.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Ikos: Right it is for the righteous in heaven who rejoice over the repentant, and for 
us sinners on earth, to rejoice over thee, O righteous Demetrius; for we have acquired 
thee as a new advocate before God on our behalf. And blessing Him with fitting 
praises, in joy we cry aloud thus: Rejoice, O boast of Rostov and praise of all Russia!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
For the sake of the humility of Christ, thou wast revealed to be a model of 
humility, O holy Demetrius. Grant that I may cry out, not in pride, but in humility: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Through abstinence thou didst make thy body subject to thy spirit, O holy 
hierarch Demetrius. Grant that I may live in abstinence, that I may cry aloud with 
undefiled lips: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
By thy teachings, O father Demetrius, thou dost direct our thoughts; and, 
emulating thee, we chant unto God: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, Thou didst conceive the beginningless God in 
thy womb, Whom we hymn, saying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Thou art our good teacher, O father Demetrius, crying out to all who heed thy 
teaching: Exalt Christ supremely throughout all ages!  
O divinely wise hierarch, all-blessed Demetrius, by thy supplication and thy philan-
thropic love for us entreat God, the Lover of mankind, on our behalf, for we 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Thou didst overturn the wickedly harmful reasoning of the vain-minded, O holy 
Demetrius, and didst instruct the faithful to remain steadfast in the true Faith, crying 
out: Supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, we piously hymn thy supra-natural and wondrous 
birthgiving, supremely exalting Christ throughout the ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Enjoying the everlasting life for which thou didst diligently struggle, O father, pray 
thou that we also may attain unto it.  
Even though thou hast passed from us to the heavens, O holy hierarch Demetrius, 
yet abiding in spirit with those who call upon thee, thou dost ever teach and 
strengthen them, that they may tread the path of the saving commandments of God.  
Thou hast been revealed to be a most radiant beacon of piety, a most excellent 
rhetorician, and an adornment of Orthodox hierarchs. Wherefore, as is meet, we 
magnify thee with heartfelt love.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, with the holy hierarch Demetrius beseech God, 
the Lover of mankind, Whom thou didst bear, that He save our souls.  
Exapostilarion: of the holy hierarch: 
O our God, Who hath set the bounds of the nations according to the number of 
Thine angels, and Who hath assembled Thy Church from the scattered children of 
Adam, multiply therein Thy saints like the stars in heaven, among which the memory 
of Thy holy hierarch Demetrius hath shone forth. For his sake enlighten souls 
darkened by schismatic vain-mindedness, that together we may cry out to Thee the 
threefold hymn: Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”:  
From thy youth thou didst wholly take upon thyself the search for wisdom and the 
fear of God, which having found thou didst not hide in the earth, like the slothful 
servant; but teaching and laboring for Him Who gave thee the talant, thou didst 
increase it an hundredfold, and didst become a great merchant, making clear the 
understanding of the Old and New Testaments, and disclosing the depths of the 
meaning of the divinely written books: and thou hast taught us also to conduct such 
goodly trade. Wherefore, O Demetrius, thou good and faithful servant of God, for 
such treasures which thou hast revealed unto us thou hast entered into the joy of thy 
Lord. (Twice)  
Thou didst bind thy holy mind to the obedience of faith, that thou mightest adorn 
it with good works; hence thou hast been shown to be a skillful husbandman of the 
vineyard of Christ. For every branch which did not produce fruit thou didst cut off by 
the fear of the Lord, and therein preserved piety alone, which thou didst hedge round 
about with the dogmas of the Church, and which thou didst strengthen within by the 
tower of Orthodoxy, wholly filling the wine-vats thereof with thy teachings. 
Wherefore, O holy Demetrius who loved the works of faith, visit now the vineyard 
which the right hand of the Most High hath planted, that it may produce the grapes 
of salvation. (Twice) 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Glory ..., of the holy hierarch, in Tone VI: 
Sing unto the Lord a new song, O Russia! Praise thy God, O city of Rostov! For 
the Most High hath been well-pleased to give us the new wonderworker Demetrius, 
to whom witness hath been borne by all, as also by truth itself. And honoring his 
memory among the saints, let us, elders and the young, praise and magnify our God, 
Who hath granted His favored one to shine forth upon us in holy incorruption and 
the working of miracles.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in the Tone VI:  
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: ** Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
Great Doxology, Troparia, Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the holy hierarch.  
Established firmly upon the rock of the Faith of Christ, thou wast firm in the 
confession of Orthodoxy, and didst unceasingly denounce the ungodly. (Twice) 
Thou didst not cease to call out for the lost sheep of the flock of Christ, reproving, 
entreating and counseling them, even though not all heeded thy voice.  
The children of the Church who had remained unshaken within its bosom, didst 
thou encourage; and we, attending to thy teachings with sweetness, cry aloud: There is 
none as holy as our God!  
With the eye of thy compassion look upon the billowing of sin which doth assail 
us, O holy hierarch of Christ, and guide our voyage to the calm haven of God’s 
loving-kindness. (Twice) 
O father Demetrius, be thou for us a good helmsman, and leave us not to perish in 
our sins, but as thou thyself wast tempted therein as a man, help us who are tempted, 
O holy Demetrius, and be thou a helper and mediator for us before the greatly 
merciful God, that He lead our life up from corruption.  
Theotokion: With mouth and heart we magnify thee, the Mother of God. Do 
thou, who hast reconciled the whole of the human race with God, and deprive us not 
of thine aid.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
O lover of Orthodoxy and uprooter of schism, * healer of Russia and new 
advocate before God, * by thy writings thou didst heal the minds of the foolish. * O 
blessed Demetrius, thou harp of the Spirit, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls may 
be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Let us bless Demetrius, the golden-worded teacher, the radiant star of Russia, * 
who shone forth from Kiev, and through Novgorod and Seversky reached Rostov, * 
illumining the whole land with his teachings and miracles; * for he wrote down for 
posterity, those things which are for our edification, * that, like Paul, he might win all 
for Christ, ** and save our souls through the right Faith.  
 
Prokeimenon of the saint, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the 
meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 318 (HEB. 7: 27-8: 2) 
Brethren: Such a High Priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those 
high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people’s: for 
this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests 
which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the 
Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this 
is the sum: we have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of 
the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, 
which the Lord pitched, and not man.  
Alleluia of the saint, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate 
wisdom, and his tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 36 (JN. 10: 9-16)  
The Lord said unto the Jews who came to Him: I am the door: by Me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 
know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down My life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one Shepherd.  
 
Communion verse of the saint: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous 
be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
