--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 24th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR ARETHAS & THOSE WITH HIM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Thou didst place thy courage * in opposition to the savagery of the Jews, * O all-
praised martyr Arethas, * and wast revealed to be victorious * by the grace of God, * 
bringing to Christ, * O glorious one, * a militant choir of martyrs of every age, ** 
composed of all races.  
O all-glorious Arethas, * having formed a beautiful choir * of thy sacred fellow 
martyrs, * thou didst struggle with them, * completing the good race * and the good 
fight * of thy most courageous contest. * Wherefore, entreat Christ, * that He grant 
peace and great mercy ** unto our souls.  
The divinely wise martyred virgins, * enkindled by the love of Christ, * unmindful 
of the weakness of their nature, * but manifestly strengthened * by the power of God, 
* trampled upon the deception of the enemy; * and, unafraid of the pain of torture, ** 
feared not the fiery furnace.  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone IV: 
With oneness of mind, O ye faithful, and with hymnody let us honor today the 
most glorious chief shepherd Arethas and those with him; for he denounced the most 
iniquitous one and shed his blood in confession of Christ. Hence, a cloud of fire 
consumed the face of the earth, in reproof of the ungodliness of the all-iniquitous 
ones. Wherefore, O Christ God, Who strengthened the spiritual athletes for Thy 
glorification, by the supplications of Thy saints preserve us also from temptations and 
tribulations, in that Thou art the Master of all.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Understanding beforehand the wicked and evil plan of the unbelieving Jews, ye 
struggled toward suffering for Christ with boldness of spirit; for Him Who of old, in 
the time of the law, saved them from Egypt in the wilderness they condemned to the 
Cross. And so now also with you, they, infected with unbelief, pass from words to 

--- PAGE 2 ---
deeds and condemned you to the fire. But, suffering with manly patience and oneness 
of mind, ye showed yourselves to be marvelous among martyrs. As ye have boldness 
before God, entreat Him, that our souls be delivered from grievous transgressions.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all? * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone I:  
By the pangs of the saints, whereby they suffered for Thee, * be Thou entreated, 
O Lord; * and heal all our pain, we pray Thee, ** Who lovest mankind.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyrs, with 4 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is:  
“With songs we hymn the assembly of martyrs with divine beauty”; 
 The composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
O martyr Arethas, all-blessed spiritual athlete of God, illumine my mind by thy 
supplications and those of the martyrs who suffered with thee, that I may hymn your 
radiant and divine memory.  
Having manifestly acquired a life in the heavens above, O divinely blessed one, by 
emulating Christ, with a desire for martyrdom thou didst give thyself over to the 
iniquitous Jews, O divinely wise one.  
The all-iniquitous and most unrighteous Jews, violating the word of God, 
destroyed the divinely elect flock of Christ; yet they accepted condemnation with 
upright and divine intent.  
Having trodden the path which leadeth to heaven surely, O all-praised Arethas, 
thou didst lead to Christ a company of martyrs assembled of every age and class.  
Theotokion: With hymns, O ye faithful, let us praise the most holy Mary, the 
joyous Mother of God, the calm haven, the intercessor for all the faithful.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Seeing Thy Church established by the grace of the Cross, the all-iniquitous 
children of the Jews, consumed by jealousy, pitilessly tortured Thy children with 
multifarious wounds, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.  
The impious ones, possessed of a venomous tongue and blaspheming Thee, O 
Savior, slaughtered those who believed on Thee, Who had delivered them from the 
ancient torment of our first parents.  
O Christ, Who alone hast fashioned the hearts of all with Thy divine hand: who 
can fathom the depths of Thy forethought? For Thou didst give over to wolves the 
flock which Thou hadst gathered.  
Thy divinely wise flock, cut down by the swords of the barbarians, earnestly called 
upon Thee: “Accept our spirits and souls, O Savior, and guide them to the light of 
Thy kingdom!”  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: In that thou alone hast given birth to the hypostatic Life, O most 
pure one, thou hast led me up again to life, who of old wast slain. And, stricken 
thereby, most malicious death hath manifestly burst asunder.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Armed with the power of the Cross, and having fortified thy city with faith, thou 
didst put the tyrant’s savagery to shame by thy deeds; and as a model of divine 
hymnody, thou didst lead martyrs to Christ. Wherefore, assembling, we honor thy 
most festive memory as is meet, O all-famed Arethas. Entreat Christ God, O all-
glorious passion-bearer, that He grant remission of sins to those who honor thy holy 
memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
From the snares of enemies visible and invisible, * we have been overcome by the 
storms of our uncountable sins, * and fleeing unto the safe harbor of thy goodness O 
pure one, * we have thee as our rampart and sure protection. * Wherefore we thy 
servants beseech thee * to ceaselessly make fervent supplication, O most pure one, * 
unto Him who seedlessly became incarnate from thee, * that those who worthily 
hymn thee ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Made strong by grace, the divine and most radiant assembly and choir, the 
multitude of the martyrs, the victorious army, which had Arethas as its commander, 
suffered. Let it be hymned with love and honor by those who chant: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lover of mankind!  
Thy divinely wise city, sustained by the knowledge of thee who art resplendent 
with honorable grey hairs and who struggled manfully against the exceedingly wicked 
ones, O most noetically rich martyr, seized the trophy and chanted unto the Savior: 
Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Protected by the new law of the life-creating Spirit, and trampling upon the written 
law, the pious city prevailed with spiritual purity and noble character, chanting unto 
Christ: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Truly the city of God hath been revealed to be an all-honored and divine 
habitation of martyrs, and of thee most glorious, great and wondrous things are now 
chanted; for thou didst lead to the Master a choir of those who chant: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lover of mankind!  
Theotokion: Springing forth from the royal house of David, O Virgin, thou hast 
given birth to the Word Who ineffably reigneth from before the beginning of time 
and hath shone forth from thee in a manner past understanding. Wherefore, we, the 
faithful, call thee, the Theotokos, blessed.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
The divinely blessed assembly, called by God, struggled, and the right victorious 
ones, strengthening and aiding one another fervently, gloriously assented to be 
slaughtered for Christ’s sake by the iniquitous.  
Fortified by faith and kindled with the zeal of piety, Thy favored ones, O Christ, 
were not afraid of the terror of the most iniquitous ones, and, chastely bound by Thy 
love, they willingly gave themselves over.  
Committing their whole life to the divine forethought and inescapable judgments 
of God’s providence, with goodly boldness the divine assembly, the valiant ones, 
rushed at the exceedingly wicked, vile and murderous Jews.  
Trusting in Thee, and believing on Thy resurrection, O Savior, Thy most valiant 
martyrs were slain by the iniquitous for confessing Thee, neither protesting nor 
wailing.  
Theotokion: God, the Word of God, Who from before time, is equally existent 
with the Father, making His abode within thy womb in the richness of His 
compassion, impoverished Himself and appeared on earth as a man, becoming flesh, 
O all-hymned Virgin Theotokos.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Signed with the blood of Christ, the holy and glorious martyrs fervently shed their 
own blood and have now been deemed worthy to reign with Him.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Mute tongues prophetically spake peace, speechless babes preached Christ, and 
divinely wise virgins offered themselves to God for piety’s sake.  
The light which richly shineth forth healings from Christ was apportioned unto 
thee, O divinely eloquent Arethas; and thou didst depart thereto, still pouring forth 
the sweat of thy contest.  
A multitude of martyrs was divinely led to Thee, O Savior; and leaping for joy in 
chorus around Thee, the choirs of the saints ask remission of sins for those who ever 
glorify them.  
Theotokion: Ineffably arrayed by assuming flesh from thee to unite Himself with 
mankind, O thou who knewest not wedlock, He shone forth majesty from Sion on 
high, illumining the world.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
The feast of the passion-bearers hath dawned upon us today * as the harbinger of 
gladness; ** and celebrating it, we glorify the Lord Who lives in the highest.  
Ikos: Illumine my mind with the splendor of the struggles of the valiant Arethas 
and all the saints who suffered with him; for he, first of all, showed himself to be 
faithful, manfully doing battle with those who reject the incarnation of Thee Who, in 
a manner transcending nature, assumed flesh and wast born, that Thou mightest 
deliver us from deception and show us how to walk without wavering, the path of 
witness which the spiritual athletes trod, hymning Thee, the Lord Who livest in the 
highest.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The torrents of the blood of Thy spiritual athletes pour forth healings upon those 
who praise their memory with faith and cry out earnestly to Thee, the Creator: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The victors put the whole council of the iniquitous to shame, for, adorned with 
divine understanding and keenness of mind, and rejoicing while being slaughtered, 
they chanted: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
As they were wounded with love of Thee, O Christ, the compassionate mothers 
spared not their children, but, burned alive in the furnace, they chanted unto Thee, 
the Master, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Brightly lighting lamps of virginal struggle, the God-bearers, rejoicing with the wise 
virgins in the bridal chamber of God, cried out: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: Thou art the cleansing of souls and the mediatress of salvation for 
those who with faith and love proclaim thee to be the Mother of God and likewise 
cry out to thy Son: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
The martyrs cried out, saying to the God-slayers: “Perfection is clearly not in the 
law; rather salvation hath been granted through Christ! Wherefore, we are all slain, 
rejoicing, and we die zealously, chanting unto Him: Ye people, supremely exalt Christ 
throughout the ages! “  
A babe instructed in the mysteries, taught the mindless ones to look to Thy most 
pure image, O Christ, and to embrace faith in Thy coming to earth; and, compelled 
by the hands of the all-iniquitous ones, he entered the flame with her who gave him 
birth, chanting: Ye people, supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages!  
Having struggled piously on earth, O martyrs, ye received crowns from Christ in 
the heavens as is meet, joyfully departing to the habitation of those who rejoice, who 
chant with faith and cry out unceasingly: Ye people, supremely exalt Christ 
throughout the ages!  
Having vanquished the cruel prince of this world and those who serve his will, O 
saints, with boldness and ineffable joy ye passed over to the Ruler and Lord of all, 
crying out: Ye priests, hymn; Ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Pray to thy Son and Lord for us who truly hymn thee in a pure 
manner, and who confess thee to be the Mother of God, O most pure one; and ask 
that salvation and the remission of sins be granted to those who with faith chant: Ye 
priests bless; Ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God’s ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin’s womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
Having shared in death, ye were partakers of the glory of Christ, O holy martyrs, 
and have been splendidly adorned with a diadem. And ye stand before God, asking 
for the salvation of our souls, O right glorious ones.  
Ye were shown to be lawful soldiers of Christ and invincible martyrs, O all-wise 
Arethas and those who diligently suffered with thee, together with the women 
passion-bearers and the virgin maidens. Wherefore, we beseech thee earnestly: Pray 
on our behalf!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Direct my life, O Word of God, and by the entreaties of Thy favored ones who 
love Thee, O Master, pilot me, and deem me worthy to have a share with them, 
overlooking my sins, in that Thou art good and the Lover of mankind.  
Theotokion: Thou wast the dwelling-place of God, containing the Infinite One, 
Who before was incorporeal, in thy womb, and having given birth to Him incarnate 
for our sake, entreat Him, O pure one, that He grant remission of sins unto all who 
with faith ever magnify thee.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs:  
Spec.: Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
God was the fulfiller of the prophecy of Arethas, raising up the courageous 
Elesbaan, who pursued and slayed legions of the iniquitous, and Negranes, who hath 
been borne aloft and filled with gladness, unto the bringing low of the impious 
Omiritus.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Saved by thee, O Lady, we confess thee to be the Theotokos; for thou hast 
ineffably given birth unto God Who destroyed death by the Cross, and hath drawn to 
Himself a multitude of martyrs. With them we praise thee, O Virgin.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT LITURGY  
At the beatitudes: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of the canon of 
the holy martyrs. 
Seeing Thy Church established by the grace of the Cross, the all-iniquitous 
children of the Jews, consumed by jealousy, pitilessly tortured Thy children with 
multifarious wounds, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.  
The impious ones, possessed of a venomous tongue and blaspheming Thee, O 
Savior, slaughtered those who believed on Thee, Who had delivered them from the 
ancient torment of our first parents.  
O Christ, Who alone hast fashioned the hearts of all with Thy divine hand: who 
can fathom the depths of Thy forethought? For Thou didst give over to wolves the 
flock which Thou hadst gathered.  
Theotokion: In that thou alone hast given birth to the hypostatic Life, O most 
pure one, thou hast led me up again to life, who of old wast slain. And, stricken 
thereby, most malicious death hath manifestly burst asunder.  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone I:  
By the pangs of the saints, whereby they suffered for Thee, * be Thou entreated, 
O Lord; * and heal all our pain, we pray Thee, ** Who lovest mankind.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
The feast of the passion-bearers * hath dawned upon us today * as the harbinger 
of gladness; * and celebrating it, we glorify the Lord Who lives in the highest.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I might 
not be shaken. 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 330 (HEB. 11: 33-40)  
Brethren: The saints through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, 
obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, 
escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in 
fight, turned to flight the armies of aliens. Women received their dead raised to life 
again; and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a 
better resurrection: and others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, 
moreover of bonds and imprisonment: they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, 
were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and 
goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; of whom the world was not worthy: 
they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. And 
these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise: God 
having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made 
perfect.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 38 (MT. 10: 32-33, 37-38; 19:27-30)  
The Lord said unto His disciples: Whosever confesses me before men, him will I 
confess also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me 
before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven. He that loveth 
father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or 
daughter more than me is not worthy of me. And he that taketh not his cross, and 
followeth after me, is not worthy of me. Then answered Peter and said unto him, 
Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore? And 
Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the 
regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit 
upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And everyone that hath 
forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or 
lands, for my name’s sake, shall receive a hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting 
life. But many that are first shall be last; and the last shall be first.  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
 
 
 
 
