--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 23rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE JAMES, THE BROTHER OF GOD 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Come, O ye divinely wise, * and in a sacred manner * let us honor the memory of 
the brother of God; * for, taking up the yoke of Christ with zeal, * he showed himself 
to be a preacher * of the goodness of His Gospel and kingdom, * and persuadeth us 
of His ineffable providence. * Wherefore, through him, O Almighty One, ** grant us 
cleansing. (Twice)  
The proclamation of thy words * hath catechized all the ends of the world; * 
thereby are we enlightened * with every manner of divine virtue * and are guided by 
faith * to acknowledge the Holy Trinity. * Wherefore, we beseech thee, as a hierarch: 
* Pray thou to Jesus, the Lover of mankind, ** that He save our souls, (Twice)  
Perceiving thy manner of life from afar, O James, * Christ, the Lover of mankind, 
* the Most wise One Who seeth all things, * receiving thee, ordained thee * to be an 
instructor of the sacred mysteries * for the people of Jerusalem * and a priest to 
perform the ineffable sacred mysteries. * Him do thou now beseech, ** that our souls 
be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
With the blood of martyrdom thou didst adorn thy priesthood, O hieromartyr and 
apostle; for standing forth on the pinnacle of the temple, thou didst proclaim God the 
Word to be the Creator of all that existeth. Wherefore, cast down by the Jews, thou 
wast deemed worthy of the mansions of heaven, O James, brother of God, entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
All of us, the multitudes of the pious, * celebrating the sacred feast now with joy, * 
exclaim with loud voices, * faithfully praising the brother of God, * the disciple of the 
Lord, in psalms and hymnody; ** for he ever prayeth that we be saved.  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Thou wast shown to be the Word’s brother in the flesh * by His own desire, O 
wise one, * His disciple and an eye-witness of the divine mysteries, * having fled with 
Him to Egypt, * with Joseph and the Mother of Jesus. ** With them pray that we be 
saved.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
The choir of the apostles * chose thee to be the first bishop in holy Sion * for 
Christ our Benefactor, * in that thou art His kinsman and brother * according to the 
flesh, ** His companion and the heir to His footsteps, O James.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Thou wast the brother and eminent successor of Christ, the Chief Shepherd, 
chosen from among the apostles. Thou didst love Him for Whom thou didst die, and 
wast not daunted by torture, O glorious James. Him do thou unceasingly entreat, that 
He save our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone II:  
As a disciple of the Lord thou didst receive the Gospel, O just one; * as a martyr 
thou dost possess what is infinite; * as the brother of God, thou hast boldness before 
Him; * and as a hierarch, thou canst make entreaty. ** Beseech Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, * O Theotokos; * 
for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, * thou art known to be a true Mother, 
having given birth unto God. ** Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord”, the Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone II:  
As a disciple of the Lord thou didst receive the Gospel, O just one; * as a martyr 
thou dost possess what is infinite; * as the brother of God, thou hast boldness before 
Him; * and as a hierarch, thou canst make entreaty. ** Beseech Christ God, that our 
souls be saved. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, * O Theotokos; * 
for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, * thou art known to be a true Mother, 
having given birth unto God. ** Him do thou entreat, that our souls be saved. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
O James most wise, blessed brother of God, apostle, eye-witness and martyr of 
Christ: by thy supplications free those who celebrate thine honored memory from the 
transgressions which beset us, that we may inherit the heavens through the power of 
the Spirit. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
O Virgin, we hymn thee, the unburnt bush which Moses saw, the mountain of 
God, the holy cloud, the undefiled tabernacle, the God-pleasing table, the palace of 
the King Most High, the all-splendid and impassable gate. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
O disciple of the Word, preacher of the Truth, holy apostle, thou wast dispatched 
like an arrow, illumining those in the darkness of cruelty; and, driving the darkness of 
ungodliness from the earth, thou hast shown us all to be right believing children of 
the day, O holy James, beholder of Christ. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
O most pure Virgin, from divers perils, evil circumstances and cruel misfortunes 
free those who place their unwavering trust in thee as their protection, entreating thy 
Son with His apostle, and thereby save all who hymn thee.  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without martyria; and the canon of the holy 
apostle, with 6 Troparia, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Thou dost openly teach, O apostle, that every good gift and ever perfect gift is 
given to mankind by the Father of lights, pray thou that those who hymn thee may 
partake thereof.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Illumined by the light of the divine Spirit and setting forth laws with Him, O 
valiant one, thou dost guide the Churches of the nations as an apostle of Christ, O 
all-blessed teacher of the sacred mysteries.  
Thou didst manifestly adorn the choir of the apostles as the first hierarch, O all-
wise one, anointed by the Word’s own action, in that thou art the disciple and brother 
of God, O most sacred preacher of sacred things.  
Theotokion: Having thee as a well-spring of healings, who hast given birth to the 
Well-spring of life, O pure Virgin Theotokos, we draw forth health for our souls and 
restoration for our bodies.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
The tribe of Judah rejoiceth in thee today, seeing thee shining brightly with the 
splendors of Christ.  
Having thee, the right glorious preacher, as a divinely shining star, the Church of 
the nations is illumined with divine light.  
Thou didst lay down the law of life for the Church of Christ, codifying and 
proclaiming it through the life-giving Spirit.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth in the flesh, O Mother of God, to Him Who 
hath shone forth from the Father, Whom James hath preached as the God of all, O 
pure one.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
As the kinsman of Jesus according to the flesh, O all-wise Apostle James, thou 
hast received an abundance of grace from Him, and imparted enlightenment and 
understanding upon all, uprooting the delusion of idolatry; wherefore, the deceiving 
leaders of darkness unjustly slew thee who preached the Savior. For this cause we cry 
out to thee: entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who 
honor thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
O undefiled, blameless and all-immaculate Lady, thou cloud of the noetic Sun and 
golden candle-stand of the light of God: with the radiance of dispassion illumine my 
soul, which hath grown dim through the blindness of the passions, I pray; with 
torrents of compunction enlighten my polluted heart, and with tears of repentance 
cleanse me of the mire of my evil deeds, that with love I may cry out to thee: O Ever-
virgin Theotokos, entreat Christ God, that He grant me forgiveness of my 
transgressions; for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV  
Irmos: For the sake of love for Thine image, * O compassionate One, * Thou 
didst ascend the cross * and the nations melted away. * For Thou, O Lover of 
mankind, * art my strength and my praise. 
Thou didst lead thy steeds, the apostles, to the sea, O Savior, and hast enlightened 
the nations, drawing them to acknowledge Thee, O Master.  
Thou hast shone forth upon all, revealed as a clear reflection, having manifestly 
received the pristine rays of the uncreated Trinity.  
Consecrated prophecy perceiveth thee as a whirling stone which crusheth the foul 
vanity of falsehood by the power of the Spirit.  
Theotokion: The pre-eternal Word Who was ineffably begotten of the Father and 
descended into thy womb, O Mother of God, hath revealed unto us the Apostle 
James.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Thou, O Lord, the light and effulgence, hast shown forth James as one shining 
with light, drawing forth mortals from unbelief and darkness.  
With an unrestrained tongue, O Lord, Thy just brother preached Thee, and, slain, 
became an emulator of Thy suffering.  
What earthly mind can offer hymns of praise to thee who wast illumined with the 
graces of the virtues, O James?  
Theotokion: The Word, contemplating our salvation, O Virgin, found thee a truly 
divine dwelling-place and made His abode in thee.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
He Who, in His mercy, accepted thy brotherhood, revealed thee to be a hierarch 
higher in honor than Aaron of old and clad thee in vestments better than those of the 
law.  
Thou wast a lyre sounded by the movements of the Spirit, delighting all our 
thoughts and leading to God those who are saved from most cruel bondage, O most 
excellent one.  
Thirsting, thou didst drink of the water of life, pouring forth from thy divinely elo-
quent belly rivers flowing out unto all the world through the divine Spirit.  
Theotokion: Through disobedience Eve gave birth to sin, but the Theotokos, 
having conceived, gave birth to the Life which groweth not old and which hath 
abolished the ancient debt of us all.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up on the Cross ...”: 
The Word of God, the Only-begotten of the Father, * Who hath come unto us in 
the latter times, * showed thee to be the first pastor and teacher of the people of 
Jerusalem, * and a faithful server of the mysteries of the Spirit, O godly James. ** 
Wherefore we all honor thee O apostle. 
Ikos: With hymns of praise we faithfully hymn thee, the child of Joseph, first 
hierarch of the people of Jerusalem and brother of the Lord, O God-seer James, and 
we cry out to thee: Bestow upon us the perfect gift from the Father of lights, and 
dispel the sorrow which results from the multitude of our transgressions. For our 
enemies have crushed us under their heel, the Moslems have surrounded us, whose 
bows do thou swiftly break, O thou who art manifest in sanctity, that we may all 
honor thee, O apostle.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Enlightened on the pinnacle by the divine advent of the Spirit, as in a furnace, O 
divinely eloquent one, thou didst mystically cry aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple 
of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Mighty inspiration from on high caused the apostle to proclaim the great works of 
God with a fiery tongue: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Producing the writing-tablet of active vision like the tablets of the Spirit, thou didst 
teach mankind, crying out: Blessed art Thou, O Lord my God!  
Theotokion: In thy womb, O Bride of God, He Who created the world hath 
shown James to be a minister of God, and who crieth aloud: Blessed art thou among 
women, O all-immaculate Sovereign Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Stretching forth Thy mighty hands, O Savior, Thou didst bless Thine apostles, 
while ascending to Thy beginningless Father; causing them to cry aloud with gladness, 
O Master: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
As Thou didst truly promise to Thine apostles, O Master, Thou didst send the 
Spirit; and James, illumined with the splendor thereof, doth manifestly enlighten the 
whole world with the lightning-flashes of Thy Divinity, O Master, and crieth out to 
Thee: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
O wise James, thou didst have as thy Teacher the hypostatic Wisdom, Who hath 
taught thee ineffable and unutterable mysteries; and roused the people to reverently 
cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: The prophet beheld thee, O pure Virgin, as a manifest and noetic 
mountain; for from thee the supremely precious Stone was cut, truly saving the whole 
world, which chanteth in a godly manner: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Come ye all, and with sacred hymns let us magnify James, the first-enthroned 
luminary of the Church, as a hierarch and preacher of Christ, who was rightly named 
the Just.  
We magnify thee, O James, thou godly one who hast a share in the eternal 
kingdom, and who art called the brother of God, thou initiate of the sacred mysteries 
who hast received a title corresponding to thy life.  
Standing, crowned, before the throne of the Trinity, O blessed James, as a right 
pleasing hierarch entreat thy Master, that those who honor thy memory with faith 
may enjoy incorruptible honors.  
Theotokion: O divinely revealed one, by thy teachings thou dost plainly teach us to 
worship as God, the incarnate Word Who was born from the Virgin who kneweth 
not wedlock; and, believing on Him now, we magnify thee as is meet.  
Exapostilarion of the holy apostle:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”:  
As is meet, O divinely inspired and blessed James, we, the faithful, praise thee as 
the brother of the Lord, glorifying thy radiant, most honorable and light-bearing 
memory. Pray thou earnestly for those who honor thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
As is meet, we, the faithful, set before Thee as a suppliant and fervent intercessor 
Thy pure Mother. Grant that Thy servants may partake of Thy glory, the portion of 
the righteous and the sweetness of paradise, and that we may obtain the kingdom of 
heaven.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O Lord, even though at the tribunal ...”: 
O Lord, * even as James stood * on the pinnacle of the temple, * he proclaimed 
Thee, crying out with boldness, * to be God the Word, * the Creator of all * Who 
came into the world. * Through his supplications grant enlightenment ** unto our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
O Lord, * even though the head of the apostle * was crushed by a stave, * the tree 
of life * hath been given him in paradise, * and, departing from transitory things, * he 
rejoiceth eternally. * Through his supplications ** send down Thy peace upon the 
Churches.  
O Lord, * the brother of God, * who is truly ever-memorable, * confessing Thee 
valiantly on earth, * put to shame * and subdued the heretical foes. * Wherefore, 
having suffered, * he standeth before Thee, ** rejoicing.  
O Lord, * even though the Jews * cast the just one down from a height, * yet he 
hath been deemed worthy * to dwell in the mansions of heaven with gladness, * and 
to rejoice as is meet * in the sustenance of delight. * Wherefore, Thou dost grant 
peace ** unto our souls.  
Glory ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone I:  
Enlightened by the fiery beams of the divine Spirit, O James, brother of God, thou 
wast revealed to be a godly lover of piety. Wherefore, arraying thee in the vestments 
of a lawful priesthood, more precious than those of Aaron of old, in His tender 
compassion He accepted thee as His brother. Him do thou entreat, O boast of the 
apostles, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion.  
Great Doxology, litanies & dismissal.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the holy apostle.  
The tribe of Judah rejoiceth in thee today, seeing thee shining brightly with the 
splendors of Christ. (Twice) 
Having thee, the right glorious preacher, as a divinely shining star, the Church of 
the nations is illumined with divine light.  
Thou didst lay down the law of life for the Church of Christ, codifying and 
proclaiming it through the life-giving Spirit.  
He Who, in His mercy, accepted thy brotherhood, revealed thee to be a hierarch 
higher in honor than Aaron of old and clad thee in vestments better than those of the 
law.  
Thou wast a lyre sounded by the movements of the Spirit, delighting all our 
thoughts and leading to God those who are saved from most cruel bondage, O most 
excellent one.  
Thirsting, thou didst drink of the water of life, pouring forth from thy divinely elo-
quent belly rivers flowing out unto all the world through the divine Spirit.  
Theotokion: Through disobedience Eve gave birth to sin, but the Theotokos, 
having conceived, gave birth to the Life which groweth not old and which hath 
abolished the ancient debt of us all.  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone II:  
As a disciple of the Lord thou didst receive the Gospel, O just one; * as a martyr 
thou dost possess what is infinite; * as the brother of God, thou hast boldness before 
Him; * and as a hierarch, thou canst make entreaty. ** Beseech Christ God, that our 
souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
The Word of God, the Only-begotten of the Father, * Who hath come unto us in 
the latter times, * showed thee to be the first pastor and teacher of the people of 
Jerusalem, * and a faithful server of the mysteries of the Spirit, O godly James. ** 
Wherefore we all honor thee O apostle. 
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, §200 (1: 11-19)  
Brethren: I tell you, the gospel which was preached of me is not after man. For I 
neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus 
Christ. For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the, Jews’ religion, how 
that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it: and profited in 
the Jews’ religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly 
zealous of the traditions of my fathers. But when it pleased God, who separated me 
from my mother’s womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I 
might preach him among the heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and 
blood: neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles before me; but I 
went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. Then after three years I went 
up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days. But other of the 
apostles saw I none, save James the Lord’s brother.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §56 (13: 54-58)  
At that time, Jesus came into His own country, and taught the people in their 
synagogue, insomuch that they were astounded, and said, Whence hath this man this 
wisdom, and these mighty works? Is not this the carpenter’s son? is not his mother 
called Mary? and his brethren James, and Joses and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, 
are they not all with us? Whence hath this man all these things? And they were 
offended in him, But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honor, save in 
his own country, and in his own house. And he did not many mighty works there 
because of their unbelief.  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
 
 
