--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 25th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS MARCIAN & MARTYRIUS, THE 
NOTARIES  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Having finished the race * and kept the Faith, * ye were crowned with the crown 
of martyrdom, * O Marcian and Martyrius, * ye unshakable pillars of the Church, * 
breasts putting forth the milk of truth, * lustrous pearls, * beacons illumining creation 
** with the splendors of piety.  
Having a single understanding among yourselves * and agreeing as one, * O godly 
twain, * ye destroyed the division of Arius, * teaching all to worship the Son as 
consubstantial with the Father * and co-beginningless with the Spirit: * the Trinity in 
Unity, * the Unity in Trinity, ** the one Godhead indivisible in three Hypostases.  
Ye showed yourselves to be like-minded followers, * emulators and zealots * of 
the sacred preacher Paul, * and with the outpouring of your blood * ye drowned the 
enemy, * drying up the torrent of grievous heresies * and revealing yourselves to be 
rivers of piety, * watering the Church of Christ, ** O Marcian and Martyrius.  
Glory ..., the composition of German us, in Tone I: 
As disciples and followers of the preacher and confessor of the consubstantial 
Trinity, O blessed ones, and therefore persecuted with him, ye preferred death by the 
sword to blasphemous heresy. Wherefore, adorned by God with crowns of 
martyrdom, and having received boldness before Him, pray ye, that those who honor 
your memory be delivered from misfortunes.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
When she beheld the Lamb upon the Cross * bereft of form and beauty, * the all-
immaculate ewe-lamb and Lady * said weeping: “Woe is me! * Where hath Thy come-
liness gone, O Thou Who art most sweet? * Where is the shining grace * of Thine 
image, ** O my Son most beloved?”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos; and, Glory ..., in Tone III:  
Having cast down heresies with the shield of the Faith, Marcian and Martyrius, the 
champions of the Trinity and noetic beacons of the Church, illumined the world with 
the light of Orthodoxy. And, obedient to Paul the equal of the apostles, the pastor 
and teacher of true dogmas, they set at naught the distinctions of Arius and Nestorius 
and did away with the confusions of Sabellius and Severus. And theologizing 
concerning the Unity in Trinity, and God Who was incarnate of the Virgin, the all-
praised ones preached that all should piously hymn the one Christ in two natures. 
Wherefore, having received crowns of victory from heaven, the divinely eloquent 
ones ask for us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone III:  
A sword pierced thy heart, O most pure one, * when thou didst behold thy Son 
upon the Cross; * whereupon thou didst cry aloud: * “Show me not to be childless, O 
my Son and my God, ** Thou Who hast kept me a Virgin even after I gave birth!”  
 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos; and the canon of the martyrs, with 4 Troparia, the 
acrostic whereof is: “I offer hymnody unto the two martyrs”, the composition of 
Joseph, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
Ever most completely illumined with the light of the Holy Trinity, O holy ones, ye 
became constant luminaries; wherefore, celebrating today your radiant feast with 
faith, we rejoice in splendor.  
Desiring to behold on earth the Word Who shone forth for our sake from the 
Virgin, O spiritual athletes, and confessing Him to be consubstantial, with most 
mighty resolve ye suffered a violent death.  
Showing yourselves to be followers and disciples of the wise Paul, O divinely 
eloquent ones, ye preached the Son as equal in honor with the Father; wherefore, cut 
down with the sword, ye have sanctified the earth with the outpouring of your blood, 
O spiritual athletes.  
Theotokion: Conceiving the beginningless Son of God, O pure one, thou gavest 
flesh to Him, and He became a man in His ineffable mercy; wherefore, worshiping 
Him, we piously glorify thee, the cause of the deification of all.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Illumined by the Spirit with the divine truths of Orthodoxy, ye drove away the 
darkness of Arius, becoming witnesses of the Almighty.  
Preaching the dogma of the equality of the Word with the Father, O holy Marcian 
and Martyrius, ye preferred to die, and have passed over to life without end.  
Through sacred enlistment ye have been numbered with the angels, and have most 
radiantly joined the choirs of the martyrs; wherefore, we praise your honored 
memory.  
Theotokion: Adorned with golden robes like a queen, O Lady, thou standest now 
before God the King, praying for thy servants.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Continuing to confess even unto the shedding of your blood, O glorious martyrs, 
ye accepted the divine ordinance concerning God, denouncing the delusion of the 
heretics and preserving the Orthodox Faith. Pray ye unceasingly to Christ God, that 
He grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence, * when taking flesh in thy 
womb, * He remained God though He had became a man; * and even after thy 
birthgiving, preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, * as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. * Him do thou earnestly beseech, ** that He grant us great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
The martyrs of the Lord, made steadfast by their valiant mind and the perfect 
wisdom of Orthodoxy, finished the contest of martyrdom, having driven away the 
darkness of heresy.  
He who did not profess that the Word is consubstantial with the Father and was 
mindlessly wroth against you, O martyrs, was strangled with the cords of your sacred 
struggles and by the grace of God was drowned in the torrents of your blood.  
With joyous hymnody let the valiant Marcian and Martyrius be praised: the breasts 
of the Church pouring forth the milk of Orthodoxy and nurturing the pious.  
Theotokion: Of old, the sacred prophet called thee the divine mountain of God 
greatly overshadowed by the virtues, O most pure Virgin, from whom the Savior and 
Word appeared for the restoration and enlightenment of our souls.  
ODE V  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
Ye showed yourselves to be followers of the most wise dogmas of Paul; the divine 
hierarch, O martyrs; and emulating his ways, ye suffered patiently and have been 
lawfully crowned.  
Like stars ye shine forth radiantly at the summit of the honored Church, driving 
away the most profound darkness of the heresy of Arius, O most valiant martyrs.  
Withdrawing from the beauties of life, O holy ones, ye drew nigh unto Christ, and 
by shedding but a little blood ye have inherited the unshakable kingdom, O glorious 
spiritual athletes.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Theotokion: On earth thou hast given birth to the Son and Truth Who is 
consubstantial with the Father and the divine Spirit, O Birthgiver of God. Him do 
thou unceasingly entreat, that He have compassion on our souls.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 
Following the words of Paul, the most wise pastor, ye kept the Orthodox Faith, 
and like lambs ye were slaughtered by the swords of the blood-thirsty, rejoicing.  
Precious in the sight of the Lord was your death, O right glorious and wise 
warriors; wherefore, every year ye are blessed by all with honors, O saints.  
O all-blessed and valiant spiritual athletes Marcian and Martyrius, the Church of 
Christ ever rejoiceth, possessing you as a well-spring of miracles.  
Theotokion: With mouth and tongue we truly confess thee to be the Mother of 
our God, O Virgin. Him do thou earnestly entreat, O pure one, that our souls be 
saved.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Having struggled well from childhood, * O Marcian and wise Martyrius, * ye cast 
down the apostate Arius, * preserving the Orthodox Faith untainted, * following 
Paul, the wise teacher. * Wherefore, with him ye have found life, ** as most excellent 
champions of the Trinity.  
Ikos: As servants of the piety of God, the Lover of mankind, O blessed twain, go 
ye quickly before me and deliver me from evils, bestowing upon me words of 
wisdom, that I may praise your suffering for the Faith, O holy ones who suffered 
with constant integrity and have received heavenly crowns. And ye rejoice with the 
choirs of spiritual athletes and apostles, teachers and honored hierarchs, as preachers 
of the Word of God and most excellent champions of the Trinity.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Following well the sacred pastor, and adorned with Orthodoxy, in vain were ye 
slain at the hands of the heretics, O most glorious warriors.  
Faithfully preserving the law of God unadulterated, O divine martyrs, ye suffered 
lawfully and were slain together at the hands of the iniquitous.  
After your sacred burial, O saints, ye bury the infirmities of those who approach 
your tomb with faith, through your holy mediation before the Bestower of life.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: Delivered from eternal damnation by thy birthgiving, O Mother of 
God, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O ever blessed and joyous one!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
Professing the Lamb of God to be consubstantial with the Father, ye were 
slaughtered like two lambs; and brought to the banquet on high, ye have been 
reckoned among the assembly of those who suffered.  
Strengthened by the power of the Spirit, ye uprooted the savagery of delusion, O 
wise martyrs, and, having suffered mightily, ye heal those who are grievously afflicted 
by infirmities.  
As physicians of the passions of our souls, O holy martyrs, by your divine 
supplications free us from cruel infirmities and the uprisings of the adversary.  
Triadicon: We hymn the unbegotten Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the one 
uncreated Essence, the one Divinity; and we cry out together: All ye works of the 
Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
Theotokion: O Birthgiver of God and Lady, who hast given birth to the Life of all, 
thou glory of the martyrs and the righteous, and fervent cleansing of transgressions: 
thou hast brought life to us who are dead.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Enlivened by divine strength, O spiritual athletes, ye were not afraid of death, and, 
zealously bowing your necks beneath the sword, ye valiantly finished your divine 
contest. Wherefore, ye are worthily called blessed.  
Like two radiant beacons ye illumine the fullness of the world with the splendors 
of divine sufferings, O wise Marcian and Martyrius, driving away the gloom of the 
dark heresy of Arius.  
Having vanquished Macedonius who is blind of mind, ye received from God 
crowns of glory as is meet. Standing before the throne of the Master, O right glorious 
ones, ask for us perfect remission of transgressions.  
Your divine memory hath shone forth more brightly than the sun, illumining the 
hearts of all who celebrate it, O blessed ones. Thereon beseech ye the Lord, that He 
deliver us from the darkness of our offenses.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
 
Theotokion: As the dwelling-place of the Light, O pure and all-immaculate one, 
illumine the eyes of my soul which have been darkened by negligence and are ever 
afflicted with the most profound gloom of ignorance, that I may bless thee with faith.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs: 
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”:  
As followers of the all-blessed Paul, ye finished your course and with him have 
received the kingdom of Christ and immortal glory; and ye stand together with all the 
saints before the adored Trinity, glorifying the Godhead as is meet.  
Theotokion: The ranks of the incorporeal ones praise thy birthgiving; for thou 
alone hast filled those on earth with joy. Wherefore, we the faithful glorify thee who 
art all-immaculate, praising thee with hymns. For upon those in darkness thou hast 
shone forth the Light Which shineth forth today like the dawn.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Having struggled well from childhood, * O Marcian and wise Martyrius, * ye cast 
down the apostate Arius, * preserving the Orthodox Faith untainted, * following 
Paul, the wise teacher. * Wherefore, with him ye have found life, ** as most excellent 
champions of the Trinity.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §224B (EPH 4:7-13)  
Brethren: Unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift 
of Christ. Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, 
and gave gifts unto men. (Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended 
first into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended is the same also that 
ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things.) And he gave some, 
apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; 
For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the 
body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the 
Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of 
Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §34 (MT 10:1, 5-8)  
At that time, when Jesus had called unto Him His twelve disciples, He gave them 
power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and 
all manner of disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them saying: 
“Go not into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: 
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying: 
‘The kingdom of heaven is at hand.’ Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, 
cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.”  
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
