--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY AND GLORIOUS GREAT MARTYR DEMETRIUS 
THE MYRRH-GUSHER OF THESSALONICA 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE GREAT AND DREADFUL EARTHQUAKE AT 
CONSTANTINOPLE IN 740 A.D.  
If the pastor or abbot so desireth, a vigil may be served.  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy great-martyr, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
O God, Who dost shake the foundations of the whole earth, * Who alone dost 
make the seabed tremble * as the Creator of all: * deliver us from the earthquake of 
Thy righteous wrath, O Lover of mankind, ** being ever entreated in Thy tender 
compassion. (Twice)  
Thessalonica doth hold chorus on the day of thy commemoration, * O thrice-
blessed Demetrius, * and doth call upon all the surrounding cities * to keep thy 
splendid festival, * and we, assembling with them, ** praise thy struggles in song.  
Come, ye faithful, * and, assembling, let us praise the soldier of Christ, * the valiant 
luminary Demetrius, * who trampled down all the might of the enemy, * and with 
faith let us cry out to him: ** Entreat Christ on our behalf, O martyr!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Today the whole universe is illumined with the rays of the passion-bearer; and the 
Church of God, adorned with flowers, doth cry out to thee, O Demetrius: O favorite 
of Christ and most fervent intercessor, cease thou never to pray for thy servants!  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VI:  
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit of 
life. * Thee do we entreat: Pray thou, O Lady, with the holy apostles, ** that He have 
mercy upon our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
Thee do we have * as a bestower of many gifts, * O favorite of Christ, * for thou 
dost ever fulfill ** the requests which we have.  
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
O blessed Demetrius, * accept these offerings, * sweet hymns, * praises of thy 
sufferings, ** and thanks for thy graces.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, * in the courts of the 
Lord they shall blossom forth.  
O comeliness of sufferers, * splendor of martyrs, * protector of kings: * accept 
thou now the praise ** of those who with love glorify thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
O wondrous and divine doing! * A Virgin, remained so even after giving birth! * to 
God the Word, * Who hath taken human nature upon Himself ** and appeared 
materially!  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone III:  
The whole world hath found thee to be a great champion amid misfortunes, * who 
conquered the pagans, O passion-bearer. * Therefore, as thou didst cast down the 
pride of Lyaeus * and didst appoint the bold Nestor for the struggle, ** thus, O 
Demetrius, beseech Christ God to grant us great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the earthquake, in Tone VIII:  
O Christ our God, Who lookest on the earth and makest it tremble: * deliver us 
from the dreadful threat of earthquake, * and send down upon us thy rich mercies 
and save us, ** through the prayers of the Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy great-martyr, 4 in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
 O glorious martyr Demetrius, * like a radiant star thou dost ever illumine thy 
native land; * for thou dost ever protect it from lies and destruction * wrought by the 
foe, * delivering it from misery and every tempest. * Wherefore, blessed one, it doth 
joyously offer praise unto thee, * keeping thy yearly commemoration, * hymning with 
faith and love ** the Lord who hath glorified thee. (Twice)  
O martyr and passion-bearer of Christ, * holy Demetrius, * like a sun thou dost 
illumine the world with miracles. * Wherefore, on the day of thy commemoration * 
we all delight in thy wonders, O blessed one, * keeping festival with faith. * Thus, as 
thou hast boldness before the Lord, * beseech Him to save thy servants ** from 
corruption and tribulations.  
Thy side was pierced by spears * for the sake of the Savior * Whose side was 
pierced on the Cross; * for with love didst thou emulate Him in thy wounds, * O 
passion-bearer Demetrius, * revealing unto all the steadfastness of thy witness. * 
Wherefore, the tyrant fell wounded, * receiving the shaft of thy confession, ** O 
spiritual athlete of Christ.  
And 4 in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! * Today, on the commemoration of the martyr 
Demetrius, * joy hath shone forth in heaven and on earth. * He is crowned with 
praises by the angels * and receiveth hymns from men. * O, how he suffered! * How 
well he fought the fight! * Thereby was the evil foe felled ** when Christ conquered 
him. (Twice)  
O most glorious wonder! * With rays of miracles * brighter than the sun * Demet-
rius doth ever enlighten the ends of the earth, * he who is illumined with the never-
fading light * and delighteth in the Light unwaning. * By his rays have the clouds of 
barbarians been dispelled, * infirmities driven away, ** and the demons vanquished.  
O most glorious wonder! * The thrice-blessed Demetrius, * pierced for the sake of 
Christ, * hath ever shown himself to the foe as a two-edged sword, * mowing down 
the uprisings of the enemy * and casting down the audacity of the demons. * Let us 
cry out to him: * O holy Demetrius, save us ** who ever faithfully honor thee with 
love!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI, the composition of the holy Emperor Leo VI: 
Today the universal festival of the passion-bearer doth call us together. Come, 
then, ye who love the feasts of the Church, and let us radiantly celebrate his 
commemoration, saying: Rejoice, thou who didst rend the garment of impiety with 

--- PAGE 4 ---
faith and didst robe thyself in manliness of spirit! Rejoice, thou who didst wreck the 
schemes of the alien one with the might given thee by the One God! Rejoice, thou 
who with thy pierced limbs didst spiritually portray the suffering of Christ for us! Him 
do thou entreat, O Demetrius, adornment of spiritual athletes, that we be delivered 
from enemies, visible and invisible, and that our souls be saved!  
Both now ..., the Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH  
Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of 
thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy 
mercies toward me? are they restrained? Doubtless thou art our Father, though 
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O Lord, art our 
Father, our Redeemer; thy name is from everlasting. O Lord, why hast thou made us 
to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants’ 
sake, the tribes of thine inheritance. The people of thy holiness have possessed it but 
a little while: our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary. We are thine: thou 
never barest rule over them; they were not called by thy name. Oh that thou wouldest 
rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow 
down at thy presence, as when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to 
boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at 
thy presence! When thou didst terrible things which we looked not for, thou camest 
down, the mountains bowed down at thy presence. For since the beginning of the 
world men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O 
God, besides thee, what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him. Thou, meetest 
him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways: 
behold, thou art wroth; for we have sinned: in those is continuance, and we shall be 
saved. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father; we are the clay, and thou our potter; 
and we all are the work of thy hand. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither 
remember iniquity for ever: behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people.  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JEREMIAH  
The Lord spake the following: I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the 
love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land that 

--- PAGE 5 ---
was not sown. Israel was holiness unto the Lord, and the first-fruits of his increase: all 
that devour him shall offend; evil shall come upon them, saith the Lord. Hear ye the 
word of the Lord, O house of Jacob, and all the families of the house of Israel: thus 
saith the Lord, What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far 
from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? Neither said they, 
Where is the Lord that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, that led us through 
the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought, and 
of the shadow of death, through a land that no man passed through, and where no 
man dwelt? And I brought you into a plentiful country, to eat the fruit thereof and the 
goodness thereof; but when ye entered, ye defiled my land, and made mine heritage 
an abomination. The priest said not, where is the Lord? and they that handle the law 
knew me not: the pastors also transgressed against me, and the prophets prophesied 
by Baal, and walked after things that do not profit. Wherefore I will yet plead with 
you, saith the Lord, and with your children’s children will I plead. For pass over the 
isles of Chitin, and see; and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there 
be such a thing. Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but my 
people have changed their glory for that which doth not profit. Be astonished, O ye 
heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, saith the Lord.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
But though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was loved of him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness, doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted he to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in their minds, 
That his grace and mercy is with his saints, and that he hath respect unto his chosen.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera of the Great Martyr, The 
composition of George, in Tone I:  
Be thou glad in the Lord, O city of Thessalonica! Rejoice and hold chorus, 
splendidly arraying thyself with faith, for thou dost have as a treasure within thy 
bosom Demetrius, the all-glorious passion-bearer and witness to the truth. Delight 
thou in his miracles, see the healing he doth accomplish, and beholding him who 
casteth down the audacity of the alien ones, cry out in thanksgiving unto the Savior: 
O Lord, glory be to Thee!  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
The composition of Anatolius: With the comeliness of hymns let us brighten this 
day, and let us proclaim the struggles of the martyr; for the great Demetrius doth 
move us to praise. For, having manfully put down the assaults of the demons, he 
zealously entered the stadium and, having gloriously carried off the trophies of 
victory, he doth entreat the Savior, that our souls be saved.  
In Tone II, the composition of Germanus: O wise Demetrius, Christ God hath 
blamelessly set thy soul in the dwellings on high; for thou wast a champion of the 
Trinity and, hard as adamantine, thou didst manfully suffer in the stadium; and 
pierced in thine incorrupt sides, O all-honored one, emulating Him Who was pierced 
on the Tree for the salvation of the whole world, thou didst receive the gift of work-
ing miracles, richly bestowing healings upon all. Wherefore, today we celebrate thy 
repose as is meet, glorifying the Lord Who hath glorified thee.  
 
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Let us trumpet forth ...”:  
Let us make haste with faith and love, and let us cry out hymns of festivity, and let 
us all clap our hands during this festival of our chief leader. Let the armies of heaven 
rejoice over him who boldly cast down the audacity of Lyaeus and was pierced for the 
King and Lord, Who Himself was pierced with a spear. Let the earth and the sea 
marvel at the most glorious signs wrought by the radiant luminary. Let the young 
praise, as is fitting, the bridler of youth, the staff of old age, the intercessor amid 
misfortunes, the enricher of the destitute, the guide on the good path, the ally in war, 
O city of Thessalonica, and in prayer let us say: O most glorious Demetrius, go thou 
before us and rescue us from every need, and save thy servants by thy prayers.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, by Patriarch Germanus, in Tone V: 
Let us sound the trumpet of hymnody! For the Queen of all, who is both Mother 
and Virgin, hath been revealed from on high, and with blessings crowneth those who 
hymn her. Let those who exercise dominion assemble and in hymns praise the Queen 
who hath given birth unto the King Who before was well-pleased, in His love for 
mankind, to deliver those held fast by death. Ye pastors and teachers, assembling, let 
us praise the most pure Mother of the good Shepherd, the golden lamp-stand, the 
Light-bearing cloud, her who is more spacious than the heavens, the animate ark, the 
fiery throne of the Master, the golden jar which received the Manna, the gate of the 
Word which was shut, the refuge of all Christians; and praising her with divinely 
eloquent hymns, let us say thus: O palace of the Word, vouchsafe the kingdom of 
heaven unto us, the lowly, for naught is impossible for thy mediation.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the earthquake, the composition of Symeon of 
the Wondrous Mountain: In Tone II: 
When the earth trembled with fear at Thy wrath, the mountains and hills did 
quake, O Lord; but, regarding us with the eye of Thy compassion, be Thou not wroth 
with us in Thine anger, but, spare the works of Thy hands, and free us from the 
dreadful threat of earthquake, in that Thou art good and the Lover of mankind.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Verse: He looketh on the earth * and maketh it tremble.  
In Tone IV: Awesome art Thou, O Lord, and who can abide Thy righteous wrath? 
Who can entreat Thee? Who can render Thee mild concerning Thy sinful and 
despairing people, O Good One? The ranks of heaven: the angels, authorities, 
principalities, thrones, dominions, cherubim and seraphim, cry out to Thee on our 
behalf: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O Lord! Disdain not the works of Thy hands, and 
in the compassion of Thy mercy save Thou Thine imperiled city.  
Verse: Thou madest the earth to quake * and troubled it.  
The Ninevites, because of their offenses, heard the threat of destruction by 
earthquake; yea, through the resurrection of Jonah in the intermediate sign of the 
whale, cried out in appeal. Thus, taking pity on Thy people and their babes and cattle, 
Thou didst accept their cry. So also take pity and have mercy on us who are being 
chastised, for the sake of Thine own arising on the third day.  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII: 
O ever-memorable Demetrius, thy most blessed and immaculate soul hath the 
heavenly Jerusalem as a dwelling place, whose walls have been adorned by the most 
pure hands of the invisible God. And on earth this most eminent temple doth possess 
thy most precious and much-suffering body as an inviolate treasury of miracles, a 
medicine for infirmities; and having recourse thereto we draw forth healings. O all-
praised one, from the obstacles of the adversary keep thou this city which doth 
magnify thee, for thou hast boldness before Christ, Who hath glorified thee.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * Mother of 
God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, * 
granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting now our supplications, 
** pray thou that we all be saved. 
At the Blessing of the Loaves, Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone III:  
The whole world hath found thee to be a great champion amid misfortunes, * who 
conquered the pagans, O passion-bearer. * Therefore, as thou didst cast down the 
pride of Lyaeus * and didst appoint the bold Nestor for the struggle, ** thus, O 
Demetrius, beseech Christ God to grant us great mercy. (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...” , (Once)  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion for the Earthquake, in Tone VIII:  
O Christ our God, Who lookest on the earth and makest it tremble: * deliver us 
from the dreadful threat of earthquake, * and send down upon us thy rich mercies 
and save us, ** through the prayers of the Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Earthquake, in Tone VIII:  
O Christ our God, Who lookest on the earth and makest it tremble: * deliver us 
from the dreadful threat of earthquake, * and send down upon us thy rich mercies 
and save us, ** through the prayers of the Theotokos. (Twice) 
Glory ..., that of the holy great-martyr in Tone III:  
The whole world hath found thee to be a great champion amid misfortunes, * who 
conquered the pagans, O passion-bearer. * Therefore, as thou didst cast down the 
pride of Lyaeus * and didst appoint the bold Nestor for the struggle, ** thus, O 
Demetrius, beseech Christ God to grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., that of the earthquake.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
Today we piously celebrate the feast of the passion-bearer Demetrius, for he 
unceasingly entreateth Christ to grant peace and mercy unto all. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O ye faithful, let us bless the Theotokos, * our helper, the fervent aid of those 
amid misfortune, ** by whom we have been delivered from corruption.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Thy memorial hath rendered the Church of Christ splendid, O glorious martyr 
Demetrius, and hath brought all together to praise thee fittingly with hymns as a true 
warrior and destroyer of the enemy, O divinely wise one. Wherefore, by thy 
supplication deliver us from temptations. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
We hymn thee, O Bride of God, Mother of Christ God, glorifying thine unap-
proachable Offspring, by Whom we have been delivered from the deceit of the devil 
and from all misfortune, O Sovereign Lady Theotokos; and we faithfully cry out: 
Have mercy on thy flock, O thou who alone art all-hymned!  
The Polyeleos and Magnification: We magnify thee, O holy passion-bearer 
Demetrius, and we honor thy precious sufferings, which thou didst endure for 
Christ.  
The Selected Psalm:  
A: Our God is refuge and strength, a helper in afflictions which mightily befall 
us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  

--- PAGE 9 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
As with rays of the radiance of miracles thou dost illumine and enlighten all the 
ends of the earth like a most luminous star. And like another paradise thou dost make 
fragrant and gladden souls, causing infirmities to cease. Wherefore, we hymn thee as 
is meet, O all-blessed one, and with love we honor thy precious memory. O passion-
bearer Demetrius, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who 
honor thy holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; He hath 
wrought all His desires in them.  
Let every breath ..., 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (10:16-22)  
Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as 
serpents, and gentle as doves. But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the 
councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye shall be brought 
before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the 
Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: 
for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that 
speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. And the brother shall 
deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up 
against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all 
men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Today the universal festival of the passion-bearer doth call us together. Come, 
then, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, and let us radiantly celebrate his 
commemoration, saying: Rejoice, thou who didst rend the garment of impiety with 
faith and didst robe thyself in manliness of spirit! Rejoice, thou who didst wreck the 

--- PAGE 10 ---
schemes of the alien one with the might given thee by the One God! Rejoice, thou 
who with thy pierced limbs didst spiritually portray the suffering of Christ for us! Him 
do thou entreat, O Demetrius, adornment of spiritual athletes, that we be delivered 
from enemies, visible and invisible, and that our souls be saved!  
Three canons: one of the earthquake, with 6 Troparia, including its Irmos; and two of 
the holy great-martyr, with 4 Troparia each.  
ODE I 
Canon of the Earthquake, in Tone VI, the acrostic whereof is: “O Christ, quickly put 
an end to the quaking of the earth!” the composition of St. Joseph: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
As Thy wrath is dreadful, Thou hast delivered us therefrom, O Lord, not having 
buried all our creation in the ground. Wherefore, we ever glorify Thee with 
thanksgiving.  
O Master, Thou dost shake the whole earth like a dry leaf, confirming the faithful 
in the fear of Thee, and we ever rejoice at our unending correction, O Lord.  
Deliver us all from the earthquake which doth weigh down greatly upon us, O 
Lord, and grant not that Thine inheritance perish utterly for it hath angered Thy 
longsuffering with many evils.  
Theotokion: As servants we cry to thee, O Mother of God: rescue us from the 
most oppressive earthquake and from corruption, mercifully showing forth thy 
mercies upon this city and its people.  
Canon I of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV, the acrostic whereof is: 
“I address the right victorious Demetrius!” the composition of St. Theophanes:  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Crowned with a divine crown of martyrdom, thou dost rejoice in the presence of 
God, shining with splendors therefrom and filled with radiance, O right wondrous 
great martyr.  
The Master hath received thee who art a witness to the truth, who struggled 
patiently even to the shedding of thy blood, and steadfastly showed forth opposition 
to the tyrants, O blessed one.  
The author of evil didst thou cast to the earth, O Demetrius, slaying him with the 
spear of thy martyrdom, strengthened therefore with divine grace and power which 
passeth understanding, O blessed one.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: He Who, as God, was first begotten without a mother hath come 
among us, receiving flesh and uniting Himself thereto through thee without a father, 
O all-hymned Theotokos, which transcendeth comprehension and all telling.  
Canon II of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I honor the grace of the myrrh of Demetrius,” the composition of George of 
Skilitsa:  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
O Demetrius, thou open wellspring of fragrant and precious myrrh, who washest 
my heart clean of the filth of the passions, having shown me to be the fragrance of 
Christ through the exercise of the virtues, fill my mind with grace, that I may hymn 
thy divine graces.  
Rivers of living water flow from the midst of the faithful, saith the word of God. 
Wherefore, the ever-flowing springs of thy myrrh are poured forth, whose streams 
gladden the city of God, which doth glorify thy martyr’s boldness.  
Of old, the staff of Moses, striking the rock in the desert land, disclosed gushing 
streams of water; and thy body, O Demetrius, pierced by a spear, hath shown forth a 
wellspring of myrrh, refreshing the new Israel  
O Demetrius, who hast received a recompense for the wounds of thy martyrdom 
the likes of which eyes hath not seen, nor ear heard, for thou dost now pour forth a 
sea of myrrh, the rewards of purity, upon the ends of the earth, washing away the 
passions of our souls.  
Theotokion: O all-pure one, the Word of God, finding thee to be an exceedingly 
undefiled dwelling, made His abode in thy womb; and having anointed with His 
divinity that which He took from thee, He came forth with both alone and called 
Himself flowing Myrrh, for Christ is both God and man.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth ...,  
ODE III 
Canon of the earthquake  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
The earth is wounded because of us who conceal ourselves evilly and ever move 
Thine anger against us, O compassionate King of all. But take pity on Thy servants, 
O Master.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Having shaken it, Thou hast made the earth firm again, O Lord, chastising and 
converting our weaknesses, wishing to make us steadfast through godly fear of Thee, 
O supremely good One.  
O brethren, let us flee sin which hath given birth to bitter death, most oppressive 
earthquakes and unbearable plagues; and let us please God with repentance.  
Theotokion: O pure Theotokos, who alone art good, we beseech thee: earnestly 
entreat the supremely good Word, that we may all be delivered from earthquake and 
wrath.  
Canon I of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Thou didst account the tyrant’s command but naught, for thou didst honor the 
word of God above all, O passion-bearer.  
A splendid candlestick in the midst of the tabernacle of martyrdom wast thou, 
shining with divine light, O Demetrius, martyr and spiritual athlete.  
Thy city, having acquired thee as a sacred and wondrous fountain of healings and 
an inviolable treasure, hath been enriched with all gladness.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, healing the corrupted image of the earthborn, the 
Lover of mankind clothed Himself therein with flesh taken from thee, yet remaining 
as He was before.  
Canon II of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Begotten from on high by God, thou wast an heir of divine blessings, being called 
His son, a co-heir with Christ; and thou dost reign with Him, for thy myrrh is a token 
of this, O Demetrius.  
Planted by flowing waters like the tree mentioned by David, O glorious one, thou 
didst put forth the great fruit of martyrdom, and hast been revealed to be a wellspring 
of myrrh, flowing unto the ends of the earth.  
Drawing forth the grace of Christ, from Whose side flowed forth blood and water, 
thou didst shed thy blood, pierced for His sake, and now thou dost pour forth 
fragrant myrrh like water upon our hearts, O Demetrius.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, thy sacred and spiritual vessels are full of fragrance 
and the myrrh of the divine Spirit Who descended upon thee. For, having given birth 
unto God, thou hast rescued the faithful from the stench of the passions.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Kontakion of the earthquake, in Tone VI: 
Deliver us all from the grievous trembling of the earth, O Lord, * and from 
plagues unbearable on account of our sins. * Take pity on the Orthodox people * 
which Thou hast purchased with Thy blood, O Lord and Master, * and deliver not 
this city unto destruction by dreadful earthquake; * for we know none other God 
than Thee, * and unto those who hymn Thee hast Thou exclaimed: ** I am with you, 
and lo! no one is against you!  
Sessional Hymn of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
With psalms do we cry out to the valiant spiritual athlete, the mighty warrior of 
Christ, Who reigneth over all: Rejoice, adornment and comeliness of martyrs! Rejoice, 
radiant star of the Church! Rejoice, rampart and refuge of those who have recourse to 
thee! O glorious great martyr Demetrius, from every wound and affliction of the alien 
save all who hymn thee. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., that for the earthquake, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”:  
Thou hast not despised those who have greatly sinned against Thee, but, chastising 
them, Thou hast mercifully corrected them. Thou didst cause the earth to quake with 
Thy divine gaze, O longsuffering Master, in no wise harming all Thy servants, in Thy 
great tender compassion. Wherefore, we sing Thy glory with thankful voices and 
glorify Thee in fear.  
ODE IV 
Canon of the earthquake  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Thou dost shake the earth, O Lord, desiring to make steadfast with true fear all of 
us who are shaken by the assaults of the lying enemy, O Master.  
Thou dost cause all things to quake by thy divine command, and Thou dost strike 
terror into the hearts of those who live on earth, O Master. Wherefore, calm thou the 
waves of Thy righteous wrath, O Lord!  
Those who have no fear of Thee in their minds dost Thou terrify by the shaking of 
the whole earth, O Thou Who alone art merciful. Yet show forth the wonder of all 
Thy mercies upon us, as is Thy desire.  
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be a temple of God, O Lady, in supplication we 
stretch forth hands of compunction in thy holy church. Behold our affliction, and 
grant us aid!  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Canon I of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Beholding thee, the vanquisher of the deception of impiety, the most exalted Word 
of God hath crowned thee with glory, O Demetrius, who chantest: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
Having won a victory over falsehood, thou didst receive a victor’s crown of 
righteousness, O Demetrius, crying out to Thy Creator: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Guided by God’s life-bearing hand, thou didst attain unto the most tranquil 
harbors, where, rejoicing, O Demetrius, thou dost now cry aloud: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: As the most sacred of all created beings, thou alone wast deemed 
worthy to become the Mother of God; for, having given birth unto Him, thou hast 
illumined the world with the grace of divine knowledge.  
Canon II of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Having done away with all the defilement of thy birth through the laver of 
regeneration, thou didst show thyself to be one who preserved his purity even unto 
the end. Wherefore, Christ hath transformed thy natural goodness into myrrh, as He 
changed water into wine.  
As the nature of fire is bestowed upon all, preserving its whole power, so thy 
myrrh is drawn forth by all, yet remaineth undiminished, O sufferer. Wherefore, 
bowing down in worship, we piously hymn God, Who hath given thee grace.  
Who can render Thee audible praises, O Christ, Thou Word of God, beholding the 
graces which Thou hast bestowed upon Thy sufferers? For, lo!, the myrrh of the 
martyr Demetrius floweth like a fountain, and his fragrance wafteth forth, dispelling 
the gloom of wickedness.  
A fountain springing up from the earth gave thee to drink before watering all the 
face thereof; and having been hidden beneath the earth, thou hast been revealed to be 
a wellspring of fragrant myrrh, O martyr Demetrius; for a multitude of spears opened 
thy veins, thou dost now water the ends of the earth.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, we know thee to be the Bride and Mother of God, for 
the Word of God, finding thee as a fragrant rose blossoming amidst the lowly valley 
of mankind, desired thy beauty and, having come forth from thee, He hath perfumed 
the faithful.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE V 
Canon of the earthquake  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
O heart, tremble thou now, beholding the threat that hangeth over thee, and cry 
out: Take pity on thy people, O Lord and Master, and cause Thy righteous wrath to 
cease, O Compassionate One.  
“O Jesus, give not this people and city, whom Thou hast purchased with Thy 
blood, over to destruction by troubling the earth with fearsome earthquakes”, the 
choir of the apostles doth entreat Thee.  
Having turned away and departed in spirit from Thy straight ways, we have moved 
Thee, Who art merciful and rememberest not offenses, to displeasure, O Master. Yet 
be Thou merciful and compassionate unto Thy servants.  
Theotokion: Now hath the time for aid arrived, O pure one, now is deliverance 
needed. Pray thou to thy Son and God, that He spare us sinners and deliver us from 
the wrath which lieth upon us.  
Canon I of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Receiving the fire of divine love in thy heart, thou didst quench the fire of the 
impious madness of idolatry, O glorious Demetrius.  
  
Thou hast shown thyself to be one who delivereth us from misfortunes, O 
Demetrius, protecting by thy prayers those who praise thee with faith and love. 
Those who earnestly have recourse unto thy temple in faith, O Demetrius, are 
quickly delivered from infirmities and soul-destroying passions.  
Theotokion: The Word of God, Who is one in essence with the Father, O Mother 
of God, hath, in a manner transcending comprehension and all telling, become thy 
Son, of one essence with thee.  
Canon II of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Thou wast a cistern collecting the mercy of Him Who descended from the 
heavens, as it were rain or dew; and thou didst gush forth with mystical gifts, and now 
thou dost put forth a wellspring of myrrh from thy tomb, O Demetrius.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Following the rule of spiritual athletes, thou didst strip thyself naked of all earthly 
love, O martyr; and didst anoint thyself with the oil of grace, and, having vanquished 
the prince of darkness, thou didst receive the reward of pouring forth sweet-smelling 
myrrh, O Demetrius.  
Thou wast shown to be a rose blooming in the midst of the Master’s meadow, O 
Demetrius, empurpled with the blood of thy torments, the wounds of thy lancings, 
and thy pangs of suffering.  
Lo! the martyr’s temple is again seen to be a divine ark in which there is a lamp, his 
tomb, which holdeth myrrh and oil, and around which we leap in spirit; and, holding 
chorus, we praise. 
Wounded with zeal for the love of Christ, like a new Elijah thou didst denounce 
the emperor and give thyself over unto death. Yet thou livest and hast shown thy 
tomb to be a wellspring of myrrh, like unto an inexhaustible container of oil. 
Theotokion: Of old thy forefather, chanting, described thy mystery and all the 
glory within the daughter of the King, glorifying thee as her who is blessed among 
mortals. Rejoice, thou restoration of the whole world. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the earthquake  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Lacking the boldness to entreat Thine exaltedness, O Master, we, the lowly, move 
Thy chosen angels to fervent prayer. For their sake take away Thy wrath from us.  
Now have we realized how Thou hast desired us great sinners with our grievous 
transgressions. Wherefore, we thankfully glorify Thee.  
Thou commandest that the foundations of the earth be moved, that we, the lowly, 
cease not to be moved by the virtues of a better life, and that we be made steadfast 
through fear of Thee, O Word.  
Theotokion: O holy Bride of God, by thy maternal prayers take pity now upon thy 
troubled people, and quickly alter the displeasure of God in our regard, we beseech 
thee.  
Canon I of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Assembling together, we chant thy glorious and luminous memorial which is full of 
wonders and of the gifts of the honored and holy Spirit, O all-blessed one.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
By thy prayers loose thou the bonds of mine offenses, for, as an invincible martyr, 
thou hast boldness before the Master; and be thou my refuge and protection, O 
Demetrius.  
Theotokion: Finding thee, O pure one, as a most pure lily, a lily of the valley, 
among the thorns, the Bridegroom, the Word, made His abode within thy womb, O 
Mother of God.  
Canon II of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Thou didst flourish spiritually, like a fruitful olive tree, and wast forcibly pressed 
by the hands of soldiers. But now thou dost comfort the faithful, O Demetrius, 
pouring forth myrrh from thy divine tomb.  
Like a bee, thou didst show thyself to be a cultivator of all the virtues wrought by 
God, O blessed one, keeping thine immaculate soul like a honeycomb; and now thou 
pourest forth myrrh, delighting our souls.  
Thou didst love Christ with all thy soul and didst follow Him to the myrrh of 
sweet fragrance; and thou didst partake thereof through a better union. And now dost 
pour forth unending streams of myrrh, O Demetrius.  
The droplets of the blood of thy sufferings, falling upon the ground, have made it 
a wellspring of fragrant myrrh. And now thou dost continually pour it out for those 
who draw it forth, O Demetrius.  
Drenched with the flow of thy blood, O wise one, like another new wellspring, like 
a river, thou dost richly put forth thy myrrh for the healing of those who ask it and 
who earnestly approach, O blessed one.  
Theotokion: Beholding the golden and inextinguishable lamp of the Light, we who 
have darkened our souls with a multitude of sins draw nigh, for she giveth us 
illumination and driveth away all darkness. 
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II:  
He that gaveth thee invincible strength, * O Demetrius, * hath dyed the Church in 
the streams of thy blood, * and hath kept thy city unharmed, ** for thou art its 
confirmation.  
Ikos: Assembling in faith, let us all hymn the great Demetrius as a warrior and 
martyr of Christ, crying out together in hymns and songs unto the Master and Creator 
of the universe: Deliver us from earthquake and want, O Lover of mankind, through 
the prayers of the Theotokos and of all Thy holy martyrs, for in Thee do we all place 
our trust, that we be delivered from misfortunes and tribulations. For Thou art our 
confirmation.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
ODE VII 
Canon of the earthquake  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
All-hymned art Thou, O long-suffering Lord, for Thou hast not slain Thy servants 
by the quaking and dreadful shaking of the earth, but hast frightened them, seeking to 
turn us all from evils unto life.  
Let us give vent to groaning from the depths of our hearts, and let us pour forth 
tears, that we may dissuade Christ, the merciful Master, Who doth threaten us 
because of the increase of our sins, from destroying us all by earthquake.  
Let us cry: Alas! Let us stretch forth our hands unto God Most High, and let us 
cease to do evil any longer, for, lo! the Savior, in His displeasure, doth shake the 
whole earth, wishing to make us steadfast.  
Theotokion: O pure one, look down and save all who hymn thee, for we shall be 
destroyed in God’s wrath, and by His great and dreadful anger, for His threatening 
hath now come upon us because of our many sins.  
Canon I of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
All adorned with divine glory and grace, O martyr and passion-bearer, thou hast 
shone forth brilliantly illumining those who cry aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple 
of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Arrayed in thy blood as in purple vesture, and holding the Cross instead of a 
scepter, O glorious one, thou dost now reign with Christ, O martyr Demetrius, crying 
aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: O exceedingly glorious and radiant Mother of God: Protect all who 
honor thee as the Theotokos, for blessed art thou among women, O all-immaculate 
Lady.  
Canon II of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
Isaiah doth in prophecy command the thirsting to draw forth water, O Demetrius. 
And if he had seen thy tomb, he would certainly have cried: Come ye to the 
wellspring of myrrh and draw forth salvation!  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Thou wast born of earth and hast made thine abode in the land of the meek, 
where the waters of sweetness are found; and having drunk thy fill thereof, thou dost 
now pour forth an ever-flowing wellspring of myrrh, O Demetrius.  
Thou dost grow like the branch of a vine, remaining joined to God, without being 
cut off. And filled with the ineffable sap thereof, thou dost now pour forth myrrh in 
streams upon all, O Demetrius.  
O, thy new struggles! O, the strange sufferings of thy martyrdom! For, accepting 
the drops of sweat which thou didst pour forth for Him, Christ hath shown thee to 
be a wellspring of myrrh, O blessed one.  
Pouring forth the stream of thy myrrh, O Demetrius, thou hast spread out a great 
abyss of miracles drowning therein the infirmities of our bodies and souls, and 
calming every tempest of temptation.  
Theotokion: With thy milk didst thou nourish thy God, Who was born of thee 
incarnate, that He might lighten the affliction in Hades of Adam, who ate of the tree 
of knowledge and transgressed God’s commandment.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the earthquake  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
When this, Thy righteous wrath, descended upon us, O Lover of mankind, we 
were confounded and seized by boundless despair, beholding Thee, Who wast 
displeased with us.  
O ye faithful, let us stretch forth our hands and direct our gaze toward our only 
Master, Who can save us, and let us cry out: O Christ, avert Thine anger quickly from 
us, in so far as Thou lovest mankind.  
Thousands of angels, the company of martyrs, prophets and apostles, and the holy 
choir of the venerable and hierarchs entreat Thee, O Master: Spare Thy lowly people!  
O Compassionate One, Who knowest our weakness and that which doth easily fall 
and is uncorrected within us, let Thine anger abate; calm this turmoil, and spare the 
world in Thy mercy.  
Theotokion: O merciful Theotokos, who hast given birth to the merciful Savior, 
behold the affliction and the groaning of thy people, and hasten thou to offer 
supplication, that He have pity on them.  
Canon I of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Thou didst eclipse all the wrath of the enemy, O glorious one, arrayed for battle 
with the indelible power of Christ, and as a victor thou didst cry aloud, O martyr 
Demetrius: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Having shown the steadfastness of the martyrs, thou didst inherit the eminence of 
the martyrs, O martyr, being washed in the holy laver which is not defiled by further 
attacks of sin; and, pierced by a spear, thou didst cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
The multitude of thy miracles and the gifts that Christ gave thee, which surpass 
comprehension, are evident to all, O glorious one, and the grace of healings, which 
transcendeth all telling, clearly proclaimeth thy grace unto us who cry out: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Let us hymn the pure Theotokos, who, alone among all generations, 
is a Virgin Mother; for she is the mediatress of our salvation, in that she hath given 
birth to the Word, the Redeemer of the world, to Whom we cry aloud: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Canon II of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
May God reveal thee to those who are in this world, O Demetrius, as one who 
hath kept the lamp of thy soul alight, ever filled with the oil of good works. Doors, as 
of a chamber, have been opened unto thee, and He showeth thee to be an ever-
flowing wellspring of divine myrrh, imparting grace thereto as the reward of thy 
purity.  
Not of blood, nor of the lust of the flesh, O Demetrius, wast thou born, as the 
Gospel saith, but of God; for thou dost honor the incarnate God, and zealously 
exhausting thyself for His sake, thou didst receive wondrous grace from on High, and 
pouring forth divine myrrh, and perfuming souls.  
Thou art shown to be an animate ladder firmly anchored to the ground by pillars 
of flesh, but reaching to the heavens; for thou wast enriched by God, Who was 
established within thee, O martyr. And having been shown to be a pillar anointed 
with the oil of the struggles of martyrdom, thou dost now pour forth a wellspring of 
divine myrrh upon those who approach with faith.  
David, chanting prophetically, O Demetrius, described thee as the river of God 
filled with waters; for, lo! the flow of thy myrrh is inexhaustible. Wherefore, the 
watery multitude of rivers lift up their voices and clap their hands to the glory of 
God, Who hath glorified thee by all of these things.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Thou alone art the thrice-holy Lord, O Almighty God, of Whom the sufferer 
Demetrius theologized when locked in prison, having slain the noetic serpent with a 
tangible lash and cast down the audacity of Lyaeus through the divine Nestor; and 
pierced by a spear, he now floweth forth with myrrh from his tomb.  
Theotokion: In place of Adam, the Lord; in place of Eve, thee O most pure one; 
instead of the lying serpent, Gabriel; instead of the tree; the Cross; instead of Eden, 
the garden of the tomb; Rejoice! instead of grief; the spear instead of the fiery sword, 
and the purple robe instead of the fig leaves. Therefore, we hymn thee, O maiden, as 
the cause of all these things.  
ODE IX 
Canon of the earthquake  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Behold, we have all sinned, but the earth, which hath not sinned, doth suffer 
dreadfully; for the Lover of mankind, chastising us, doth shake it all. Let us come to 
our senses and take care for our salvation.  
As Thou art the Lord of times and seasons, O Master, wishing to lay Thy servants 
low in the twinkling of an eye, Thou didst yet restrain Thyself according to Thy great 
compassion. And we who are without excuse give Thee thanks, O Thou Who alone 
lovest mankind.  
O Christ, from earthquake, the sword, bitter bondage, pagan invasion, defeat, 
famine, pestilence, and every other affliction deliver Thou Thy city and every land 
that doth hymn Thee in faith. 
Groaning, the earth crieth out wordlessly: Wherefore do ye pollute me with many 
evils, all ye? For, sparing you, the Master woundeth me alone. Come, then, to your 
senses, and move God to mercy by repentance!  
Theotokion: O Virgin, who in thy birthgiving received no defilement, thou hast 
rescued us from corruption and the most grievous earthquakes and tribulations, 
allaying the Master’s displeasure by thy maternal deliverance, O divinely joyous one.  
Canon I of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Loose the bonds of the transgressions of those who hymn thee, O passion-bearer; 
put an end to the assaults of the passions; cause the tumult of heresies to cease, and 
calm the tempest of temptations by thy prayers.  
 

--- PAGE 22 ---
O crowned martyr Demetrius, guide thou thy most sacred flock to the straight 
paths of the kingdom of heaven, to the pasture of salvation, to the eternal fold.  
O martyr Demetrius, entreat the Lord, the Bestower of life and King of hosts, that 
those who hymn thee may obtain crowns of glory and the kingdom of heaven.  
Theotokion: Trusting in thee, O Virgin, all we, the faithful, honor thee as the root, 
the wellspring and cause of incorruption; for thou hast poured forth upon us the 
hypostatic Immortality.  
Canon II of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Thou didst receive a soul like unto an alabaster box filled with the divine myrrh of 
virtue, and Christ bowed His head toward thee, O martyr; for thy life was calmed by 
the brilliance of purity. Wherefore, thou wast blessed and filled with the grace to pour 
forth myrrh upon the ends of the earth.  
Behold the radiant types of ineffable rewards that await thee! Behold the 
wellspring of ever-flowing myrrh, O sufferer! Wherefore, standing before God with 
the boldness of a martyr, beg thou victory for Orthodox Christians over their 
adversaries.  
With the sign of the Cross of the Victor thou didst vanquish the savagery of 
Lyaeus, setting over him as victorious thy fellow contender Nestor. And now, do 
thou subject every barbaric nation to holy Orthodoxy, O Demetrius.  
Us who have recourse with fervent love from the depths of our hearts to the 
coffer of thy relics, which poureth forth rivers of myrrh, O martyr of Christ, do thou 
deliver from soul-destroying deeds and from the deluge of the stench of the passions 
by thy prayers; and show them forth as sweet fragrances before the Lord.  
We celebrate a day of spiritual joy, O Demetrius, beholding the wellspring of thy 
myrrh, which floweth unceasingly. Driving away the gloom of the passions as one 
filled with divine light, do thou grant that we walk nobly, as in daylight, that we may 
behold the unapproachable light of God.  
Theotokion: Thou, O all-pure one, art a golden dove which bore the Word of 
God like an olive sprig, anointing thy flesh with the oil of divinity. And the sufferer, 
having accepted Him into his heart, as in a coffer, doth pour forth myrrh from his 
tomb, anointing the faces of the faithful.  
Exapostilarion of the holy great-martyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “O immutable Light ...”: 
Thou didst arm Nestor with the Cross, destroying the audacity of Lyaeus through 
him in the stadium, O Demetrius; like Christ, thy side was opened by a spear, and 
with it thou hast preserved thy flock. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 23 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
O Lord, Who lookest down upon the earth from heaven and makest all things to 
tremble: Deliver us from earthquake through the prayers of the Theotokos, whom 
Thou hast given to Christians as an intercessor.  
On the Praises, 6 Stichera of the holy great-martyr, 3 in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Having been pierced, * thou didst wound the Adversary with thy spears * and 
didst render him dead and of no effect; * deliver us from his malice, O Demetrius, * 
rendering us ever strong * against the tormenting passions * by thy sacred prayers, * 
piercing our hearts and souls ** with divine fear, O holy one.  
Beholding thee to be a river full of spiritual waters, O holy one, * we pray thee: * 
In thy great goodness * sacredly bedew our souls, * which have wasted away * 
through offenses of the passions, * and those who are amid defilement do thou wash 
clean, * and deliver from manifold misfortunes ** and eternal torment.  
As a most radiant star * hast thou shone forth upon the earth * in the splendor of 
miracles; * ever enlightening the earth, * O glorious Demetrius, * and driving away 
the gloom of darkness from our souls by thy prayers. * Heal thou the infirmities * of 
those who celebrate thy memory with love, ** O glory and boast of the martyrs.  
And 3 Stichera, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
O martyr of Christ, come thou to us who beseech thy merciful visitation, and 
deliver those who are afflicted with threats of torment and the mad raging of heresy. 
For as captives and naked we are persecuted by them, moving often from place to 
place and straying into the caves and mountains. Therefore, spare us, O all-famed 
one, and grant us liberty; calm the tempest and dampen the displeasure which is 
directed against us, entreating God, Who granteth great mercy to the world.  
O thou that didst not fear the bondage of the enemy, thou hast been given to us as 
a rampart, setting at naught incursions of barbarians and easing infirmities. An 
indestructible base and unassailable foundation, a governor, a citizen and champion 
of thy city wast thou, O Demetrius. O all-blessed one, by thy prayers save it, which is 
now in grievous danger and is wretchedly oppressed, beseeching Christ, Who 
granteth the world great mercy.  
The choir of passion-bearers hath appeared, possessed of every virtue, by which 
the great martyr hath worthily inherited the enjoyment of incorruptible and blessed 
life. Adorned therein, O right wondrous Demetrius, revered for thine emulation of 
Christ and praised for the spear which also pierced thee, pray thou yet more earnestly 
that He deliver us who honor thee from suffering and grievous circumstances, 
fervently entreating Him Who granteth the world great mercy.  

--- PAGE 24 ---
Glory ..., in Tone II, the composition of Andrew: 
Let us honor him who, through spears, hath inherited the grace of the Savior’s 
side, which was pierced by a spear and from whence the Savior poureth forth the 
waters of life and incorruption, Demetrius, most wise in teachings and crowned amid 
torments, who completed the course of suffering with the shedding of his blood and 
hath shone forth upon the whole world with miracles, who loved the Master and 
mercifully loved the poor, the intercession for the Thessalonians amid many and 
exceeding grievous misfortunes. And honoring his yearly memorial, let us glorify 
Christ God, Who for his sake worketh healings for all.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Deliver us from our needs, * O Mother of Christ God, * thou who hast given birth 
to the Creator of all, * that we all may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou who alone 
art the intercessor for our souls!  
Great Doxology, Troparia, Dismissal. First Hour  

--- PAGE 25 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the earthquake, 
and 4 from ODE VI of the 2nd canon of the holy great-martyr.  
The earth is wounded because of us who conceal ourselves evilly and ever move 
Thine anger against us, O compassionate King of all. But take pity on Thy servants, 
O Master. (Twice) 
Having shaken it, Thou hast made the earth firm again, O Lord, chastising and 
converting our weaknesses, wishing to make us steadfast through godly fear of Thee, 
O supremely good One.  
O brethren, let us flee sin which hath given birth to bitter death, most oppressive 
earthquakes and unbearable plagues; and let us please God with repentance.  
Thou didst flourish spiritually, like a fruitful olive tree, and wast forcibly pressed 
by the hands of soldiers. But now thou dost comfort the faithful, O Demetrius, 
pouring forth myrrh from thy divine tomb.  
Like a bee, thou didst show thyself to be a cultivator of all the virtues wrought by 
God, O blessed one, keeping thine immaculate soul like a honeycomb; and now thou 
pourest forth myrrh, delighting our souls.  
Thou didst love Christ with all thy soul and didst follow Him to the myrrh of 
sweet fragrance; and thou didst partake thereof through a better union. And now dost 
pour forth unending streams of myrrh, O Demetrius.  
Theotokion: Beholding the golden and inextinguishable lamp of the Light, we who 
have darkened our souls with a multitude of sins draw nigh, for she giveth us 
illumination and driveth away all darkness. 
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone III:  
The whole world hath found thee to be a great champion amid misfortunes, * who 
conquered the pagans, O passion-bearer. * Therefore, as thou didst cast down the 
pride of Lyaeus * and didst appoint the bold Nestor for the struggle, ** thus, O 
Demetrius, beseech Christ God to grant us great mercy.  
Troparion of the earthquake, in Tone VIII:  
O Christ our God, Who lookest on the earth and makest it tremble: * deliver us 
from the dreadful threat of earthquake, * and send down upon us thy rich mercies 
and save us, ** through the prayers of the Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the earthquake, in Tone VI: 
Deliver us all from the grievous trembling of the earth, O Lord, * and from 
plagues unbearable on account of our sins. * Take pity on the Orthodox people * 
which Thou hast purchased with Thy blood, O Lord and Master, * and deliver not 
this city unto destruction by dreadful earthquake; * for we know none other God 
than Thee, * and unto those who hymn Thee hast Thou exclaimed: ** I am with you, 
and lo! no one is against you!  

--- PAGE 26 ---
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II:  
He that gaveth thee invincible strength, * O Demetrius, * hath dyed the Church in 
the streams of thy blood, * and hath kept thy city unharmed, ** for thou art its 
confirmation.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: O Lord, save Thy people, * and bless Thine in-
heritance.  
Verse: Unto Thee, O Lord, will I cry; O my God, be not silent unto me.  
Of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the 
Lord, * and shall hope in Him.  
 
FOR THE EARTHQUAKE:  
THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (12:6-13, 25-27)  
Brethren: Those whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son 
whom he receiveth. If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for 
what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, 
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons. Furthermore, we have 
had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not 
much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live? For they verily for a 
few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but he for our profit, that we might be 
partakers of his holiness. Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, 
but grievous: nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness 
unto them which are exercised thereby. Wherefore lift up the hands which hang 
down, and the feeble knees; and make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is 
fame be turned out of the way; but let it rather be healed. See that ye refuse not him 
that speaketh: for if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, much 
more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven: 
whose voice then shook the earth: but now he hath promised, saying, Yet once more 
I shake not the earth only, but also heaven. And this word, Yet once more, signifieth 
the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those 
things which cannot be shaken may remain. 
FOR THE HOLY GREAT-MARTYR:  
THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO TIMOTHY (2:1-10)  
My child Timothy: be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things 
that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful 
men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a 
good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs 
of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man 
also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The 
husbandman that laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; 

--- PAGE 27 ---
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the 
seed of David was raised from the dead, according to my gospel: wherein I suffer 
trouble, as an evildoer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. 
Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sake, that they may also obtain the 
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: O God, Thou hast cast us off and hast destroyed us; Thou 
hast been wroth and hast had pity on us.  
Verse: Thou madest the earth to quake and troubled it.  
Of the holy great-martyr: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and 
like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
FOR THE EARTHQUAKE:  
THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW (8:23-27)  
At that time: Jesus entered into a ship, his disciples followed him. And, behold, 
there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the 
waves: but he was asleep. And his disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, 
Lord, save us: we perish. And he saith unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little 
faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm. 
But the men marveled, saying: What manner of man is this, that even the winds and 
the sea obey him!  
FOR THE HOLY GREAT-MARTYR:  
THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN (15:17-16:2) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: These things I command you, that ye love one 
another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye 
were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, 
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember 
the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have 
persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will 
keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for my name’s sake, 
because they know not him that sent me. If I had not come and spoken unto them, 
they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin. He that hateth me 
hateth my Father also. If I had not done among them the works which none other 
man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both me and 
my Father. But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in 
their law, They hated me without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, whom I 
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from 
the Father, he shall testify of me: and ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been 
with me from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not 
be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that 
whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.  

--- PAGE 28 ---
Communion Verse, of the earthquake: Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise 
Him in the highest.  
Communion Verse, of the holy great-martyr: In everlasting remembrance shall 
the righteous be; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
