--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER  
(&THE 8th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JULY) 
COMMEMORATION OF THE KAZAN ICON OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS 
AT GREAT VESPERS 
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the icon: 4 in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
As the most comely palace of the Word * and His light-bearing throne, O Lady 
Theotokos, * thou didst contain within thy womb * the Word Who is co-enthroned 
with the Father. * And having given birth unto the never-waning Light, * thou hast 
brought light to our darkness, * hast driven away the delusion of the serpent and 
destroyed corruption, * and by thy birthgiving hast granted everlasting life to the 
world. * Thou hast opened the gates of paradise * and bestowed all manner of 
blessings upon human nature. * And now, do thou by thy supplications, O Sovereign 
Lady, ** deliver thy servants from all misfortunes.  
As thou art the great Queen * and Mother of the King of the exalted hosts in 
heaven, * stretching forth thy most pure hands, * thou dost intercede for us with 
supplication; * and on earth, as a mighty helper, * thou abidest with thy servants in 
spirit and in thy divine icon, * and dost gladly save * and deliverest from all 
temptation ** those who piously confess thee to be the Theotokos.  
As a paradise of golden radiance, * a most comely palace of divine light, * a holy 
tree overshadowed by the Holy Spirit, * a habitation of the never-waning Light, * 
shining manifestly with divine splendor upon those who know thee, * thou dost 
illumine all creation with thine Infant; * and entreating Him, O Queen and 
Theotokos, * deliver from all misfortunes ** all Orthodox hierarchs and people who 
flee to thee.  
The Church of God, made splendid * with the icon of thee and thy Son, O 
Theotokos, * as with royal purple and fine linen, * is adorned with miracles. * Today, 
at the revelation of thine image, it calleth all to celebrate, * shining with the grace of 
the Holy Spirit more brightly than the radiance of the sun, * pouring forth streams of 
healing * upon the sick and the infirm, ** and granting rich mercy unto all.  
And these Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
O Jesus, exalted and unapproachable King, Who art enthroned with the Father 
and the divine Spirit, and Who wast well-pleased to be born on earth of the Virgin 
who tasted not of wedlock: taking pity on thy creation, bestowing ineffable beauties 
upon human nature, accept Thou the supplications of Thy Mother which are offered 
to Thee on our behalf; and be not mindful of our iniquities, but, as Thou art 
compassionate, remember us and save our souls. (Twice)  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Bowing down the heavens, the King of glory condescended to restore Adam who 
had become all corrupt through his transgression, making His abode within thee, O 
pure Virgin, He was born without violating the seal of thy virginity, and, though King 
of the archangels, was carried in thine arms as a lowly Babe. And now He accepteth 
thine entreaties, and fulfilleth thy petitions in all things, in that He is thy Son and 
God. Therefore, beseech Him earnestly, that He save our souls, in that He is 
compassionate.  
More than the tabernacle of Moses, which was fashioned according to a heavenly 
plan, God wholly hallowed thee with the Holy Spirit, O Theotokos; and, having dwelt 
wholly within thee, He hath given life to all mankind. Wherefore, thine icon also hath 
been filled with the grace of God more than the ark of Aaron, pouring forth 
sanctification upon souls and bodies. And bowing down with love before it, we ask of 
thee great mercy, and salvation for our souls, O blessed helper.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Come, let us rejoice in the mighty helper of our race, the Queen and Theotokos! 
Come, let us bow down before her serene and precious image, which is venerated by 
the angels! For the Theotokos giveth abundant gifts of healing to the faithful, pouring 
forth never-failing grace from the inexhaustible wellspring of her holy icon, delivering 
from the darkness of temptations and misfortunes, and from every sin, those who 
piously and in a God-pleasing manner glorify and honor her radiant and wondrous 
holy icon. Wherefore, chanting, we cry aloud to the prototype thereof: Rejoice, O 
loving help of the world, in the salvation of our souls!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the Day. And three lessons: 
READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (28:10-17). 
And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran. And he lighted 
upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took 
of the stones of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to 
sleep. And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it 
reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it. 
And, behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy 
father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to 
thy seed; and thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth; and thou shalt be spread 
abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee 
and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed. And, behold, I am with 
thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into 
this land; for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee 
of. And Jacob awakened out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the Lord is in this place; 
and I knew it not. And he was afraid, and said; How dreadful is this place! This is 
none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF EZEKIEL (43:27-44:4). 
The Lord said: it shall be, that upon the eighth day, and so forward, the priests 
shall make your burnt offerings upon the altar, and your peace offerings: and I will 
accept you, saith the Lord God. Then he brought me back the way of the gate of the 
outward sanctuary which looketh toward the east; and it was shut. Then said the Lord 
unto me; This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by 
it; because the Lord the God of Israel hath entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut. 
It is for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread before the Lord; he shall 
enter by the way of the porch of that gate, and shall go out by the way of the same. 
Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house: and I looked, and, 
behold, the glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord.  
READING FROM THE PROVERBS (9:1-11). 
Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars: she hath 
killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine; she hath also furnished her table. She 
hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth upon the highest places of the city, Whoso is 
simple, let him turn in hither: as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, 
Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled. Forsake the 
foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding. He that reproveth a scorner 
getteth to himself shame: and he that rebuketh a wicked man getteth himself a blot. 
Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. 
Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a just man, and he will 
increase in learning. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: and the 
knowledge of the Holy is understanding, for by me thy days shall be multiplied, and 
the years of thy life shall be increased.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera: 
In Tone II: Thine icon, O Theotokos, is truly more venerable than the ark of old 
before which David danced, having assembled the ranks of Israel, for the councils of 
hierarchs with the ranks of the angels, kings and princes, and all the multitude of the 
Christian people stand now before it, blessing thee, the Mother of God; and 
glorifying thee as befitteth servants, honoring and bowing down before thee; they 
pray to thee, after God, that the world be granted peace in Orthodoxy, the scepters of 
kings be made steadfast, and thy servants be saved from all evils, in that thou art 
blessed.  
Before thine image, O most pure Sovereign Lady Theotokos, stand the company 
of hierarchs, kings and princes, and all the people, monastics and laity, who know 
thee truly to be a powerful and invincible helper; and they are moved to offer thee 
supplications with all their soul, and are impelled to pray to God, in need of thine aid, 
that thou mightest stretch forth thy God-bearing hands and pray for the world. 
Hearken thou and give ear, O Lady, and grant consolation to thy servants, lest our 
heavy and grievous sins gain the victory over us; for we are all ever in need of thine 
assistance.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
In Tone VI: When first thine icon was painted by Luke, the Evangelist of the 
mysteries of the Gospel, and was brought to thee, O Queen, that thou mightest make 
it thine own and impart to it the power to save those who honor thee, thou didst 
rejoice; and as thou art the merciful collaborator in our salvation, in that once thou 
didst conceive God in thy womb, thou didst chant a hymn to the icon, giving mouth 
and voice thereto: “Behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed!”, 
and, gazing at it thou didst say with authority: “My grace and power are with this 
image!” And we truly believe what thou didst say, O Sovereign Lady, for in this image 
thou art with us. Wherefore, standing reverently before it, we thy servants bow down 
before thee. Visit us with thy maternal compassion.  
In Tone VII: A great and most glorious mountain art thou, O Theotokos, 
surpassing Mount Sinai. For, unable to bear the descent of the glory of God in types 
and shadows, it caught on fire, and thunder and lightning struck it; but thou, being 
the most divine light, bore the Word of God in thy womb without being consumed, 
and with the milk of thy breasts didst nurture Him Who holdeth all things in His 
hand. And now, as thou dost possess maternal boldness toward Him, O Lady, help 
those who faithfully celebrate thine honored festival, and visiting us in thy mercy, 
forget us not; for thou hast received from God the gift of ordering and protecting the 
Christian flock, thy servants.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
To thee do all the generations of mankind offer gifts of praise, entreating thee as 
Queen and the Mother of God: the prophets proclaimed thee most wisely, the Levites 
blessed thee, the apostles and martyrs confessed thee, kings and princes bow down 
before thee, hierarchs proclaim thee, monks and layfolk render thee reverence, rich 
and poor, orphans and widows, and mortals of every age and station, old and young, 
flee beneath thy mighty protection with faith. By thy prayers, O Sovereign Lady, 
protect and preserve us, and save our souls from misfortunes.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
O Theotokos, thou honored habitation of the most pure Light, how can we, thy 
slaves, worthily hymn thee? For by the revelation of the most pure icon of thee and 
the pre-eternal Infant all are sanctified.  
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation.  
O undefiled Virgin, full of divine joy, what thanks can we ever offer unto thee? 
For by the most radiant effulgence of thy blessed birthgiving thou hast led all up from 
corruption to life.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
O Virgin Sovereign Lady, Mother of the Creator, joy of the ranks of heaven and 
blessed helper of the human race, pray for the salvation of our souls.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
O ye people, let us splendidly chant the hymn of David to the Maiden Bride of 
God, the Mother of Christ the King: At Thy right hand stood the Queen, O Master, 
arrayed in a vesture of in-woven gold and adorned with divine splendors. Making her 
more beautiful than all the world, in that she is good and elect among women, Thou 
wast well-pleased to be born of her in Thy great mercy, and hast given her as a helper 
to Thy people, to save and protect them from misfortunes by Thine omnipotent and 
divine power. By her supplications, O Christ God, have mercy upon us.  
At the blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion, in Tone IV: 
O earnest helper, Mother of the Lord Most High, * thou dost entreat Christ, thy 
Son and our God, on behalf of all, * and causest all who have recourse to thy mighty 
protection to be saved. * O Sovereign Lady and Queen, help us all who, amid 
temptations, sorrows and sickness, * are heavy laden with many sins, * who stand 
before thee and with tears pray to thee before thy most pure image * with 
compunctionate soul and contrite heart, * and who have unfailing hope in thee: * 
grant deliverance from all evils, and things profitable unto all, * O Virgin Theotokos, 
save us all, ** for thou art the divine protection of thy servants. (Thrice) 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone IV: 
O earnest helper, Mother of the Lord Most High, * thou dost entreat Christ, thy 
Son and our God, on behalf of all, * and causest all who have recourse to thy mighty 
protection to be saved. * O Sovereign Lady and Queen, help us all who, amid 
temptations, sorrows and sickness, * are heavy laden with many sins, * who stand 
before thee and with tears pray to thee before thy most pure image * with compunc-
tionate soul and contrite heart, * and who have unfailing hope in thee: * grant 
deliverance from all evils, and things profitable unto all, * O Virgin Theotokos, save 
us all, ** for thou art the divine protection of thy servants. (Thrice) 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
O pious people, ye assemblies of Orthodox Christians, draw ye all nigh with faith, 
falling down before the divine image of the Mother of God; for she joyfully granteth 
healing to all the ailing, woundeth the heretical like a shaft from a bow, maketh us all 
radiantly glad, and illumineth us with grace by her supplications.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone III: 
God made thee a wholly good and undefiled Virgin among women, having 
prefigured thee honorably through the prophets; and having blessed thee by His 
priests, He caused thee to dwell in the Holy of Holies and nurtured thee by an angel, 
giving thee bread from heaven. And the same supremely good One, the only-
begotten Word of God, made His abode within thee and issued forth from thee in 
the flesh. Wherefore, we worship and honor thee truly as the true Theotokos.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Let all the multitude of the faithful radiantly join chorus, and let the army of the 
demons lament, beholding the manifold feasts of the Mother of God shining forth, 
praising the blessed Mother of God with divine hymns. For where the most blessed 
Lady Theotokos, the divinely elect Maiden, is glorified in God-pleasing manner, there 
are the fall of wickedness and the mighty confirmation of Christians.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O most blessed Lady Theotokos, divinely elect Maiden, splendid fulfillment of the 
words of the prophets, boast of the apostles, crown and confession of the martyrs, 
greatly hymned one who art honored by the angels and the generations of mankind, 
longed-for helper of the whole world: deliver thy servants from future damnation and 
the lake of fire, O thou who alone art blessed.  
At the Polyeleos, this Magnification: We magnify thee, O most holy Virgin, and 
we honor thy holy image, whereby thou pourest forth healings upon all who 
with faith have recourse unto thee.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Remember, O Lord, David and all his meekness.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
O Mother of God, save those who honor thee in an Orthodox manner, and flee to 
thee, and lovingly bow down before thy holy icon; and give us not over to our 
adversaries as plunder, neither let all the evils which our sins have prepared for us 
come upon us, nor let our iniquities gain ascendancy over our heads; but may thy 
God-pleasing maternal prayers to God win the victory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Thy most pure icon, O Virgin Theotokos, is a source of spiritual healing for the 
whole world; and having recourse thereto, we bow down before thee, and venerate, 
kiss and honor it, drawing forth therefrom the grace of healing of bodily infirmities 
and the passions of the spirit; and thus are we freed by thy supplications.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation 
and generation.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, §4 (LK I :39-49, 56) 
And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city 
of Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came 
to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her 
womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost: and she spake out with a loud 
voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 
And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, Lo! 
as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my 
womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of 
those things which were told her from the Lord. And Mary said: My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath re-
garded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all 
generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; 
and holy is His name. And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to 
her own house.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VIII: 
Come, let us rejoice in the mighty helper of our race, the Queen and Theotokos! 
Come, let us bow down before her serene, wondrous and precious image, which is 
venerated by the angels! For the Theotokos giveth abundant gifts of healing to the 
faithful, pouring forth never-failing grace from the inexhaustible well-spring of her 
holy icon. She delivereth from the darkness of temptations and misfortunes, and 
from every sin, us who piously and in God-pleasing manner glorify and honor the 
radiant and wondrous holy icon of the Mother of God. Wherefore, chanting, we cry 
aloud to the prototype thereof: Rejoice, O loving help of the world, in the salvation 
of our souls!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE I  
Canon to the Directress, the most holy Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, including the 
Irmos, the composition of the priest-monk Ignatius, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O pure one, joyously do I now offer my foremost praise: Rejoice! And with a 
gladsome voice I cry out to thee, O Directress: Rejoice, and fill me with 
understanding as I begin to hymn thee!  
Rejoice, O all-hymned one who hast given birth unto Christ our everlasting Joy! O 
Directress, thou hope of the Orthodox, all-hymned Virgin, fill me with the joy which 
the world hath desired.  
All mankind and angels join chorus, ever crying out together in heaven and on 
earth, O Directress: Rejoice, O Virgin, for by thy birthgiving thou hast filled all things 
with joy!  
O Directress, grant joy unto those who with fear cry out to thee Rejoice!, in that 
thou art the Mother of joy who deliverest from all tribulations; and have mercy on all 
who have recourse to thee.  
Another canon of the feast, with 8 Troparia, in the same tone:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
The leaders of the angels reverence thee, O Theotokos; and the ranks of the saints 
serve thee with honor; the righteous adorn themselves and bless thee as the 
mediatress of heavenly things; heaven and earth together praise thee splendidly in 
gladness. And we sinners ask mercy: Illumine our hearts, O Lady, that we may chant a 
hymn to the revelation of thy holy icon.  
Come ye, O Christian people, having mystically cleansed your minds, and assemble 
in the holy church of the Mother of Christ our God; for from her holy icon there 
poureth forth upon us inexhaustibly a spiritual well-spring which healeth the souls 
and bodies of those who cry out in song: Blessed is our God Who was born of thee!  
The strange wonder of thy divine birthgiving striketh every ear with wonder and 
awe, O most immaculate one: how thou didst conceive the Creator of the cherubim; 
how thou didst bear in the flesh Him Who is life and for the whole world didst give 
birth to life: the God-man!  
Beneath thy shelter do all we, the generations of mankind, flee, O Virgin Sovereign 
Lady. With the light of thy birthgiving enlighten us, thy sinful servants who earnestly 
pray, bowing down before thy most pure icon, asking to receive from thee great 
mercy.  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, ... 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE III  
First Canon  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Rejoice, O unshakable, pure and animate palace of Christ the King Most High! 
Rejoice, O Directress, Rejoice! For by thee is our city preserved intact!  
In thy womb which tasted not of wedlock thou didst bodily contain Him Whom 
Creation cannot contain, O Virgin Directress. Wherefore, magnifying thee as is meet, 
we chant Rejoice!  
O all-hymned joy of the world, ever hymning thee with joy, O pure one, we are 
vouchsafed everlasting joy by thy maternal supplications unto Him Who was born of 
thee, O Directress.  
O Directress, we invoke thee as the golden jar, the candlestick, the rod and the 
table, O pure one, and we ever raise the cry Rejoice! to thee.  
Second Canon  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
What worthy praise can our utter infirmity offer thee? For through the 
manifestation of thy most pure, divine icon thou pourest forth bountiful streams of 
healing upon thy servants who faithfully have recourse to thee.  
The holy revelation of thy divine icon, O Virgin Theotokos, hath shone upon us 
like a radiant sun, emitting rays of most glorious miracles, and dispelling a myriad of 
evil circumstances by thy sacred intercessions, O Lady.  
Thou didst once fill thy first-painted icon with grace, O Virgin Sovereign Lady 
Theotokos; and now that same grace speaketh forth truly in the effulgence of the 
wonders of faith, as the first one did for the sake of thee who wast first depicted 
thereon, unto those who with faith have recourse to thee after God.  
We bow down before the most pure image of thee and thy Babe the sweetest 
Christ the pre-eternal and never-waning Light, O Theotokos, by Whom thou hast 
saved all human nature from cruel evils and mortal corruption.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
The divine apostles of the Word, the trumpet voiced universal heralds of the 
Gospel of Christ, having founded a divine church in thy most holy name, O 
Theotokos, approached thee, entreating thee to come to its consecration. But thou 
didst say, O Mother of God: “Go in peace, and I shall be with you there!” And they, 
going forth, found there, on the wall of the church, the likeness of thine image drawn 

--- PAGE 10 ---
powerfully in colored hues; and seeing it, they did thee homage and glorified God. 
And we also, with them, bow down before thy divine icon, asking of thee great 
mercy. Grant thou remission of sins to thy servants, O thou who alone art blessed.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the above Sessional Hymn is repeated. 
ODE IV  
First Canon  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Rejoice, O Lady Directress, thou wonder of wonders! Rejoice, joy of all cities and 
towns, impregnable fortress and bulwark for Christians amid misfortunes, thou 
victory over the enemy!  
Rejoice, rejoice, O boast of Orthodox kings, for thou, O Queen of all, dost 
accompany Christ-loving armies! Rejoice, O Directress, thou refuge and confirmation 
of us all!  
Rejoice, deliverance for all amid misfortunes! Rejoice, ready consolation for all the 
sorrowful! Rejoice, O all-hymned one! Rejoice, most blessed Directress, healer of all 
the infirm!  
Rejoice, thou whose mighty works all creation doth make haste to glorify as is 
meet; yet it is unable, O Directress, and therefore it crieth out to thee! Rejoice, O 
Sovereign Lady, thou dwelling-place which contained God!  
Second Canon  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
O ye pure people, in purity let us honor the icon of the Virgin Theotokos and of 
the divine Infant Christ our God; and let us kiss it and glorify her with fear and 
trembling; for we right honorably venerate the icon and honor even more the pure 
Mother of God.  
David, the divine and wondrous prophet, foreseeing as from a great distance, said: 
The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance. And let us, O ye faithful, 
bow down and venerate the precious icon, sanctified in body and soul.  
Luke, the divinely eloquent recorder of the Gospel, at the behest of God set down 
Thine all-immaculate image, O Theotokos, depicting the pre-eternal Infant in thine 
arms; and from temptations and misfortunes thou deliverest those who have recourse 
thereto, protecting and saving them all by thine image.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Thou art the boast and crown of all the saints, O Queen; after God, thou art our 
hope and helper, and in thee have we all set our hope of salvation. Thee do we 
entreat as the Mother of God: Rain down thy rich and soul-saving mercies upon thy 
sinful servants.  
ODE V  
First Canon  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Thou art an abyss of goodness and compassions. Rejoice, O Virgin Directress! 
Rejoice, thou who makest all faithful! O rejoice, most speedy helper of those who are 
in misfortune and sorrow!  
Beholding the mighty works of the fullness of thy wonders, we, the faithful, are 
filled with joy; and do they among us who hear of them, see them not? Wherefore, in 
every place we all ever chant unto thee, Rejoice, O Directress!  
O rejoice, O Virgin Directress, thou dwelling-place of Christ our God and 
habitation of His ineffable and supremely divine glory! O rejoice, palace all-adorned! 
Rejoice, ever reigning animate city!  
Looking upon thee as a sea of joy inexhaustible, O Virgin Maiden Directress, 
rejoicing we all cry out to thee: Rejoice! And chanting, we ever expect of thee divine 
gifts invisibly bestowed.  
Second Canon  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Every being is at a loss how to hymn thee, O most pure one, for thou art exalted 
far above the heavenly intelligences, having given birth unto the unapproachable and 
dread King and God of all, but as thou art merciful and the ready helper of mortals, 
attend unto the entreaty of thy servants, and grant us thy help.  
Where thy grace overshadoweth, O Theotokos, the demons vanish in fear and 
their wickedly devised fantasies are destroyed; the dark demons flee and the whole 
multitude of the faithful rejoice, crying out a hymn of praise to thee from their hearts: 
Rejoice, thou divine protection of our souls!  
Sweet sight is given to the eyeless, hearing to the deaf, good speech to the mute, 
the ability to walk to the lame, cleansing to the leprous, chastity to the demonized, 
and healing to those who suffer from divers sicknesses, through the overshadowing 
of thy most pure icon, O Theotokos.  
O joyous Theotokos, let us never fail to hymn thy mighty works with psalms and 
hymns; for thou hast truly given birth unto the incarnate God for our universal 
salvation and deliverance.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE VI 
First Canon  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Receiving Christ within thyself, O pure Virgin Directress, thou didst hear the cry: 
Rejoice! And having given birth unto Him ineffably, thou dost ever hear from all the 
salutation Rejoice!  
Thou hast filled all with joy, and hast united those who are on high with those 
below, O Directress. Wherefore, with joy heaven and all the earth now cry out to thee 
with one voice.  
Rejoice, O all-hymned Directress, consolation of widows and all orphans! Rejoice, 
thou who pourest forth inexhaustible riches upon all the destitute!  
Rejoice, O Directress, dwelling-place of Christ, more lustrous than any gold and 
more splendid than the dawning of the sun! Rejoice, O Virgin! Rejoice, O Bride 
unwedded!  
Second Canon  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
O Virgin Sovereign Lady, by thine exclamation of old thou didst impart to thy 
most pure image the abundantly rich grace of thy divine birthgiving, such that it 
abundantly worketh great and most glorious miracles, unto the salvation of those who 
set their hope on thee.  
Where the holy name of the joyous Theotokos is glorified, streams of every good 
thing pour forth. Come O ye people in purity, for lo, by the manifestation of the 
divine icon of the Virgin, the presence of the Queen is revealed, unto the salvation of 
all the faithful.  
Approaching with faith, O all-immaculate Lady and Mother of God, from thy 
most pure icon we receive healing of maladies, the dispelling of the passions, 
salvation which nourisheth the soul, forgiveness of sins, and everlasting deliverance.  
To thee, O Sovereign Lady, do the generations of the earthborn flee, and ask great 
mercy; and they that are infirm receive healing in abundance, release from the 
passions, and consolation amid grief. O Lady, let fall upon me a drop of soul-saving 
rain, that with all I may also hymn thy magnitude.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Kontakion of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...” 
O ye people, let us flee to the calm and goodly haven, * the speedy helper, fervent 
and ready salvation, * the protection of the most pure Virgin, * and let us make haste 
to prayer and speed to repentance. * For the Theotokos poureth forth upon us 
inexhaustible mercies; * going before us to help and deliver her goodhearted and 
God-fearing servants ** from great misfortunes and evils.  
Ikos: Having cleansed thought and mind, let us make haste to the Theotokos, 
calling her blessed in splendid hymns; and let us glorify and honor her most pure 
icon, and falling down before it, let us do homage as to herself; for the veneration 
shown an icon ascendeth unto the Prototype, and he that honoreth and boweth down 
before it, honoreth the Prototype Himself, as the divine fathers have said. And if one 
doth not reverence the most holy Theotokos, and doth not venerate her icon, let him 
be anathema; for she putteth to shame and destroyeth those who honor her not, and 
delivereth from great misfortunes and evils her good-hearted and God-fearing 
servants.  
ODE VII  
First Canon  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Rejoice, rejoice, O Directress, who dost ever direct all the faithful to tread the path 
to all salvation! Rejoice, O Sovereign Lady, for by thee are we ever delivered from the 
present tribulations brought about by the barbarians!  
Rejoice, rejoice, O Birthgiver of God, who keepest watch and prayest to God for 
us, delivering all the people from every sorrow and from all evil by thy mediation!  
Rejoice, rejoice, O most holy Directress, who fulfillest those of our petitions 
which are for our profit, and ever desirest for good and brotherly love and unity, 
particularly among those who lead.  
Rejoice, rejoice, O Directress of ships which need to sail, who deliverest the 
faithful, and quickly loosest them from divers and longstanding ailments, O thou 
deliverance of all from every sorrow!  
Second Canon  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Come ye, let us draw forth forgiveness from the inexhaustible well-spring which 
poureth forth sanctity, the most pure Virgin and her most pure Infant, God the 
Word, Who assumed flesh for our sake. And let us cry out to Him: O Creator and 
Redeemer Who art God glorified with the Father and the Spirit, blessed art Thou!  
Possessed of ever-vigilant and God-pleasing prayer, O pure one, and an 
undefeatable dominion of might, crush thou the audacity of the enemy which is 
directed against us, that we, thy servants, may rejoice in thee, crying out to thy Son: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
O ye faithful people, let us rejoice and be glad in the wondrous appearance of the 
icon of the most pure Lady, the Theotokos; for it hath been shown to be an 
inexhaustible river pouring forth the water of healing, giving sight to the blind, 
hearing to the deaf, the ability to walk to the lame, and free healing to all amid their 
infirmities.  
The unapproachable image of thy conception is an unfathomable abyss, an 
incomprehensible mystery, O Virgin, for thy conception was seedless; having given 
birth without a husband, the Incorporeal One became incarnate, the Pre-eternal One 
became an infant, the Son of God became thy Son, O Virgin. To Him do we cry 
aloud: Blessed art Thou, O God!  
ODE VIII 
First Canon  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Rejoice, O most blessed Mary, for through thee the supremely blessed God hath 
arrayed Himself in all of me; and having arrayed Himself in human nature, He hath 
united mankind to His divinity in an ineffable union, O Virgin Directress! Rejoice, O 
joyous one, thou joy of all the world!  
Rejoice, dispeller of evil spirits! Rejoice, O Theotokos Directress! Rejoice, thou 
whom the invisible armies of heaven ever glorify and magnify as the Mother of God! 
Rejoice, thou who hast joined those who are below with those above!  
Rejoice, rejoice, O Directress who without exception surpassest all the heavenly 
hosts! Rejoice, O all-hymned Lady, who hast given birth to the God of all creation, 
and who hast dominion over it! Rejoice, O pure one, who even after giving birth didst 
remain a virgin!  
Rejoice, glory of all women, most hallowed temple of our God! Rejoice, O 
Directress! Rejoice, thou who savest the souls of all the world! Rejoice, protecting 
cloud broader than the heavens! Rejoice, phial full of the divine oil of myrrh!  
Second Canon  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The minds of angels and mortals are filled with awe, O Theotokos, at how thou 
hast given flesh to the God of heaven, containing Him within thy womb, and how, 
having given birth unto Him as a babe, thou didst bear Him as a Son in thine arms, 
Him before whom creation doth stand in awe and the heavenly thrones tremble, 
crying out unceasingly: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O God Who art all-hymned and 
supremely exalted above all throughout the ages! Rejoice, thou who art the joy of all 
the world!  
With the Archangel Gabriel we cry out to thee, O Theotokos: Rejoice, thou who 
didst contain the Infinite One! Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace, bearer of the 
whole Divinity! Rejoice, restoration of Adam, the Lord is with thee, saving us for thy 
sake! Him do we hymn and supremely exalt throughout the ages.  
O sanctified root of Jesse, thou hast plucked forth the root of our sin, O rod of 
Aaron which blossomed, giving rise to a Blossom, Christ the Bestower of life! O jar 
which received the Manna, thou hast crushed all the power of death, and brought the 
human race to the regeneration of life. Wherefore, we hymn thee, the cause of that 
which is good.  
Thou art the boast of Christians, O Lady; thou art a sword against our enemies 
and a rampart for those who have recourse unto thee. We now call upon thee for aid, 
O Sovereign Lady: permit not the foe to rise up against thy people, for they praise 
neither thee nor thy Son, O Theotokos, nor do they bow down before thine icon. 
Vanquish them, and save thou our souls.  
ODE IX  
First Canon  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Rejoice, O lamp who bore the never-waning Light and who in thy birth-giving 
hast destroyed the darkness of polytheism, delivering thy people from the abyss of 
Hades! Rejoice, O Theotokos Directress, mediatress of all good things!  
Rejoice, O fertile earth from whence the Ear of heavenly grain hath budded forth 
for the faithful, delivering the whole world from soul destroying famine, O noetic and 
animate one! Rejoice, O vine which hast given birth to the Cluster of life, O pure 
Theotokos Directress!  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Rejoice, most comely paradise of mystic flowers! Rejoice, Virgin Mother, O 
Birthgiver of God who by purity hast most strangely vanquished the reasoning of the 
invisible foe! Rejoice, O Maiden, rejoice, O Directress, thou universal wonder and 
report!  
By thine aid, keep thou the remaining time of our life untouched by harm, O 
Virgin Maiden, and count us worthy of receiving a good end, for we hymn thee and 
cry aloud: Rejoice, O most blessed and pure Theotokos and Directress!  
Second Canon  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Thee, the steadfast helper of the human race, O Theotokos Mary, did the choir of 
the prophets foretell in many and divers ways, as the holy tabernacle more spacious 
than the heavens, the tablet divinely inscribed, the bush unconsumed by Fire, the 
portal through which God hath passed, the mountain and the ladder, the bridge and 
the rod which blossomed forth. And we truly magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
The mystery of the depth of thy birthgiving moveth the mind of the angels to awe, 
O Virgin, and thy most pure icon driveth away the demons, darkening the 
countenances of the ungodly, and putting them to shame. For they cannot bear to 
look upon its power, and they flee and vanish away. And we lovingly bow down and 
venerate it, and magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
As a constant intercessor before the King Most High, in that thou art possessed of 
undaunted boldness, establish thou the life of the Orthodox in profound peace, exalt 
our right believing hierarchs, and ever grant unto thy servants all things that are 
profitable, that we may magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
O all-merciful helper of Christians, the mind of mortals or that of the angels 
cannot hymn thee as is meet, for thou art more honorable than all creation, more 
glorious than all things of heaven and earth; for thou hast given birth unto the 
Creator and God of all. O Lady, mercifully accept the hymn which we have 
composed for thee from the depths of our heart, and ever save us, for we have set 
our hope on thee.  
Exapostilarion of the icon: 
Let the all-hymned Mother of God be honored, for she hath given birth unto 
Christ our God, our Life, and hath opened of the gates of paradise, she is the 
cleansing of the whole world, and the restoration to life. And He is the One of 
Whom the prophets spake, and we worship Him as our God, the Savior of our souls. 
(Twice)  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Come O ye faithful, and with purity let us exalt the wondrous icon of the most 
pure Mother of our God and Christ, the divine Infant Savior. For, having given birth 
to Him and carried Him in her arms, she possesses boldness before Him, and 
unceasingly prays on our behalf, bestowing upon her servants rich mercies.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Let us glorify the joyous Theotokos, O ye faithful, for we ever have her holy and 
blessed name upon our lips more than any other, unceasingly fleeing to her most pure 
and healing icon; for thereby have we found all things that are good and profitable on 
earth, and have been delivered from the snares of the demons in the air. For as the 
Mother who gaveth birth to the Creator of all, she saveth our souls from misfortunes. 
(Twice)  
Everlastingly may the assembly of the impious lament, who do not confess thee to 
be the Theotokos, pure in thy birthgiving, and who do not bow down before thy 
most pure icon. But we, thy faithful people, rejoicing confess thee to be the true 
Theotokos and Virgin, in that thou didst truly give birth unto Christ our God in the 
flesh, trampling underfoot the corruption of Adam, and cleansing the whole world of 
sin. Thou hast granted never-ending life and opened the gates of paradise to the 
faithful through thy divine Offspring. Him do thou entreat, that we who hymn thy 
mystery with faith may be saved.  
Let all the multitude of the pious be glad and rejoice with ineffable joy; and, falling 
down, let them all do homage and reverence the Mother of God with fear, giving 
thanks to her after God, in that she is the mediatress of such great blessings. The 
angels desire to gaze upon those things which Christ our God hath given to the 
faithful through the Theotokos, for He hath an abundance of tender compassion and 
great and exceedingly rich mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Thy holy icon which depicteth thy form, O Virgin Theotokos, is by thy grace an 
abundantly rich fountain which poureth forth its waters upon all the earth, 
enlightening the whole world with the effulgent radiance of the Holy Spirit. For thou 
didst ineffably give birth in the flesh to God the Word, hearing such things as these 
from the Archangel Gabriel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace, the Lord is with 
thee, and the Holy Spirit hath overshadowed thee upon thy conceiving! And thus 
didst thou say to the first icon depicting thee, when thou didst behold it: My grace is 
with this Icon! And thy word was fulfilled in the power of the icon. Divine grace, 
transcending every image, voice, power, deed and mind, abiding with it forever, 
unceasingly worketh signs and wonders, and giveth spiritually profitable healing to all 
who approach it with faith, by thine unceasing divine, maternal supplications to God.  
Great Doxology and Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT THE LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I, and 4 from ODE 
VI of Canon II of the feast.  
Rejoice, O unshakable, pure and animate palace of Christ the King Most High! 
Rejoice, O Directress, Rejoice! For by thee is our city preserved intact!  
In thy womb which tasted not of wedlock thou didst bodily contain Him Whom 
Creation cannot contain, O Virgin Directress. Wherefore, magnifying thee as is meet, 
we chant Rejoice!  
O all-hymned joy of the world, ever hymning thee with joy, O pure one, we are 
vouchsafed everlasting joy by thy maternal supplications unto Him Who was born of 
thee, O Directress.  
O Directress, we invoke thee as the golden jar, the candlestick, the rod and the 
table, O pure one, and we ever raise the cry Rejoice! to thee.  
O Virgin Sovereign Lady, by thine exclamation of old thou didst impart to thy 
most pure image the abundantly rich grace of thy divine birthgiving, such that it 
abundantly worketh great and most glorious miracles, unto the salvation of those who 
set their hope on thee.  
Where the holy name of the joyous Theotokos is glorified, streams of every good 
thing pour forth. Come O ye people in purity, for lo, by the manifestation of the 
divine icon of the Virgin, the presence of the Queen is revealed, unto the salvation of 
all the faithful.  
Approaching with faith, O all-immaculate Lady and Mother of God, from thy 
most pure icon we receive healing of maladies, the dispelling of the passions, 
salvation which nourisheth the soul, forgiveness of sins, and everlasting deliverance.  
To thee, O Sovereign Lady, do the generations of the earthborn flee, and ask great 
mercy; and they that are infirm receive healing in abundance, release from the 
passions, and consolation amid grief. O Lady, let fall upon me a drop of soul-saving 
rain, that with all I may also hymn thy magnitude.  
Troparion of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone IV: 
O earnest helper, Mother of the Lord Most High, * thou dost entreat Christ, thy 
Son and our God, on behalf of all, * and causest all who have recourse to thy mighty 
protection to be saved. * O Sovereign Lady and Queen, help us all who, amid 
temptations, sorrows and sickness, * are heavy laden with many sins, * who stand 
before thee and with tears pray to thee before thy most pure image * with compunc-
tionate soul and contrite heart, * and who have unfailing hope in thee: * grant 
deliverance from all evils, and things profitable unto all, * O Virgin Theotokos, save 
us all, ** for thou art the divine protection of thy servants.  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Kontakion of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VIII: 
O ye people, let us flee to the calm and goodly haven, * the speedy helper, fervent 
and ready salvation, * the protection of the most pure Virgin, * and let us make haste 
to prayer and speed to repentance. * For the Theotokos poureth forth upon us 
inexhaustible mercies; * going before us to help and deliver her goodhearted and 
God-fearing servants ** from great misfortunes and evils.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone II, the Song of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS, §240 (PHIL 2:5-11) 
Brethren: Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who, being in 
the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made Himself of 
no reputation, and took upon Himself the form of a servant, and was made in the 
likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, and 
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath 
highly exalted Him, and given Him a name which is above every name: that at the 
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and 
things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, 
to the glory of God the Father.  
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, §54 (LK 10:38-42; 11:27-28) 
Now it came to pass, as they went, that He entered into a certain village; and a 
certain woman named Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister 
called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard His word. But Martha was 
cumbered about much serving, and came to Him, and said, Lord, dost Thou not care 
that my sister hath left me to serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me. And 
Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled 
about many things: but one thing is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, 
which shall not be taken away from her. And it came to pass, as He spoke these 
things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto Him, 
Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the paps which Thou hast sucked. But He 
said, Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.  
Communion verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
