--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY WONDERWORKER ABERCIUS,  
BISHOP OF HIERAPOLIS, EQUAL OF THE APOSTLES 
COMMEMORATION OF THE SEVEN YOUTHS OF EPHESUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
With the splendors of divine teaching * thou didst destroy the night of polytheism, 
* O father Abercius, * and dawning like the morn, * thou didst make those who 
before were in darkness children of the day, * showing forth most glorious miracles, 
O hierarch. * Wherefore, we all celebrate * thy holy memory with faith, hymning thee, 
** O divinely inspired one.  
Working a miracle, O father, * thou didst mingle wine and oil * in a single vessel, * 
preserved in another form, * but by divine grace didst cause them to separate when 
needed; * and by thy prayer a gift of warm waters flowed forth, * healing the 
infirmities of all those * who approach thee with faith ** and call thee blessed, O 
Abercius.  
Cleaving wholly unto God, O Abercius, * thou wast revealed to be a fulfiller of 
divine teachings; * and having received grace * from on high, O venerable one, * thou 
didst drive away the divers infirmities of all, * and destroying the temples of the idols 
* thou didst plant divine knowledge in those * who before languished wretchedly in 
ignorance, ** O blessed one.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Submitting to God, * the blessed youths spurned * the exceedingly wicked 
commands, * and when they were bound * they broke the bonds of delusion, * and, 
rejecting worldly rank, have received a glory * which made them most gloriously 
perfect * and won for them ** the enjoyment of the heavenly kingdom.  
Having mightily trained yourselves * for the struggles of suffering, O saints, * ye 
hid in the cave, * entreating to the Lord * with unceasing prayers, * that He grant 
might and power * through judgments which He Who is the Lover of mankind doth 
know; * and in a godly manner ** He commanded all of you to fall asleep in peace.  
Come ye all, and let us earnestly hymn * the witnesses of piety, * the divinely 
assembled regiment, * the blessed choir, * the invincible company of martyrs, * the 
beautiful triumph of the Church of God, * the indivisible assembly, * the 
unvanquished army, ** the unshakable foundation of piety.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., the composition of John the monk, in Tone III: 
O venerable hierarch, all-blessed father Abercius, thou wonder-worker and 
favorite of God, who shone forth in thy prophetic life, thou hast been deemed 
worthy of apostolic gifts, unceasingly ministering unto the Savior with the angels. 
Pray thou, that our souls be delivered from every threat.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Great is the power of Thy Cross ...”:  
A sword pierced thy heart, O most pure one, * when thou didst behold thy Son 
upon the Cross; * whereupon thou didst cry aloud: * “Show me not to be childless, O 
my Son and my God, ** Thou Who hast kept me a Virgin even after I gave birth!”  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Abercius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia; and two for the saints, with 8 
Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the great glory of 
Abercius”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II:  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Illumined with the radiant splendor of the three-Sunned Godhead, O Abercius, 
thou didst become a light enlightening those in darkness and dispelling all the 
darkness of the demons.  
Thou didst lead a heavenly life on earth, O most blessed one, living in the flesh as 
one of the incorporeal ones and mortifying the passions; thereby receiving the gift of 
the priesthood.  
Having within thyself the gift of preaching, O father, thou didst destroy the 
irrationality of the vain-minded, casting down the temples of the demons and their 
false graven images.  
Theotokion: The tongues of orators are at a loss how to describe thy conceiving, 
which is beyond all telling; for thou hast given birth to God in the flesh, O all-pure 
one, Who in His goodness became like unto us.  
Canon of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
O ye seven holy youths, who are honored by the number seven, ye radiant stars 
shining in the firmament of the Church, who by your witness have come to dwell in 
the heavens: be ye mindful of those who honor you with faith.  
Forming a lamp of sevenfold brilliance with the sevenfold radiance of the Spirit, O 
ye seven martyrs, ye caused the darkness of delusion to diminish, and with the light of 
piety ye now illumine us all with a sevenfold radiance.  
Theotokion: On thee, O Virgin, do I place my hope of salvation: wash from me all 
the mire of sin and make me pure, that I may be well-pleasing to thy Son and do His 
all-holy will.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
By sacred words and the performing of miracles, O Abercius, thou hast most 
gloriously guided those who sail the sea of deception to the calm haven of salvation.  
Working healings, performing excellent miracles and dispelling the fantasies of the 
demons, thou hast been the cause of salvation for all and an intercessor for the rich.  
O father, thy discourse was sacred, thy life godly, thy character resplendent with 
miracles, thy manner of living glorious, and thy death honorable.  
Theotokion: God Who before was invisible became visible, O Virgin, being 
incarnate of thy womb in His compassion; wherefore, we bless thee with faith.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Appearing on earth in sevenfold radiance like lamps of the virtues, and shining 
brightly in the effulgence of your struggles and the brilliance of your miracles, ye have 
shone the light of the knowledge of God upon the whole world.  
Offered to the Creator from earliest infancy, for His sake ye spurned glory, royal 
honors and transitory riches, for which ye have received the glory of incorruptible 
honors.  
Theotokion: With the activity of the Life which appeared through thee to the 
world, O only most immaculate Birthgiver of God, raise up my deadened mind, 
destroying the wounds and types of sin.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
O Christ Who hast glorified Thy saints on earth, * before Thine awesome Second 
Coming * Thou hast shown forth the resurrection to those who knew it not, * 
through the most glorious raising up of the youths, * revealing their clothing and 
bodies as incorrupt; * prevailing upon the emperor to cry aloud: ** Truly there is 
resurrection for the dead!  
Ikos: When the bishop of Ephesus beheld the wondrous and exalted resurrection 
of the youths, astonished in mind he wrote with haste to the most faithful emperor, 
describing their arising: “May thy highness deign to come hither, O master, that thou 
mayest see the power of our God, which He hath shown to thee.” And rising up 
straightway, the great victor made the journey, rejoicing, showing himself to be 
another charioteer like Elijah, crying aloud: Truly there is resurrection for the dead!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Thou hast been shown to be a hierarch anointed with precious oils in a godly 
manner, O most sacred and all-praised father Abercius, working all things through 
grace, adorned with the splendor of divine gifts and miracles, healing sicknesses, 
burning up the demons, converting multitudes of the deluded. Wherefore, we cry out 
to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor 
thy holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
As pillars of the Church of Christ ye mightily destroyed the walls of unbelief, O 
seven martyred brethren; wherefore, before your death ye destroyed the rage of the 
heathen, and after your death ye destroyed the storm of heresy, pray ye for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O pure, all-immaculate one who knewest not a man, who alone hast given birth 
within time to the timeless Son and Word of God, with the holy and honored 
patriarchs, the martyrs, prophets and the venerable, entreat Him, that He grant us 
purification and great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: O most immaculate Virgin, * Mother of Christ God, * a sword 
pierced thy most holy soul * when thou didst behold thy Son and God * crucified of 
His own will. * Him do thou never cease to entreat, O blessed one, ** that He grant 
us the forgiveness of our transgressions.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.  
Thou didst abundantly adorn thy cathedra, O venerable hierarch, rendering it 
utterly magnificent with great miracles and a splendid life; wherefore, our God hath 
greatly glorified thee.  
Knowing that the Lord desireth mercy, O God-bearer, thou didst beseech Him 
fervently to cause a most wondrous outpouring of fervent waters for the healing and 
salvation of many.  
By the grace of God thou didst make childless women fertile, fulfilling their inten-
tions; for having manifestly sown upon them thy words as seed, O blessed Abercius, 
like a good sower thou didst reap grain a hundredfold. 
 Theotokion: O all-immaculate Bride of God thou hast healed the contrition and 
ancient accursedness of mortals, having given birth to Christ, the King and Lord, 
Who hath taken upon Himself our infirmities in His ineffable compassion.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Bound together with a fraternal bond, and set afire with divine desire, O martyrs 
of the Lord, ye agreed on making a true confession of faith and thereby put to shame 
the vain-minded understanding of the tyrants and the false teaching of polytheism.  
Persecuted for Christ and with Christ, hiding in caves and mountainous 
wastelands, instead of death, for many long years ye slept a life-bearing sleep for His 
sake, clearly confirming the general resurrection of mortals.  
Theotokion: That in the richness of Thy goodness Thou mightest restore Thine 
image which had become dim through the passions, Thou didst make Thine abode 
within the Virgin’s womb, making it wisdom, the temple of God, through which thou 
didst come to dwell with mankind and save the ends of the world, O Compassionate 
One.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
Having set thy feet upon the rock of thy heart, O divinely wise and blessed one, 
with divine words thou didst teach those who had fallen into perdition rendered wor-
ship to stones, such that they worshiped the Rock, Jesus Christ our God.  
Let us honor Abercius the teacher of sacred things, the excellent physician of the 
infirm, the guide of all who have been deceived by evil counsel, the phial of precious 
gifts, the receptacle of the divine Spirit.  
When wine and oil were placed together in a single vessel and mixed together at 
thy command, at the appointed time they were poured forth most gloriously 
unmingled, manifestly revealing thy most excellent grace, O sacred one.  
Theotokion: In thee, O Virgin, are the laws of nature most gloriously restored; for 
without seed thou didst give birth to God the Savior, and remained a virgin - O the 
awesome wonder! Wherefore, we piously declare thee to be the Mother of Emmanuel  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Having died to the world, ye rejected all the beauties of life, committing your life 
to Him Who hath dominion over life, and slept a life-bearing sleep for many years as 
an image of the general resurrection.  
Enduring long persecution, ye showed yourselves to be spiritual athletes by your 
life, bearing hunger and thirst and divers tribulations, sorrows and misfortunes, yet 
made rich in tranquility.  
Theotokion: Made rich in thee, our rampart, and protected by thine intercession, 
boasting in thy divine glory, we call thee blessed; for thou, O most holy one, dost 
pour forth gladness and joy upon our souls. 
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Thou didst go from the East to the West, O venerable one, driving away the queen 
of demonic and cruel passion by the power of the Spirit.  
Thou didst appear strange to the world, O most sacred Abercius, working 
wondrous and awesome miracles, walking in the body and departing therefrom.  
Seen to be as bright as lightning, O divinely inspired father Abercius, thou didst 
vanquish hordes of the demons, who were unable to bear the threat of thee.  
Theotokion: Through thee, O all-holy Bride of God, we, who are dead, have been 
deemed worthy of life, and we who are in thrall to corruption have manifestly been 
enriched by incorruption.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
With love for God, O wise ones, ye left your Ephesians’ homeland, your splendid 
family, illustrious riches and honorable glory, preferring to inherit heaven.  
The seven-member choir of spiritual athletes, joining together in a godly manner, 
cast down the manifold multitude of the enemy and received the glory of confession, 
and crowns for their suffering.  
Theotokion: The majesty of the Most High shone forth from Sion, arrayed 
through a union in the flesh which He received from thee who knewest not wedlock; 
and He hath thereby enlightened the world.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “As first-fruits ...”: 
The whole Church of the faithful doth reckon thee * to be a most excellent priest 
and dweller with the apostles, O Abercius. * By thy supplications preserve it 
invincible, un-assailed and undefiled by all heresy, ** in that thou art ever-memorable.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Ikos: Mindful of the vanity of this world, as a stranger to the world and an 
emulator of the suffering of Christ thou didst mortify the carnal passions, and taking 
up thy cross, O blessed one, thou didst follow after thy Creator. Abiding with Him 
now, pray thou for those who truly honor thee, in that thou art ever-memorable.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
As a godly shepherd, as a performer of miracles, O father, by thy prayer thou hast 
granted the blind to see and the deaf to hear, and bestowed cleansing upon lepers, 
and the ability to walk to the lame, who chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
The bubbling spring of warm water and the pillar which lieth on thy grave, which 
the wicked spirit, driven out by thee, O father Abercius, carried back from great 
Rome, proclaim thine ability to work miracles throughout the ages.  
Thou wast a guide for the humble, having been revealed as exalted in vision and 
activity and power, O most sacred one, as a favorite of the most high King. To Him 
do we cry: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: He Who was begotten of the Father before the morning-star was 
born from thee in two natures and wills, as both God and man, O Maiden, and is 
known to all who cry out with faith: Blessed art thou who hast given birth to God in 
the flesh!  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Submitting to God, and guided by divine law and an upright mind, ye set at naught 
the exceedingly wicked commands of the tormentors, O youths, acquiring life and 
incorruption through death, enriched in your mortal bodies.  
Desiring to drink the cup of death for the Creator with faith, for the sake of 
immortality and incorruption ye endured the burial of your bodies, making plain the 
resurrection by your most glorious rising from the dead, O martyrs.  
Theotokion: Thou didst shine forth like the morning, having the Sun of 
righteousness Who, through divine knowledge, taketh away the darkness of ignorance 
from the world. To Him do we chant, O most pure one: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Let Abercius be honored as a most glorious shepherd, an inexhaustible well-spring 
of healings, a pillar of the Church, the confirmation of the faithful, a great luminary 
and a most splendid teacher of sacred things.  
Like the palm-tree of the psalms thou didst flourish in the courts of the living 
God; multiplying like the cedar, O wise one, and wast revealed to be like an olive-tree, 
causing the faces of all to shine with faith through the oil of thy works.  
Through thine active life, thou wast manifestly known to be like a city standing on 
the summit of a mountain, O venerable one; and thy city, which of old was sunk in 
deception, thou hast revealed to be like an heir to the city of the Most High.  
Theotokion: Behold, the bridal-couch of Solomon, surrounded now by the mighty 
prophecies of the divinely inspired Scriptures, and one upon which Christ God hath 
rested in His divine incarnation, O blessed and joyous one.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Your memory hath shone forth with a sevenfold radiance today like the beams of 
the sun, illumining the earth with the splendors of your suffering, with the brilliance 
of your miracles, and with the rays of divine dogmas wherewith ye assure all of the 
resurrection of the body and the incorruption of mortals, O wise ones.  
Once, God preserved Abimelech in the field, that he might not see the destruction 
of Jerusalem; and He preserved you asleep for a great many years in the cave as an 
assurance of the resurrection of all, O youths, ye lamps equal in number to the seven 
ages.  
Theotokion: Sanctified by the Spirit, O all-immaculate Theotokos, thou didst truly 
receive the beginningless and everlasting Son in thy womb, Who became incarnate 
within thee, O pure one, for the benefaction of those who cry out with faith: Ye 
children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
In that thy life was splendid and thy feet beautiful, in that thy yearning for God 
and neighbor was exceedingly wondrous, in that the grace given thee from on high 
was magnificent, O wise Abercius, we honor thee with faith.  
With faith let us glorify thee, O Abercius, as one who dwelleth with all the holy 
martyrs, an emulator of the divine disciples, a peer of the patriarchs, prophets and the 
venerable, and a converser with the ministers of heaven.  
Thy most holy memory, which extendeth throughout the world, doth illumine the 
souls of all with the rich light of grace. By thy supplications, O Abercius, deliver us 
who celebrate it with love from the passions and from perilous darkness, we pray 
thee.  
Theotokion: The prophet beheld thee beforehand as a radiant lampstand bearing 
within thee as a truly divine Lamp the only transcendent God Who, in the 
compassion of His mercy, became man through thee, O all-holy Virgin.  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Everyone born on earth marveled at this, and every mind was amazed, that 
mortals who lay buried for many years in a cave appeared as though having slept for 
an evening, rising up in the morning as was their wont, assuring all of the general 
resurrection of mortals.  
O ye seven radiant luminaries and martyrs, ever-radiant beacons of Ephesus, 
intercessors for the whole world, fervent advocates, preachers of the general 
resurrection and guardians of the faithful: ask for us tranquility and salvation, and 
peace for all the ends of the world.  
Theotokion: As thou art the Mother of Him Who suffered for us, in that thou art 
full of tender compassion, deliver me from soul-corrupting passions, and break thou 
the bonds of my transgressions. In that thou art good, bless now my soul, which is 
vexed by the assaults of demons, O Virgin Theotokos, that I may hymn thee, the all-
hymned one.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
The hindering demon compelled thee to hasten to the city of Rome, for he had 
entered wickedly into the daughter of the emperor, O divinely eloquent Abercius; but 
thou didst drive him from her like a dog, compelling him to carry a pillar back to 
Hierapolis.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs:  
Thy spiritual athletes, O Lord, protecting themselves with the weapon of Thy 
precious Cross, mightily vanquished the adverse powers, put the tyrants to shame and 
suffered for Thee; and they reign together with Thee, O my Christ, Thou King of all.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O thy mysteries! O thy wonders! How is it that even after giving birth thou didst 
remain a virgin as thou wast before birthgiving? How didst thou contain God Who is 
in nowise confined? Truly ineffable are all thy works, O blessed Mary! 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY 
At the beatitudes; 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of the canon of 
the holy hierarch: 
By sacred words and the performing of miracles, O Abercius, thou hast most 
gloriously guided those who sail the sea of deception to the calm haven of salvation.  
Working healings, performing excellent miracles and dispelling the fantasies of the 
demons, thou hast been the cause of salvation for all and an intercessor for the rich.  
O father, thy discourse was sacred, thy life godly, thy character resplendent with 
miracles, thy manner of living glorious, and thy death honorable.  
Theotokion: God Who before was invisible became visible, O Virgin, being 
incarnate of thy womb in His compassion; wherefore, we bless thee with faith.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Abercius our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
O Christ Who hast glorified Thy saints on earth, * before Thine awesome Second 
Coming * Thou hast shown forth the resurrection to those who knew it not, * 
through the most glorious raising up of the youths, * revealing their clothing and 
bodies as incorrupt; * prevailing upon the emperor to cry aloud: ** Truly there is 
resurrection for the dead!  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
The whole Church of the faithful doth reckon thee * to be a most excellent priest 
and dweller with the apostles, O Abercius. * By thy supplications preserve it 
invincible, un-assailed and undefiled by all heresy, ** in that thou art ever-memorable.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 318 (HEB. 7: 26-8: 2)  
Brethren: Such a high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; who needeth not daily, as those high 
priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: for this he 
did once, when he offered up himself. For the law maketh men high priests which 

--- PAGE 13 ---
have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, 
who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the 
sum: We have such a high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the 
Majesty in the heavens; a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which 
the Lord pitched, and not a man.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his 
tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 36 (JN. 10: 9-17)  
The Lord said to His disciples: I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall 
be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh not, but for to 
steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they 
might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth 
his life for the sheep. But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the 
sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf 
catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, 
and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am 
known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay 
down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them 
also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one 
shepherd. 
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be, he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
