--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 25th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY & RIGHTEOUS TABITHA  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the righteous one, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the heavenly powers ...”: 
Today the Church of Christ doth glorify a strange wonder: one of the daughters of 
Adam is received by the grave, as earth returning to the earth, fulfilling the command 
of the Creator; yet as the Destroyer of death, He giveth utterance through his apostle, 
saying: “O Tabitha, I say unto thee, arise! And thou shalt live again, that for thy sake 
all may understand that I am the Resurrection and the Life, and everyone who 
believeth in Me shall not die forever!” (Twice)  
When word of thy resurrection spread throughout the parts of Joppa, belief in 
Christ was established among many; for all understood the dominion of the Lord 
Who hath the power to raise up the dead. For this is a fulfillment of prophetic 
images, in that death hath been slain by the victory of the Son of God, and He is the 
Master and Bestower of life, Who restoreth and enlighteneth our souls. (Twice)  
He Who is the salvation of all mankind sent His disciples throughout the whole 
world, that they might preach His resurrection; and if the Lord had not arisen, hope 
in life eternal would be in vain. He who was preeminent among the apostles arrived in 
Joppa and commanded Tabitha to rise up from the dead, that all the faithful might 
truly understand that she received life through the resurrection of Christ. And we, 
believing in miracles and the resurrection without doubt, fall down in supplication 
before the Almighty, crying: O Thou Who art full of mercy and kindness, through the 
prayers of Thy holy one save Thou our souls! (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
O Tabitha who wast called “the doe”, thou wast truly like unto one when thou 
didst zealously strive to avoid all impiety, and loving thy neighbor didst abundantly 
adorn thyself with tender compassion. Wherefore this queen of the virtues led thee 
up to the celestial life, and Christ, the King of glory, seeing thee to be a wise virgin 
holding a splendid lamp in thy right hand, raised thee up again to this transitory life, 
that, showing forth a manner of life in the flesh worthy of our calling, we may be in-
structed by thee to walk in the light, and become truly perfect, and deemed worthy of 
the sweetness of paradise, the Jerusalem on high, through thy supplications to our 
Savior.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth forth 
from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, * twofold in nature 
but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect 
man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O unwedded Mother, ** 
that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the Day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye who judge the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory 
in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty from 
the Most High.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 

--- PAGE 3 ---
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera:  
In Tone I: Blessed is the righteous one who abideth in grace, for he hath been like 
unto a tree by streams of waters, whose leaf shall not fall. In thee, O Tabitha, do we 
see these words of David fulfilled, for thou didst establish thy salvation upon the firm 
rock which is the trampling down of falls into sin, didst set thy feet upon the path of 
the virtues, hastening to the mansions of heaven, where thou sittest in never-waning 
glory. Thither do thou bear supplication unto the throne of the triune Immortal One, 
that He loose the bonds of sin wherewith we have caused His image to become 
corrupt, and that, dwelling within us, He may also establish us in piety.  
The saying of the most wise one, that a good woman shall have glory and honor, 
hath been fulfilled: word of thee, O Tabitha, hath gone forth into all the earth; for all 
have thee as a model of piety which we ought to emulate, that the greatest of the 
commandments might be fulfilled. Thy love extended to all, in accordance with the 
commandment of God; wherefore, the Lord also loved thee and raised thee up from 
the grave. Forget us not who celebrate thy memory, and entreat Christ our God, the 
Master of all, Who is perfect Love, that His peace may reign within us and all 
throughout the world, and that we may ever abide in His love.  
In Tone II: “We have no other consolation such as Tabitha hath shown us,” the 
widows cried aloud to the holy Apostle Peter, “for she devoted her hands to serving 
us, sheltered many from burning heat and the cold, and brought many of the indigent 
into her own house, giving the sick all that was necessary for their cure; wherefore, do 
thou, the preeminent herald of the Almighty, command her to rise from the dead, for 
our joy and unto the glory of God!”  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Today widows sing glory unto God with voices of praise, and with them all 
mortals rejoice; for they have received from the dead an exalted woman of virtue, 
who hath been and continueth to be for them a refuge amid sorrows and needs; and 
they rejoice at the most glorious wonder, for dry bones and human flesh shall arise on 
the day of judgment, to receive the glory or condemnation of the Bestower of all 
rewards. Wherefore, let us hasten to join those at His right hand, and let us emulate 
not sacrifice, but mercy, setting the righteous Tabitha as intercessor before the Lord, 
for the salvation of our souls.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Lady and Mother of the Redeemer of the human race: we fall down before thee, 
and unto thee do we pray: Intercede, O most pure one, before thy Son, the God of 
all, that He raise up His people, who have been slain by sins, unto life and spiritual 
fruitfulness, as of old, He raised up Tabitha at the command of the apostle, that in 
thanksgiving we may cry unto Him: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
The Son and Word of the beginningless Father, Who appeared on earth to restore 
those who had fallen, setteth forth the way to salvation, saying: “Let him who wisheth 
to be saved be charitable!” And desiring exalted mercy, O Tabitha, thou didst feed the 
hungry with bread, didst assuage the thirst of those in need, didst become the 
consolation of widows and orphans, and wast the refuge of the sick and homeless. 
Wherefore, teach us all to emulate thee, and pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
When our first father thought himself higher than God, death was shown to be the 
wages of sin. But committing thy heart unto the Creator, O Tabitha, thou didst love 
those who were created in the image of the Creator. Wherefore thou didst fulfill the 
commandment of the New Adam Who hath annulled the curse of our first parent, 
and didst receive a taste of death; yet thou didst arise from the dead through the 
power of the Immortal One, that the glory of God might be made manifest unto the 
faithful, and that all people might see that even in this life the Lord crowneth the 
righteous and glorifieth those who please Him.  
Verse: The Lord brought me up out of the pit of misery, * and from the mire 
of clay.  
The joy of the widows turned into lamentation at the time of thy repose, O 
Tabitha, for no one who came to thee departed empty away, but in the name of the 
Lord thou didst satisfy every human need, didst dry the tears of the sorrowful with 
thy heartfelt discourse, didst add thereto the work of thine own hands, and thereby, 
as with wings, didst soar aloft to the throne of the Lord of the hosts on high. Him do 
thou entreat, that we be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
“Even though ye see Tabitha in the grave, do ye not lament, neither weep ye,” the 
son of Jonah said with boldness; “In sending us forth to proclaim His glad tidings, 
our divine Teacher gave us authority over all flesh: to heal the sick and infirm, to 
drive out demons and cleanse lepers, and also to resurrect the dead, that the 
confession of Him Who rose from the dead might be confirmed. For with God all 
things are possible for the faithful. Wherefore, seeing your faith, I cry aloud, 
exclaiming: Tabitha, arise from the dead!”  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
O new wonder greater than all the wonders of old! * For who hath ever known a 
mother to give birth without having known a man, * and to bear on her arm Him 
Who sustaineth all creation? * Yet it was the will of God to be born. * O most pure 
one, who carried Him as an infant in Thine embrace * and before Whom thou hast a 
mother’s boldness: * cease not to pray on behalf of those who honor thee, ** that He 
have compassion and save our souls. 
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV:  
Today the Faith of Christ is confirmed by Peter, * and the faithful who behold the 
great wonder which hath been wrought in Joppa * join chorus in gladness and glorify 
with psalms the Son of God, the Bestower of life. * The preeminent apostle speaketh, 
and she who had died riseth from the grave. * Her doth He Who hath cast down 
death give to Christ, * that the people may adorn themselves in emulation of her 
virtues. * Wherefore come, ye Christians, let us bear our supplications to the saint: * 
O blessed and loving Tabitha, bear thou our sighs unto the most holy Trinity, * and 
pray thou with boldness, that we may be children of the pre-eternal Light, * and may 
be deemed worthy of the mercy of God, and abide in divine love; ** and that peace 
may reign throughout all the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV:  
Today the Faith of Christ is confirmed by Peter, * and the faithful who behold the 
great wonder which hath been wrought in Joppa * join chorus in gladness and glorify 
with psalms the Son of God, the Bestower of life. * The preeminent apostle speaketh, 
and she who had died riseth from the grave. * Her doth He Who hath cast down 
death give to Christ, * that the people may adorn themselves in emulation of her 
virtues. * Wherefore come, ye Christians, let us bear our supplications to the saint: * 
O blessed and loving Tabitha, bear thou our sighs unto the most holy Trinity, * and 
pray thou with boldness, that we may be children of the pre-eternal Light, * and may 
be deemed worthy of the mercy of God, and abide in divine love; ** and that peace 
may reign throughout all the world. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, these Sessional Hymns, in Tone III: 
One of the Trinity, He Who became incarnate for our sake, at the word of His 
first-enthroned apostle raiseth up from the grave her who died in the flesh, that His 
confession might reign in the hearts of men through the triumph of virtue. And 
falling down before Him, we cry aloud: Save us, O Almighty, through the intercession 
of Tabitha!  
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
In the name of the Savior the preeminent apostle raised up Tabitha, who lay in the 
grave; for he is truly a righteous and pious man, and, instructed by him, we cry aloud: 
Wondrous is God in His saints!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
O unwedded Virgin who supra-naturally gave birth to the Word of God by Whom 
all life and the universe are established! O our joy and hope, accept thou the entreaties 
of the blessed Tabitha, and thereby cause us to be saved who cry unto thee: Rejoice, 
O Bride unwedded!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, these Sessional Hymns, in Tone VII: 
The human race rejoiceth today, and the whole world danceth for joy; for there is 
no more fear of corruption among mortals. The risen Christ bestoweth life and 
raiseth up Tabitha from the grave; and, beholding this great wonder, we cry aloud: 
Raise us up also, O Lover of mankind, and grant unto us Thy glory! (Twice)  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VII: 
Rejoice, O tabernacle of God! Rejoice, O holy of holies, wherein the Effulgence of 
the glory of the Father, Who of His own will assumed the guise of a servant, doth 
rest, as upon the cherubim! Rejoice, thou who hast given birth unto Him Who giveth 
life unto all, and Who hath now by His own power, at the word of His disciple, raised 
up Tabitha from the grave.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We bless thee, O holy and righteous Tabitha, 
and we honor thy holy memory, for thou dost entreat Christ our God on our 
behalf.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
Even though, having ascended to heaven, the Destroyer of death and Hades 
reigneth at the right hand of the Father, yet doth He abide inseparably within His 
Church, as the apostle promised; and He hath now raised up Tabitha from the dead, 
in full health, at the word of His disciple, teaching the virtues to those who believe on 
Him. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VII:  
O Lord, we are Thy people and the sheep of Thy pasture. Like a shepherd return 
us who have strayed, and gather us together who have been scattered by corruption. 
Have mercy upon Thy flock, take pity upon Thy people, through the supplications of 
the Theotokos, O Thou Who alone art sinless.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK, §21 (MK. 5: 24-34)  
At that time, many people followed Jesus, and thronged Him. And a certain 
woman, who had an issue of blood twelve years, and had suffered many things of 
many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather 
grew worse, when she had heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched His 
garment. For she said: If I may touch but His clothes, I shall be whole. And 
straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in her body that she 
was healed of that plague. And Jesus, immediately knowing in Himself that virtue had 
gone out of Him, turned Him about in the press, and said: “Who touched My 
clothes?” And His disciples said unto Him: “Thou seest the multitude thronging 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thee, and sayest Thou, Who touched Me?” And He looked round about to see her 
who had done this thing. But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was 
done in her, came and fell down before Him, and told Him all the truth. And He said 
unto her: “Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of 
thy plague.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
When Tabitha reposed, the faithful of Joppa were seized with grief, especially the 
widows, who wept, for one had departed from among mortals, who was full of many 
virtues, a true heir to the promise, who had done great alms-deeds. And when the 
preeminent apostle was found, all the people of the Church said unto him: 
“Transform thou the grief and tears of all into joy, for thou dost preach the glad 
tidings of Him Who hath destroyed death!” And Peter stood in their midst and lifted 
up his voice, and uttered supplication with authority, saying: “Remain thou no longer 
among the dead, O thou who hast fallen asleep!”  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraclisis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and that of the righteous one, with 8 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: 
“We all hymn thy memory and arising, O Tabitha”, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: There is none likened unto Thee, * O exceedingly glorious Lord; * for 
by Thy mighty arm * Thou didst deliver the people * whom Thou hast ac-
quired, O Lover of mankind.  
Today the luminous feast hath arrived, filling the whole world with joy. Tabitha 
returneth to this life from the sleep of death, showing forth the path to salvation.  
Even though, having ascended into heaven, the Destroyer of death and Hades 
reigneth at the right hand of the father, yet doth He also abide inseparably within His 
Church, according to His true promise; and He now raiseth up His disciple, who was 
adorned with the virtues, in full health, from the midst of the dead, at the word of His 
apostle, showing forth to His faithful the path to salvation.  
As a Well-spring of mercy, He Who hath promised to have mercy upon the kind 
hearted raised up from corruption the blessed Tabitha, who loved her neighbor, unto 
the edification of all, showing forth through her life the path to salvation.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned Virgin who hath brought into the world joy, peace and 
salvation, with the merciful Tabitha entreat thy Son, the Almighty that He have mercy 
upon His people; for He is the way to salvation for His faithful.  
ODE III  
Irmos: From on high didst Thou willingly descend to earth, * O Thou Who art 
more exalted than every noetic principality, * and from the uttermost depths of 
Hades * thou didst raise up lowly human nature; * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
The Author of all creation, abasing Himself for our sake, condescended even to 
endure the Cross and burial; yet He arose as God in glory, raising up those in the 
graves. And now He hath also raised up Tabitha from the dead, at the word of the 
preeminent apostle. Wherefore, gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Fulfilling His whole dispensation concerning us, the Master of life and death sent 
forth His apostles, the initiates of the mysteries of heaven, to all the nations, to 
proclaim the salvation of all mortals; and at the utterance of the rock of faith He 
raiseth up Tabitha who had died. Wherefore, gloriously hath He been glorified!  
He Who imparteth life unto all raiseth up from corruption the merciful Tabitha 
who had tasted of death; confirming the faith of His disciples by the miracle of His 
evangelist. Therein hath He gloriously been glorified.  
Theotokion: In thanksgiving let us all gloriously glorify her who is more exalted 
than the heavens and more pure than all creation, who revealed to the world 
Emmanuel Who hath saved us and made us His own, Who hath united us to Himself 
and raised us up from everlasting death.  
Sessional Hymn of the righteous one, in Tone III: 
O wonder transcending nature! O the greatness of God! Through the resurrection 
of the Creator life hath been established and death cast down! And in His apostles He 
worketh all manner of miracles, as we now see in the raising of Tabitha from the dead 
at the word of Peter.  
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III:  
In the fervor of faith I cry out to thee with unworthy lips and a heart defiled, O 
Theotokos: Save me who am drowning in sins! Take pity on one, who is slain by 
despair, that, saved, I may cry out to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin, thou help of Christians!  
ODE IV  
Irmos: This is our God, Who hath become incarnate of the Virgin * and hath 
deified our nature! * Hymning Him, let us cry aloud: * Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
A sign of the universal resurrection on the last day do we now see in Joppa: the 
apostle commandeth, and a dead woman obtaineth life again, edifying all in virtue. 
And falling down before her, we cry aloud: O blessed Tabitha, pray thou that we all 
be saved!  
By the power of the resurrected Savior at the sound of Peter’s voice thou wast 
roused from the sleep of death, that thou mightest again dwell in righteousness 
according to the commandments of the merciful Savior. Him do thou beseech, O 
blessed Tabitha, that we all be saved.  
The mystery of death merely touched thee, O blessed Tabitha, for the Savior, 
through the voice of His disciple, commanded thee to rise from the dead, that all 
mortals might know that the goings out and the comings in of our life are in the right 
hand of God. Him do thou entreat, that we all be saved.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: The Archangel Gabriel made announcement to thee, O Virgin, crying 
out that thy Son had cast down death and arisen as God bestowing deliverance upon 
His people, who fervently cry out to thee: O Lady, our hope, pray thou that we all be 
saved!  
ODE V  
Irmos: Now I shall arise said God prophetically, * now I shall be glorified, now 
I shall be exalted, * elevating fallen human nature, * which I received from the 
Virgin, * to the noetic light of My divinity.  
No one setteth a lighted lamp under a bushel, but rather placeth it upon a lamp-
stand, that it might shed light upon all. Wherefore, at the word of the preeminent 
apostle, the Lord and Lover of mankind raiseth thee up now, O blessed Tabitha, full 
of the oil of mercy and shining with the light of Christ. Entreat thou the Savior, the 
Bestower of life, that He enlighten our souls.  
He Who hath the authority to judge the living and the dead, sendeth His disciples 
to resurrect the dead, unto the confirmation of the glad tidings of the Gospel. 
Wherefore, Tabitha also is roused from the sleep of death, and we fall down before 
her, crying aloud: Entreat Him Who arose for our sake, that He enlighten our souls.  
With fitting hymnody let us all praise her whom the first-enthroned among the 
apostles raised from the grave. O blessed Tabitha, thou chosen vessel of the mercy of 
God, beseech the Kind-hearted One and Lover of mankind, that He illumine our 
souls.  
Theotokion: Thee do we magnify, O Virgin Theotokos! Thou art a noetic lamp 
revealing to the world the unapproachable Light, whereby we all are illumined in the 
font of baptism, even though we have been darkened by transgressions. Beseech Him 
Who received flesh from thee, that He illumine our souls.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 
All creation is now filled with awe and joy, beholding death laid low by the 
resurrection of Tabitha by a man who received the command of the God-man, the 
Destroyer of Hades and death. To Him do we cry aloud: Grant us Thy peace, O 
Almighty One!  
O blessed Tabitha who arose from the dead at the sound of the voice of the 
apostle whom the Lord had sent to perform miracles for the increase of men’s faith: 
cry aloud unto Him before Whom thou standest and upon Whom thou dost gaze 
continually in thy second repose: Grant Thou Thy peace unto Thy people, O 
Almighty One!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
When the voice of the apostle entered thine ear, O blessed one, thou didst arise 
from thy death-bier, and, having lived piously, passed over again to heavenly glory, 
where do thou beseech the Lord of all, O Tabitha, that He grant peace to us all, in 
that He is almighty.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, our joy and refuge of salvation! We are tempest-
tossed by transgressions and the perils of life, and we fall down before thee, offering 
thee contrite hearts, and call upon thee for help: Grant peace to the world through 
thy supplications!  
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
The people of Joppa were filled with awe, * and the angels of God were amazed, * 
when he who healed Eneas called forth from the dead * her who was called Dorcas, * 
who was wholly adorned with loving-kindness, * and for whom the poor widows 
cried aloud. * And now, O blessed Tabitha, hearken to our prayers which are offered 
unto thee, * and beseech the Bestower of all good things * that He grant mercy and 
compassions unto His faithful, * that, blessing thee, we may cry aloud: ** Rejoice, O 
thou who teachest us the virtues!  
Ikos: Thou art the refuge of the orphans and widows, O Tabitha, handmaid of the 
Lord. Thou didst do good to the people, fulfilling the commandments of the Gospel, 
and teaching all to not live for themselves, but to do good unto their neighbors. 
Wherefore, thou hast been shown to be an heir to the kingdom of heaven, and didst 
abide on the earth, possessed of heavenly love. Therein by thy supplications do thou 
cause us to share, who honor thee with faith and cry aloud: Rejoice, O thou who 
teachest us the virtues!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: O beginningless Word, the only-begotten Son, * Who existed in the 
beginning * with the Father and the Spirit: * blessed and supremely exalted art 
Thou, * O God of our fathers! 
The choir of the apostles scattered throughout the world, illumining all the ends of 
the earth with the light of the Gospel. And by raising up Tabitha from the dead Peter 
confirmed the whole world to confess the resurrection of Christ, the Bestower of life, 
Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
The dead shall be resurrected and those in the graves shall arise, the prophet said 
of old, foreseeing in the Spirit the trampling down of hell. And this was revealed also 
by thy falling asleep and arising, O Tabitha. Wherefore, faithfully honoring thy 
memory, we exalt Christ, the Bestower of life, throughout all ages.  
Confessing the Lord Jesus with thy mouth, O blessed Tabitha, thou didst give thy 
heart to Him, and hasten to carry out His commandments, serving the poor with the 

--- PAGE 12 ---
work of thy hands. And by virtue, as with a ladder, thou didst ascend to the mansions 
of heaven. And we, beholding thee shining with the light of the Gospel, hymn and 
supremely exalt Christ, the Bestower of life, throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: When Thomas arrived at thy tomb, O Lady, and beheld only thy 
cincture, he understood that thou hadst arisen from the tomb through the grace and 
power of thy Son. Then the apostles glorified the Lord and thee, our helper. And 
taught by them we also believe that thou art ever inseparably with us. Grant unto us 
sinners, bereft of the oil of mercy, that we may stand with the choirs of the elect 
before the throne of Christ, the Bestower of life, like Tabitha, that we may exalt Him 
supremely throughout all ages.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
Thou hast been shown to be a dwelling-place of the most Holy Spirit, O right 
wondrous one; for thou didst uproot from thy heart all sinful thoughts, acquiring the 
fear of God beyond all things, and erecting within thy soul a temple of piety, divine 
knowledge and love for mankind. And now, rejoicing in the mansions of heaven, pray 
for us who honor thee with faith.  
The spiritual fruit of peace and joy in the Holy Spirit is love, which is the bond of 
perfection, long-suffering, goodness and tender compassion. And possessed of all 
these things, thou didst make within thyself an abode of the grace of God, O right 
laudable Tabitha, and wast a model of virtue, proclaiming the Gospel of the kingdom 
of heaven by the manner of thy life. Wherefore, pray for us who honor thee with 
faith.  
Thou didst show forth a model of consolation and longsuffering, O blessed 
Tabitha, by thy life in the Lord; for thou didst mingle all thy works with the mercy 
which poured forth from thy heart, wherein grace abode. Wherefore, grant us also 
this oil, that our lamps may not be extinguished, for we honor thee with faith.  
Theotokion: The mystery which existed from before all ages was disclosed, O 
Virgin, when, in fulfillment of the counsel of the Pre-eternal One, Gabriel announced 
to thee the birth of Emmanuel, the true God and man, Who hath resurrected and 
deified all with Himself. Him do thou beseech, O our all-blessed helper, that He grant 
eternal joy to those who honor thee with faith.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The ineffable hidden mystery of God hath been revealed in thee, * O 
most pure Virgin; * for in His tender compassion * God become incarnate of 
thee. * Wherefore, we magnify thee as the Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Following the words of the Lord, thou didst love mercy, O blessed Tabitha, and 
offered Him thy heart as a pure sacrifice, which thou didst cleanse with the fire of 
divine love; and gazing upon the people, thou didst perceive in them the image of 
God, and dealt with them as the Savior of the world commanded. Wherefore, grant 
thy love also unto us, and entreat Him Whom thou didst love, that He grant us life 
without end.  
The ends of the earth are gladdened, and Joppa rejoiceth, beholding a most 
glorious miracle now wrought: for a blessed and righteous woman hath arisen from 
the grave, a disciple of Him Who trampled down the power of death and the gates of 
Hades. Him do thou entreat, O Tabitha, on behalf of us all.  
Glorification and hymnody do we offer, O blessed Tabitha, unto the only Well-
spring of immortality, Who at the word of His apostle raised thee from the dead, 
confirming the Faith, and teaching us how to enter into His heavenly mansions by the 
path of mercy which thou didst tread. And filled with joy by this, we offer him 
fervent hymns and prayers: By Thy light illumine us all!  
Theotokion: Those in heaven and those on earth hymn thee with voices of praise, 
O Mother of God, for through thee we have come to know God and have found 
eternal life. For thy divine Son hath broken asunder the bonds of death through His 
own death and resurrection. Wherefore, honoring the raising of Tabitha from the 
sleep of death by the voice of the preeminent apostle, we beseech thee, O Lady: 
Grant peace to the Church and to thy world, O Theotokos; allay the trials of the 
Church, and set us among the choirs of thy chosen ones.  
Exapostilarion of the righteous one: 
The light which hath shone forth from the tomb of the pre-eternal and incarnate 
Word hath illumined the whole world with the effulgence of the resurrection, 
whereby death hath been trampled down. And the apostle, bearing the effulgence of 
this life-bearing light, called forth Tabitha from the dead, in Joppa, confirming the 
confession of Him Who arose, to Whom we cry aloud: Enlighten us by Thy truth!  
Glory ..., another Exapostilarion: 
O thrice-radiant Trinity, with the beams of Thy light illumine us who are darkened 
by transgressions, and raise us up who have been cast down and lie prostrate on the 
ground, that we may not die eternally, but may arise from the corruption of sin, like 
Tabitha from the grave. For even though we all sin, yet we confess without hesitation 
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, in an Orthodox manner.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O most pure and most blessed Virgin, Mother of the Effulgence of the glory of 
the beginningless Father, thou who received the light of the Sun of righteousness: 
Like the all-luminous moon enlighten thy people, that all darkness may be driven 
from their hearts, for they all have thee as their helper, protection and refuge.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the righteous one, in Tone VIII:  
Blessed art thou, O holy Tabitha, who ripened within the vineyard of Christ, which 
is the Church of God. From Jesus most sweet, the Vine of truth, thou didst draw 
forth divine streams of grace, whereby thou didst produce fruit on earth for heaven. 
As grapes of the vine nurture and gladden us, may we emulate thee in good works 
and so be deemed worthy of ineffable good things.  
The Lord once taught that if a grain of wheat, falling to the ground doth not die, it 
remaineth as it is; but if it dieth, it putteth forth fruit in abundance. Thy falling asleep, 
O Tabitha, hath been shown to be fruitful, for thou didst arise from the dead because 
of the tears of widows, not only because of thy virtues, of which the whole Church 
hath now heard; but also because thou hast been shown to be a right proper example 
for the emulation of many.  
O Tabitha, This miracle was wrought for the confirmation of the Faith of Christ, 
which openeth to all the gates of paradise, that those in heaven may be united with 
those on earth. And we, lacking in the virtues, ask thy prayers to the most 
Compassionate One, that He save and have mercy upon our souls, and grant unto the 
world peace and great mercy.  
Today the assemblies of the faithful join choirs, glorifying the magnitude of virtue 
which the Lord revealed in the life of His disciple, who flourished like a palm-tree, 
increasing the talents of the Lord. O Tabitha, ask for the remission of sins of those 
who call thee blessed.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Hearkening to the voice of Christ the Master, Who said: “Be ye perfect, even as 
your heavenly Father is perfect”, thou didst follow His divine words, O Tabitha, 
planting the seeds of everlasting life in thy heart as in fertile soil, and setting forth thy 
fruits before all, who glorify Him Who hath glorified thee, and who learn to live 
according to thine example. Pray thou for all who keep thy memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI. 
The Author of all creation, abasing Himself for our sake, condescended even to 
endure the Cross and burial; yet He arose as God in glory, raising up those in the 
graves. And now He hath also raised up Tabitha from the dead, at the word of the 
preeminent apostle. Wherefore, gloriously hath He been glorified! (Twice) 
Fulfilling His whole dispensation concerning us, the Master of life and death sent 
forth His apostles, the initiates of the mysteries of heaven, to all the nations, to 
proclaim the salvation of all mortals; and at the utterance of the rock of faith He 
raiseth up Tabitha who had died. Wherefore, gloriously hath He been glorified!  
He Who imparteth life unto all raiseth up from corruption the merciful Tabitha 
who had tasted of death; confirming the faith of His disciples by the miracle of His 
evangelist. Therein hath He gloriously been glorified.  
All creation is now filled with awe and joy, beholding death laid low by the 
resurrection of Tabitha by a man who received the command of the God-man, the 
Destroyer of Hades and death. To Him do we cry aloud: Grant us Thy peace, O 
Almighty One!  
O blessed Tabitha who arose from the dead at the sound of the voice of the 
apostle whom the Lord had sent to perform miracles for the increase of men’s faith: 
cry aloud unto Him before Whom thou standest and upon Whom thou dost gaze 
continually in thy second repose: Grant Thou Thy peace unto Thy people, O 
Almighty One!  
When the voice of the apostle entered thine ear, O blessed one, thou didst arise 
from thy death-bier, and, having lived piously, passed over again to heavenly glory, 
where do thou beseech the Lord of all, O Tabitha, that He grant peace to us all, in 
that He is almighty.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, our joy and refuge of salvation! We are tempest-
tossed by transgressions and the perils of life, and we fall down before thee, offering 
thee contrite hearts, and call upon thee for help: Grant peace to the world through 
thy supplications!  
Troparion of the righteous one, in Tone IV:  
Today the Faith of Christ is confirmed by Peter, * and the faithful who behold the 
great wonder which hath been wrought in Joppa * join chorus in gladness and glorify 
with psalms the Son of God, the Bestower of life. * The preeminent apostle speaketh, 
and she who had died riseth from the grave. * Her doth He Who hath cast down 
death give to Christ, * that the people may adorn themselves in emulation of her 
virtues. * Wherefore come, ye Christians, let us bear our supplications to the saint: * 
O blessed and loving Tabitha, bear thou our sighs unto the most holy Trinity, * and 
pray thou with boldness, that we may be children of the pre-eternal Light, * and may 
be deemed worthy of the mercy of God, and abide in divine love; ** and that peace 
may reign throughout all the world.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Kontakion of the righteous one, in Tone IV: 
The people of Joppa were filled with awe, * and the angels of God were amazed, * 
when he who healed Eneas called forth from the dead * her who was called Dorcas, * 
who was wholly adorned with loving-kindness, * and for whom the poor widows 
cried aloud. * And now, O blessed Tabitha, hearken to our prayers which are offered 
unto thee, * and beseech the Bestower of all good things * that He grant mercy and 
compassions unto His faithful, * that, blessing thee, we may cry aloud: ** Rejoice, O 
thou who teachest us the virtues!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
 
READING FROM THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, §23 (ACTS 9: 32-42)  
In those days, Peter passed throughout all quarters, and came down also to the 
saints which dwelt at Lydda. And there he found a certain man named Eneas, who 
had kept his bed eight years, and was sick of the palsy. And Peter said unto him: 
“Eneas, Jesus Christ maketh thee whole: arise, and make thy bed.” And he arose 
immediately. And all that dwelt at Lydda and Sharon saw him, and turned to the 
Lord. Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which by 
interpretation is called Dorcas: this woman was full of good works and alms-deeds 
which she did. And it came to pass in those days, that she was sick, and died: whom 
when they had washed, they laid her in an upper chamber. And forasmuch as Lydda 
was nigh to Joppa, and the disciples had heard that Peter was there, they sent unto 
him two men, desiring him that he would not delay to come to them. Then Peter 
arose and went with them. When he was come, they brought him into the upper 
chamber: and all the widows stood by him weeping, and showing the coats and 
garments which Dorcas made, while she was with them. But Peter put them all forth, 
and kneeled down, and prayed; and turning him to the body said: “Tabitha, arise!” 
And she opened her eyes: and when she saw Peter, she sat up. And he gave her his 
hand, and lifted her up, and when he had called the saints and widows, presented her 
alive. And it was known throughout all Joppa; and many believed in the Lord. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was 
attentive unto me.  
Verse: And He brought me up out of the pit of misery, and from the mire of 
clay.  
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §104 (MT. 25: 1-13)  
The Lord said this parable: “The Kingdom of heaven is like unto ten virgins, who 
took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. And five of them were 
wise, and five were foolish. They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil 
with them: but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. While the 
bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry 
made: “Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him!” Then all those 
virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise: “Give us 
of your oil; for our lamps are gone out.” But the wise answered, saying: “Not so; lest 
there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for 
yourselves.” And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were 
ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward came also 
the other virgins, saying: “Lord, Lord, open to us!” But he answered and said: “Verily 
I say unto you, I know you not.” Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor 
the hour wherein the Son of man cometh.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
