--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 27th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR NESTOR OF THESSALONICA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O wondrous sufferer Nestor, * thou didst array thyself * in all the armor of Christ; 
* and, locked in mortal combat with Lyaeus, * thou didst destroy him, * and with 
invisible arrows * thou didst bring down the invisible Belial and slay him. * 
Wherefore, the Bountiful One hath crowned thee ** with a wreath of victory.  
Strengthened with divine words, * O wise Nestor, * with true courage thou didst 
slay * the proud tormentor of the martyr Demetrius; * and confessing the immortal 
God * Who died and harrowed Hades, * thou didst receive an unjust death, O 
glorious one. * Wherefore, rejoicing, ** thou hast inherited everlasting life.  
Thou wast a godly youth, * shining forth in comeliness of body * and adorned 
with divine grace, O wise one, * and invested with power. * Wherefore, having cast 
down the power of Lyaeus * by the power of the Almighty, * thou didst suffer, 
rejoicing, * and hast been numbered among the choirs of sufferers. ** Rejoicing with 
them, do thou remember us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Troubled and in grief, * we beseech thee, O most pure one, * our intercessor: * 
Permit not thy servants to utterly perish; * but hasten to rescue us * from this present 
wrath and grief, * O divinely joyous, * most holy and pure one. ** For thou art our 
bulwark and unassailable help.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician and healer * of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Nestor O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Octoechos, and this canon of the holy martyr, in Tone IV, 
with 4 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Irmos: The chariots of pharaoh and his power * were cast into the sea by Him 
Who is mighty in battles: * Let us chant a new hymn, * for He hath been 
glorified!  
By thy blood thou wast deemed worthy to sit upon the fiery chariot rejoicing, and 
with joy ascended to the heights of heaven, where Jesus, the ageless Light, doth dwell.  
Having arrayed thyself in the breastplate of faith, O Nestor, and having the Cross 
in thy hands, as it were a spear, thou didst mightily cut down legions of the enemy.  
Strengthened with the fervor of Christ’s love, thou didst stride forth into the midst 
of the arena and set at naught the wiles of Lyaeus, and win the trophy of victory.  
Theotokion: In thy womb didst thou conceive Him Who is co-beginningless with 
the Father, and in a manner transcending nature thou didst give birth to Him in the 
flesh, O thou who knew not a man, remaining truly a pure Virgin. Wherefore, we all 
honor thee.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Having established the thunder * and fashioned the wind: * do Thou 
make me steadfast O Lord, * that I may hymn Thee in truth and do Thy will; * 
for there is none holy like unto Thee, O our God.  
Strengthened with the might of the strength of Him that shattered the gates and 
portals of Hades, with zeal thou didst enter into the arena and mightily shatter the 
wiles of the enemy.  
With thy feet thou didst trample underfoot the ancient author of deception, for as 
a youth thou didst bow thyself to be beheaded by the sword, O Nestor, boast of 
martyrs. Wherefore, we praise thee. 
Setting at naught the pride of the most iniquitous, O martyr, thou didst sacrifice a 
sacrifice unto God, shedding thy sacred blood as an offering. Wherefore, He hath 
rewarded thee with rich gifts.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, Jesus, Whom thou didst bear in thy womb, having 
supra-naturally transformed the ugliness which was incurred through eating by the 
race of Adam, hath granted us our pristine comeliness.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Thou didst not fear the tyranny of the enemy, nor wast thou afraid of the 
wounding of thy body, but didst run fearlessly to the conflict, O wise one, bearing the 
invincible and divine weapon of the Cross. Wherefore, having slain the deceiver 
straightway, thou wast thyself slain, O Nestor, and, standing before Christ, thou hast 
been deemed worthy of life.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
As one who loveth sin, I beseech thee who hast given birth to the sinless God 
Who taketh away the sins of the world: O most pure one, have compassion on my 
greatly sinful soul and cleanse me of my many sins; for thou art the cleansing, 
salvation and aid of the faithful.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord and I am afraid. * Having 
understood Thy works, * I am in awe of Thee O Lord, * for the earth is full of 
Thy praise. 
Shining with the splendid teachings of Demetrius, thou didst put to flight the 
gloom of Hellenic vanity and wast illumined with the light of martyrdom.  
Thou didst trouble the salty sea of unbelief with the sweetness of thy good faith, 
O martyr, and didst drown an army of the impious in the abyss of thy blood.  
Thou wast shown to be a tree raised up towards life, nourishing the fullness of the 
faithful with the bounty of thy struggles, O Nestor of Christ, thou boast of martyrs.  
Theotokion: Be thou unto me the cleansing of sins and do thou extend a helping 
hand unto me who am in distress, O all-holy Lady, sure aid of Christians.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Send down upon us a radiant dawn, * since Thou art good, * and guide 
us in the fear of Thee, * O Master.  
Having watered thy thoughts with words of divine understanding, O glorious 
Nestor, thou didst put forth the ripe ear of martyrdom.  
With the healing of thy words, O Demetrius, martyr for Christ, Nestor put an end 
to the great iniquity of godlessness.  
Locked in combat with a visible foe, thou didst invisibly acquire the help of God, 
O glorious Nestor.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, thou who without seed hast given birth unto our God! 
Rejoice, thou who alone art the most pure Mother of God! Rejoice, thou Bride 
unwedded!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The tempest of evil thoughts, hath overwhelmed me, * dragging me 
down into the abyss of my numberless sins; * but, going before me, O good 
Helmsman, * govern me as Thou didst the Prophet, * and save me.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Having stamped thy heart with a seal, thou didst courageously wound the heart of 
Lyaeus with the spear of thy valor, O passion-bearer. And, rejoicing, thou wast slain 
for Christ, the Life of all.  
Like a bridegroom thou didst depart from the chamber of thy flesh, O wise one; 
and manifestly arrayed in garments woven from thy sacred blood, O martyr, thou hast 
taken thy place before Christ the Master.  
Having set thy feet upon the rock of piety, Christ, the Rock of life, guided thy 
steps to Himself, O Nestor, and put thine enemies to shame.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mary, who hast given birth unto God Who taketh away the 
sin of the world, thou hast broken the chains of my transgression, for on thee have I 
placed my hope of salvation.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest...”: 
Having contested well, * thou hast now inherited immortal glory, * for thou wast 
an excellent warrior of the Master * by the prayers of the martyr Demetrius; ** with 
him, then, cease not to pray for us all, O wise Nestor.  
Ikos: From childhood didst thou tread the path of the Lord, O thrice-blessed one, 
piously desiring His testimonies; and, having zealously taken the Cross upon thy 
shoulders, O divinely wise Nestor, thou didst destroy the wicked deception of the 
madness of idolatry, breaking and destroying the snares and nets of Lyaeus. 
Wherefore, we flee to thy protection with faith, crying aloud: O most noetically rich 
martyr, entreat Christ God on behalf of us all!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst speak with Moses on the mountain * and prefigure the 
Virgin in the bush: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers, Who hast illumined the hearts of 
the faithful with the splendor of the passion-bearer’s struggles.  
Having quenched the flame of impiety with the dew of thy blood, O divine martyr 
Nestor, thou dost chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Offering a living sacrifice as an odor of sweet fragrance to the Lord, O martyr 
Nestor, thou didst cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to be more holy than the cherubim, O all-
holy Lady, who hast given birth unto the Word of God Who doth sanctify us.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The earth and all that is therein, * the seas and all wellsprings, * the 
heaven of heavens, light and darkness, * frost and heat, ye sons of men, and ye 
priests, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
The earth received thy precious blood which was shed for Christ; the heavens re-
ceived thy soul which was adorned like a bride; and the choirs of martyrs and the 
souls of all the righteous greeted thee with joy, O martyr.  
Oh, thy God-loving soul which considered a temporal death to be but naught and 
chose to live in the Lord! Oh, thy divine manliness which was much stronger than the 
cowardice of the foe! For thou hast denounced those who do not confess Christ!  
Having fought the good fight, thou didst truly finish thy course, O wise martyr, 
and kept the faith. And now a crown of righteousness doth lie before thee, which 
Christ shall bestow upon thee throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: I fear not the pursuit of the enemy, for I have thy help; I fear not evil 
men, but flee to thee, O Birthgiver of God. For in thee do I boast, and in thee do I 
cross the wall of sin, saved by thy prayers.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: For the Mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His 
name; * and His mercy is upon them that fear Him * unto generation and 
generation. 
In a sacred manner thou hast arrayed thyself in purple vesture dyed with thy blood; 
and, grasping the Cross in thy right hand as a scepter, thou dost reign with Christ, O 
blessed Nestor.  
Thou art shown to be a ripe cluster on the noetic Vine; and, squeezed out by the 
winepress of martyrdom, thou hast poured forth the wine of compunction upon us 
who ever praise thee.  
Joining chorus with the angels before the face of Jesus and delighting in His glory, 
O Nestor, do thou ever remember those who faithfully keep thine honored memory.  
Theotokion: Thou wast revealed to be the abode of the Light which hath truly 
driven away the gloom of ancient ignorance, O pure one, ark of holiness and golden 
candlestick, O thou who art more spacious than the heavens.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyr,  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
By the power of the Cross and the prayers of Demetrius, the glorious martyr, thou 
didst cast down the magnitude of the impious Lyaeus and the pride of the enemy, O 
Nestor, having first vanquished the passions; and thou wast shown to be an excellent 
martyr for Christ, O wise sufferer.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Saved by thee, O Theotokos, we hymn thee as an invincible weapon, an 
unassailable rampart, a tower of strength, a haven of salvation, a truly divine 
foundation, and the bridge which leadeth from earth to heaven.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT LITURGY  
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Nestor O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone II: 
Having contested well, * thou hast now inherited immortal glory, * for thou wast 
an excellent warrior of the Master * by the prayers of the martyr Demetrius; ** with 
him, then, cease not to pray for us all, O wise Nestor.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
 
THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE EPHESIANS (6:10-17) 
Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God that ye may be able to withstand in 
the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (21 :12-19) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute 
you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before 

--- PAGE 7 ---
kings and rulers for my name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it 
therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer: for I will give 
you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor 
resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and 
friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of 
all men for my name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your head perish. In your 
patience possess ye your souls.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
 
 
 
