--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 29th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR, ANASTASIA THE ROMAN  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER, ABRAMIUS THE RECLUSE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel: “What shall we call thee ...”: 
O all-praised martyr and spiritual athlete, * having cast down carnal passions by 
abstinence, * thou didst slay the serpent foe by thy contest, * astonishing the angels 
with thy suffering, * and causing all to rejoice in thine ordeal, * O adornment of 
monastics, * vessel of virginity. * Pray that Christ God ** save and enlighten our 
souls!  
What shall we name thee, O glorious one? * Bride of Christ who shone forth in 
the virtues of virginity, * chosen daughter of the heavenly Jerusalem, * dweller and 
converser with angels, * one who delighteth in the noetic bridal chamber, * O much-
suffering Anastasia, * thou adornment of monastics. * Pray that Christ God ** save 
and enlighten our souls!  
Thou didst endure the extraction of thy teeth, * the severing of thy hands, feet and 
breasts, * thy limbs being cut off by iniquitous torturers; * yet thou didst lift up thine 
eyes * to the comeliness of thy Bridegroom, * enduring pain in a manner past nature. 
* O much-suffering Anastasia, * incorrupt Bride of Christ, ** pray that He save and 
enlighten our souls!  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O divinely wise father Abramius, * being like unto Abraham in spirit, * thou didst 
move * from thy father’s land, O blessed one, * rejecting the desires of the flesh; * 
and, joyfully enclosing thy body * in a small hut, * thou didst furnish thy soul with 
wings to fly to the heavens, ** where thou hast manifestly found thy life.  
O venerable father Abramius, * who, in accordance with thy name, didst acquire 
the soul of Abraham, * thou didst endure temptations, * strengthened by divine love; 
* and united to God by love, * thou didst inherit the promised land, * adorned with 
the splendors of the virtues. * Wherefore, rejoicing, ** we celebrate thy memory.  
O venerable father Abramius, * by divine providence didst thou draw forth * the 
woman who was cruelly devoured by the serpent * through deception, * and who was 
dragged down * into the pit of destruction; * and thou didst present her, saved, to 
God. * All marveled at her repentance, ** piously glorifying the supremely good God.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Rejoice, bearer of the divine Light, most bright star, * and tabernacle of sanctity! * 
From thy most pure womb * Light hath shone upon us, * illumining the ends of the 
earth, * and enlightening them with His grace. * Rejoice, O most pure one, origin of 
salvation! * Rejoice, report and saying ** awesome to those who trust in thee!  
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all? * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Anastasia, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Abramius. 
.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, with six Troparia, including the martyria; and two 
canons for the saints, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise thy manly passion, O 
martyr,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
O divinely wise one, grant thou enlightenment to me who honor this thy light-
bearing commemoration, driving darkness from my soul.  
From childhood thou didst offer thyself wholly to thy Creator, and with the fire of 
abstinence thou didst utterly consume the passions of thy body.  
Thou didst ascend the heights of torment, O martyr, without pitying thy flesh, and 
as a virgin wast deemed worthy of the noetic bridal chamber.  
Theotokion: We honor thee, O Maiden, as the ladder reaching to heaven, whereon 
God Who hath made mortals heavenly established Himself.  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor thy most splendid life, 
O blessed one,” the composition of Joseph, in the same tone:  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Resplendent with divine brilliance, O all-blessed Abramius, by thy supplications 
deliver those who celebrate thy light-bearing feast from the gloom of the passions.  
Divine desire set thy soul afire and quenched the burning of the flesh, O blessed 
father, causing thee to live on earth immaterially.  
Having mortified thy members on earth with fasting and all manner of sore 
afflictions, O wise father, thou wast deemed worthy of a better life in the heavens, O 
God-bearing Abramius.  
Theotokion: The Word of God the Father becameth supra-naturally incarnate of 
thy sacred blood, O Virgin Mary. Him do thou entreat, that He mortify the 
movements of my flesh.  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Thou didst stand before the tribunal of the tyrant, preaching Christ, the Word of 
God, the Maker and Master of all, O glorious one.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
When thou wast given over to be a spectacle, O glorious one, the beauty of thy 
heart revealed thee to those who looked on as most comely.  
Christ gaveth thee inexhaustible riches of healing, O maiden, for thou didst 
willingly love His poverty.  
Theotokion: With the fire of thy prayers consume thou the tinder of my sins, O 
Mother of the Light, bringing to me the divine dew of remission.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Desiring the End of all desire in every way, O God-bearer, thou wast beyond the 
world and the flesh. Wherefore, thou hast received transcendent glory and everlasting 
delight, O father.  
A living temple of the all-accomplishing Spirit wast thou revealed to be, O father, 
having shut thy body up in a hut, O venerable one. Wherefore, thou wast resplendent 
with rays of the virtues, being deified in a sacred manner, O blessed Abramius.  
By the husbandry of hardship thou didst harvest the ripe grain of the virtues an 
hundredfold, wherewith those who celebrate thine honored repose with reverence are 
fed.  
Theotokion: In thee, O all-holy one, the Cause of all made His abode as He so 
desired in the great abundance of His tender compassion; and He hath sanctified 
human nature which in the beginning fell headlong through transgression.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Cleansed by the waters of virginity, O venerable Anastasia, * and crowned with the 
blood of martyrdom, * thou dost grant healing of infirmities * and salvation unto 
those in need * who have recourse to thee with their whole heart; * for Christ 
granteth might to thee, ** pouring forth ever-flowing grace.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone VIII,  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
With the dew of abstinence thou didst quench the flame of the passions in thy 
youth, and with the fire of thy blood thou didst reduce all deception to ashes, 
bringing thy precious virginity and valiant suffering to the Word, thy Bridegroom, as a 
dowry. Wherefore He lead thee, into the bridal chamber of glory as one who wast 
splendidly courageous and trampled the serpent underfoot, O much-suffering 
Anastasia. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor 
thy holy memory with love.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Emulating Abraham of old, O father Abramius, thou didst depart from thy 
kinsmen in the flesh, submitting to the calling of our God. Wherefore, having fasted, 
thou didst show thy soul to be more brilliant than the rays of the sun, O divinely wise 
and all-blessed one.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Do thou guide to the path of repentance, * us who have ever wandered away into 
the trackless wastes of evil * and have angered the supremely good Lord, * O blessed 
Mary who knewest not wedlock, ** thou refuge of despairing men and dwelling-place 
of God.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
The most iniquitous ones condemned thee, who from thy youth didst bear the 
most easy yoke of Christ, O martyr, to bear also a yoke of Iron.  
With drops of thy blood thou didst quench the embers of polytheism; and with the 
rays of thy miracles thou didst utterly consume the tinder of the passions.  
The most wicked one, having stripped thy body naked, could not strip thee of 
grace; and he became the cause of thy receiving a most wonderfully woven seamless 
garment from on high.  
Theotokion: Even after giving birth thou didst remain a pure virgin, as thou wast 
before birthgiving; for thou didst bear a young babe Who is known to exist from 
before the ages.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Having washed away defilement of soul with the streams of thy tears, thou didst 
become a divine and honorable habitation of the Spirit, O all-blessed father.  
Thou didst keep to all-night vigil, unceasing prayer, avoidance of any passionate 
attachment, love unfeigned and perfect faith.  
As a most true favorite of God, O venerable Abramius, thou didst receive the 
grace to heal sufferings and to drive out unclean spirits.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: O Theotokos, Mother and ever-Virgin, by thy supplications deliver 
me who am held fast by despondency and am now drowning in sin.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Thou wast revealed to be unconsumed by the material fire, O martyr Anastasia, for 
the fire of the heart of divine love bedewed thee.  
Adorned by blows to thy face, O martyr, thou didst repel the vile ignorance of the 
enemy.  
Stretched out on the tree, O divinely wise Anastasia, thou didst emulate the divine 
suffering of thy Bridegroom with love.  
Theotokion: We hymn thee, O all-hymned Lady Theotokos, for thou hast given 
birth in the flesh unto the all-hymned God, O most pure one.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Like a fruitful branch thou didst put forth the grapes of the divine virtues, O 
father Abramius, pouring forth the wine of compunction, dispelling the drunkenness 
of the passions from the souls of men, and making glad the hearts of the faithful.  
Divers temptations did the most wicked serpent raise against thee, O God-bearing 
father, but thou didst slay him with the sword of the Cross; and by righteous 
judgment thou didst receive from God a crown of victory, O divinely wise Abramius.  
Having become through faith a house of the sanctity of the divine Spirit, O father, 
thou didst erect a sacred house; and having with thine instructions converted the 
unhallowed council of unholy falsehood, thou didst consecrate them all to God.  
Theotokion: Enlightened by the divine Spirit, O most pure one, with sacred voices 
the hallowed prophets proclaimed thee beforehand to be the Virgin maiden from 
whom God the Word became incarnate in His infinite tender compassion, in a 
manner beyond cause and understanding.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
Thy body, wracked with wounds, revealed the rightness of thy conscience to 
Christ our God, O spiritual athlete.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thou wast suspended aloft, O right laudable martyr, enduring wounds and 
preserving thy nobility of thy soul unharmed.  
Thou didst endure the removal of teeth, hands and feet, O much-suffering martyr, 
lifting thine eyes unto Christ thy Bridegroom.  
Theotokion: Having given birth unto God Who is the Lover of mankind, O right 
loving Sovereign Lady, entreat Him, that we be delivered from the fire of Gehenna.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Those who were in the darkness of deception, found thee to be a beacon guiding 
them straight to the paths of life, O God-bearing Abramius, putting away the 
darkness of ignorance, and were then revealed to be luminous by the divine Faith.  
Having vigilantly entreated God, thou didst send the enlightenment of salvation 
upon those who were held fast in the night of the madness of idolatry, O divinely 
wise Abramius; and through grace showed them all forth as children of the light and 
the day.  
Having peacefully come to the end of thy life amid a life of threefold tumult, O 
all-blessed Abramius, with godly hope thou didst pass on and attain unto the calm 
haven of the heavenly kingdom and divine splendor.  
Theotokion: Through thy mediation, O Mother of God, raise me up who am 
heavy with the slumber of despondency, and grant that I sleep not the sleep of death, 
O Virgin, for I hold thee to be the intercessor and guide of my life.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone III 
 Spec. Mel: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
On earth thou wast revealed to be an angel in the flesh, * and through fasting thou 
didst become like a planted tree, * thriving on the waters of abstinence, * and washing 
defilement away with the torrents of thy tears. ** Wherefore, thou hast been revealed 
as a divine dwelling of the Spirit, O Abramius.  
Ikos: Having spurned corruptible things, thou didst receive incorruptible beauty; 
disdaining the pleasures of the flesh, thou didst come to love purity from thy 
childhood, O wise one. Wherefore, fleeing a worldly bridal-chamber, and rejecting a 
noble spouse and thy parents, thou didst manifestly desire the one, loving God, truly 
loving Him with all thy soul and heart, O father; for which cause thou hast been 
revealed as a divine dwelling place of virginity and of purity of spirit, O Abramius.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
With the virgins thou dost rejoice where the sounds of the voices of those who 
keep festival are, O spiritual athlete, chanting to God the Creator: Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Beholding thy limbs broken and enduring the rending away of thy nails, thou didst 
offer thyself to God as a sacrifice, chanting: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages!  
Thou wast shown to be like a vine, thy hands and feet pruned like branches, O 
divinely wise one, pouring forth for us noetic wine which consoleth our hearts, 
dispelling the drunkenness of the passions.  
Theotokion: The Undefiled One, having clad Himself in all of man save sin, issued 
forth from thy womb as a mortal, O pure one. Him do thou entreat, that He save 
those who honor thee with faith.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * ‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages’.  
That thou mightest receive the kingdom on high and ineffable glory, O wise one, 
as one intelligent and knowledgeable thou didst wisely despise downtrodden and 
corruptible glory.  
When the wicked wolf deceitfully rent thy ewe-lamb apart, O wise one, thou didst 
break his jaws; and as a most exemplary shepherd thou didst bring her to life.  
Obeying the Master’s laws, thou didst seek that which had gone astray, and, having 
found it, like a shepherd thou didst take it upon thy shoulders, and didst lead it into 
the fold of repentance.  
Theotokion: Thou alone, O Virgin, hast given birth to One of the Trinity, Who is 
seen in two natures and one hypostasis. To Him do we chant: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Having prevailed like a youth, O most laudable spiritual athlete, thou didst win a 
victory over deception; for thou didst endure the deprivation of hands and feet and 
the removal of thy breasts and teeth, chanting with joy, O martyr: Ye people 
supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
Resplendent as the sun in the radiance of virginity, with the beauty of torment 
thou didst shine forth and didst illumine the world with the brilliant effulgence of 
thine endurance, O spiritual athlete, crying out: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
By thine entreaties, O bride of God, cleanse thou my soul, which hath been defiled 
by the passions and darkened by the assaults of the serpent of evil, and with thy 
radiant overshadowing, O martyr Anastasia, illumine it, that I may cry out: ye priests 
hymn; ye people supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: The virgin Anastasia, desiring thee, the pure and unblemished one, 
kept her body and soul untainted, reducing to ashes the burning of the passions with 
patience; and having endured the temptation of many torments, she now rejoiceth 
with thee in the mansions of heaven, in gladness throughout all ages.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The serpent malefactor cast thy pure dove into the pit of perdition; but thou didst 
all-wisely buy her out, O father, chanting: Bless the Lord, ye works, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout the ages!  
 
As thou didst make thy rounds in this life, O father Abramius, so after thine end 
thou hast been shown by the divine grace of the Spirit to be a physician of the sick, 
chanting: Bless the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Shining forth in guilelessness, righteousness, chastity and faith, O blessed and 
venerable one, thou wast reckoned among the angels, chanting: Bless the Lord, ye 
works, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to be the all-holy dwelling of the Stream of 
life, from whence drinking, we who have been dead inherit life, crying out: Bless the 
Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Thou wast hung upon a tree, bringing to mind the blessed suffering of the Word 
of God, and endured the cutting off of thy hands and feet, the uprooting of thy teeth, 
and the severing of thy tongue and breasts, O pure Anastasia, glory of monastics and 
adornment of martyrs.  
Like a bride wast thou adorned with comeliness, having betrothed thyself to the 
Bridegroom by well accomplished sufferings, and as one chosen thou dost rejoice 
within His splendid chambers, bearing the lamp of virginity. And now thou reignest 
throughout the ages in splendor with Him Who liveth, O Anastasia.  
Thy pangs let fall a sweetness which taketh away the bitterness of sin, and thy 
shrine poureth forth rivers of healings drowning all sufferings and cruel afflictions, 
unto the glory of the Savior Who glorifieth thee as is meet, O honored Anastasia.  
Strengthened by Thy Cross, O almighty Christ, women have become brave and 
have manfully crushed the head of the exceedingly crafty foe, O Word of God. And 
having received a dwelling place of joy in paradise, they have attained wondrous 
deification, hymning Thee.  
Theotokion: Thy martyr, O Lord, adorned with rays of virginity and wearing the 
purple vesture of the blood of her torment, in that she knew Thee to have taken flesh 
from a woman, hath been gloriously brought before Thee, our God Who reignest 
over creation, in the entourage of Thy mother.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
O God-bearing father, because of thy hope thou wast deemed worthy to behold 
things which have been longed for from of old, which eye hath not seen, nor ear 
heard.  
Thou hast appeared shining and comely with the divine rays of the virtues, O 
Abramius, and, rejoicing, thou standest before the comely Master.  
Thou hast joined thyself to the choirs of the venerable; and having received 
deification with them, O venerable one, pray thou that we all be saved.  
Honoring thy life and thy sacred repose, O Abramius, the Church joyously 
introduceth a day of gladness.  
Theotokion: O right loving Virgin, bless thou my soul which hath been afflicted by 
sin, and make me a partaker of the good things of heaven.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
AT THE LITURGY  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Anastasia, O Jesus crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Abramius. 
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
Cleansed by the waters of virginity, O venerable Anastasia, * and crowned with the 
blood of martyrdom, * thou dost grant healing of infirmities * and salvation unto 
those in need * who have recourse to thee with their whole heart; * for Christ 
granteth might to thee, ** pouring forth ever-flowing grace.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone III: 
On earth thou wast revealed to be an angel in the flesh, * and through fasting thou 
didst become like a planted tree, * thriving on the waters of abstinence, * and washing 
defilement away with the torrents of thy tears. ** Wherefore, thou hast been revealed 
as a divine dwelling of the Spirit, O Abramius.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that he hath rendered unto me?  
 
THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE GALATIANS (5:22-6:2)  
Brethren: The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the Spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight. 
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth. 
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (11 :27-30) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: All things are delivered unto me of my Father: 
and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, 
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Come unto me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and 
learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 
For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.  
 
Communion Verse: The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance; he 
will not be afraid of any evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
