--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 24th DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER  
COMMEMORATION OF THE ICON OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS  
“THE JOY OF ALL WHO SORROW”  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy icon, in Tone IV: 
Having acquired Mary the Theotokos as all unassailable rampart, come, ye faithful, 
let us worship and bow down before her, for she hath boldness before Him Who was 
born through her, and she doth pray and save our souls from wrath and death.  
Great is the power of thy wonders, O pure one, for thou dost deliver from 
misfortunes, dost save from death, dost rescue from desperate straits, dost free from 
sorrows, and dost take away the iniquities of all.  
He Who is the God of all, took flesh from thy blood, O most pure one, and hath 
shown thee forth to the faithful as a protection, an intercessor and champion of those 
who are in want and grievous circumstances, and a calm haven amid tempest. 
Wherefore, from all sorrow and anguish save thou those who have recourse to thy 
divine protection.  
Deliver us from our needs, O Mother of Christ God, who didst give birth unto the 
Maker of all, that we all may cry out to thee: Rejoice, thou who alone art the 
intercession for our souls!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Confessing thee, O most pure one, to be the Theotokos, holier than the cherubim 
and more exalted than the seraphim, we sinners have in thee a helper, and in time of 
temptation we find salvation in thee. Wherefore, cease thou never to pray for us, O 
strength and refuge of our souls!  
“O joyous Light ...,” Prokeimenon of the Day  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V: 
O fervent and invincible intercessor, sure and certain hope, shelter and haven for 
those who bring themselves to thee, O pure ever-Virgin: Entreat thy Son and God to 
grant peace, salvation and great mercy to the world.  
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation.  
Show forth thy speedy protection, aid, and mercy upon thy servants, O pure one; 
calm thou the waves of vain thoughts, and raise up my fallen soul, O Theotokos; for I 
know, O Virgin, that whatsoever thou desirest thou canst do. 
 Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
Thee alone, the pure and undefiled Virgin, do we have as an unassailable rampart, 
a haven and mighty protection, and a weapon of salvation. Disdain me not, wretched 
as I am, O hope of the hopeless, support and aid of the sorrowful.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V:  
We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, * and we, the faithful, glorify thee as is meet, * 
thou unassailable city, * impregnable rampart, ** and steadfast intercession and refuge 
of our souls.  
Troparion of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone IV:  
Let us, the sinful and humbled, * now earnestly flee to the Theotokos, * and bow 
down, crying out in repentance * from the depth of our souls: * Help us, O Lady, 
who hast been merciful us. * Hasten thou, for we are perishing * from a multitude of 
transgressions. * Turn not thy servants away, ** for thee do we have as our only 
hope.  
Another Troparion, in the same tone:  
Unworthy though we be, * we cannot cease to proclaim thy might, O Theotokos; * 
for if thou shouldest not intercede in prayer, * who would deliver us from such 
misfortunes? * Who would have kept us free until now? * We shall not forsake thee, 
O Lady, ** for thou dost ever save thy servants from all evil.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
We sing “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy icon: 
In Tone II: O good one, thou dost intercede for all who with faith bring 
themselves to thy mighty protection; for before God we sinners, ever weighed down 
by many sins, have none other deliverance in misfortune and sorrows, O Mother of 
God most high. Wherefore, we bow down before thee; deliver thy servants from 
every evil circumstance.  
Thou art the joy of all who sorrow, and the protector of the oppressed, feeder of 
the hungry, consolation of travelers, haven for the tempest-tossed, visitation of the 
sick, protection and aid of the infirm, staff of old age, O most pure Mother of the 
most high God. Hasten thou, we pray thee, to save thy servants.  
In Tone IV: Rejoice, O most pure Mother of God! Rejoice, thou hope of the 
faithful! Rejoice, cleansing of the world! Rejoice, thou who dost deliver thy servants 
from all sorrows! Rejoice, haven for the tempest-tossed! Rejoice, light of all the world! 
Rejoice, comforter and helper of Christians! Rejoice, refuge and salvation of all who 
bless thee, O Bride of God!  
Rejoice, thou beauty of Jacob which God hath chosen and loved, portal for the 
saved, loosing of the curse, O all-blessed one, the womb which contained God, 
restoration of the fallen, more holy than the cherubim and most exalted of all 
creation, fiery throne of the Word, cloud from whence the Sun hath shone forth, 
granting great mercy to those who are in darkness.  
In Tone VIII: Rejoice, thou joy of the angels! Rejoice, glory of mankind! Rejoice, 
hope and intercession, rampart and aid of the faithful, O most pure Sovereign Lady 
and Mother of God, who without knowing a man hast given birth to God, the Re-
deemer of the world, in the flesh. Disdain not thy servants, but by thine entreaties 
deliver us from the temptations, misfortunes and evil circumstances which surround 
us, O joy of all who sorrow, sole refuge of Christians.  
Rejoice, O all-hymned Theotokos, thou fount gushing forth life for the faithful! 
Rejoice, Sovereign Lady of all creation, thou blessed one! Rejoice, bush unburnt! Re-
joice, holy mount! Rejoice, life-bearing garden! Rejoice, animate paradise! Rejoice, 
Virgin Mother! Rejoice, thou Bride of God!  
Rejoice, O Theotokos, Mother of Christ! Rejoice, our only hope, thou help of 
mankind! Rejoice, most radiant beacon of the Light! Rejoice, lamp of holiness! 
Rejoice, fiery chariot of the Word! Rejoice, divine habitation! Rejoice, thou fountain 
of joy, gushing forth the water of grace upon those who have recourse unto thee!  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Rejoice, boast of all the world! Rejoice, temple of the Lord! Rejoice, mountain 
thickly wooded! Rejoice, refuge of all! Rejoice, golden candlestick! Rejoice, precious 
glory of the Orthodox! Rejoice, Mary, Mother of Christ God! Rejoice, thou paradise! 
Rejoice, divine table! Rejoice, O tabernacle! Rejoice, golden jar! Rejoice, thou hope of 
all!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Come, ye assemblies of those who love the feasts of the Church, let us bless the 
most holy Virgin, the divine Maiden, for she is the mediatress of joy and salvation for 
the world, in that she hath given birth unto Christ God. For the beginningless Father 
claimed for Himself this daughter, who alone was chosen from all generations; and 
the co-beginningless and equally everlasting Word chose her as His Mother; and the 
Holy Spirit in a godly manner joined her to Himself as a most pure bride. With 
unceasing hymns the hosts of the Most High, having Gabriel as their chief captain, 
magnify her as one chosen of God and blessed among women, crying: Rejoice, for 
the Lord is with thee! And with the prophet David, the patriarchs, prophets and all 
the saints crown her with joyful voices, crying aloud: The queen stood at Thy right 
hand, O Master, in a vesture of gold, wrought about with divine graces. And we, the 
unworthy, hymn her as the mighty helper of our race, saying: Rejoice, wondrous 
adornment of the Church and most marvelous protection of the whole world! 
Rejoice, ally in battle for faithful kings and might of warriors! Rejoice, protection, 
praise and joy of all born of earth! Rejoice, divine consolation of all who sorrow and 
are oppressed! Rejoice, divinely joyous one, the Lord is with thee, granting the world 
great mercy through thee!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the Day. Three Lessons: 
READING FROM THE FIRST BOOK OF MOSES, CALLED GENESIS  
And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran. And he lighted 
upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took 
of the stones of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to 
sleep. And he dreamed, and beheld a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it 
reached to heaven: and he beheld the angels of God ascending and descending on it. 
And, behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy 
father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to 
thy seed; and thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth; and thou shalt be spread 
abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee 
and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed. And, behold, I am with 
thee; and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into 
this land; for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee 
of. And Jacob awakened out of his sleep, and he said, surely the Lord is in this place; 
and I knew it not. And he was afraid, and said, how dreadful is this place! This is 
none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
READING FROM THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL  
Thus saith the Lord, it shall be, that upon the eighth day, and so forward, the 
priests shall make your burnt offerings upon the altar, and your peace offerings: and I 
will accept you, saith the Lord God. Then he brought me back the way of the gate of 
the outward sanctuary which looketh toward the east; and it was shut. Then said the 
Lord unto me; This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter 
in by it; because the Lord the God of Israel hath entered in by it, therefore it shall be 
shut. It is for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread before the Lord; he 
shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate, and shall go out by the way of the 
same. Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house: and I looked, 
and, behold, the glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord: and I fell upon my 
face.  
READING FROM THE PROVERBS  
Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars: she hath 
killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine; she hath also furnished her table. She 
hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth upon the highest places of the city, who so is 
simple, let him turn in hither: as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, 
Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled. Forsake the 
foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding. He that reproveth a scorner 
getteth to himself shame: and he that rebuketh a wicked man getteth himself a blot. 
Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. 
Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a just man, and he will 
increase in learning. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: and the 
knowledge of the Holy is understanding. For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and 
the years of thy life shall be increased.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
O Birthgiver of God, thou intercessor for all, joy of the sorrowful and great 
consolation of the weeping; with the angels, apostles and all the saints, entreat thy 
Son, Christ our God, that He deliver us at the hour of the dread judgment, of 
condemnation, that having acquired salvation through thee, we may always glorify 
thee as most blessed.  
With faith do I flee unto thy protection, O most pure Birthgiver of God: Save me 
from temptations and misfortunes, from the retribution of the passions and the 
malice of the demons, for thou hast an abyss of mercy and art shown to be a 
mediatress of salvation who bore the merciful God, Who alone is most compassion-
ate and full of loving-kindness.  
O all-pure one, the beginningless Word, having found thee alone among women 
from all ages to be the beauteous comeliness of Jacob, and having made His abode 
within thee, for mercy’s sake, hath renewed human nature. Him do thou entreat 
unceasingly, that we who honor thee as the joy and salvation of the world be 
delivered from all misfortune and sorrow.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Let us hymn the portal of heaven, the ark, the all-holy mountain, the luminous 
cloud, the heavenly ladder, the noetic paradise, the deliverance of Eve, the great 
treasure of the whole universe, for in her hath been wrought the salvation of the 
world and the remission of the ancient transgression. Wherefore, we cry aloud unto 
her: Beseech thy Son and God, that He grant forgiveness of sins unto those who bow 
down before thee and with gladness celebrate thine all-honored festival, O blessed 
Mother of God, our glory and joy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V:  
With a trumpet let us sound forth hymns, for the Virgin Mother, the Queen of all, 
bending down from on high, doth crown with blessings those who raise hymns unto 
her. Let kings and princes come together, and let them clap their hands in praise to 
the queen who gaveth birth unto the King Who, in His love for mankind, was well 
pleased to loose those who aforetime were held fast by death. O ye pastors and 
teachers, assembling, let us hymn the most pure Mother of the Good Shepherd, she 
who is far more spacious than the heavens, the animate ark of the Lord, the fiery 
throne of the Master, the golden jar which contained the heavenly Manna, the portal 
of the Word which was shut, the refuge of all Christians. All ye people, praising her 
with eloquent hymns, let us thus say: O Mother of God the Word, grant thou the 
kingdom of heaven unto us, the lowly, for naught is impossible for thy mediation.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
To the Christian race hath Christ given thee as one higher than all heaven and 
earth, more glorious than the cherubim and more honorable than all creation, a 
helper and a mighty shelter to save and protect us sinful ones who have recourse unto 
thee. Wherefore, we hymn thee, the refuge of all, O Lady, and we radiantly celebrate 
thine honored and right favorable feast, O joyous joy of all, entreating Christ to grant 
us great mercy through thee.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
In Tone V: With splendor let us chant the hymn of David to the Maiden Bride of 
God, the Mother of Christ, the King of all: Upon Thy right hand stood the Queen, O 
Master, arrayed in a vesture of gold, wrought about with divers colors; for, having 
made her who was chosen among women yet more beautiful than all the world, He 
was well pleased to be born from her, for His mercy’s sake; and He hath given her 
who alone is blessed unto His people as a helper, to watch over and protect His 
servants from all misfortune.  
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance. 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
In Tone VII: O Theotokos, thou art a mountain greater and more glorious than 
mount Zion; for, unable to endure the descent of the glory of God in image and 
shadow, it burned with fire, and lightning and thunder were manifest there; but thou, 
without being consumed, didst bear within thy womb the Word of God, Who is the 
divine fire. Wherefore, O Lady, cease thou never to visit thy servants with thy mercy, 
for from thy Son and God thou hast received the gift to watch over and protect thy 
Christian flock.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV:  
Regard thou the entreaties of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, quelling the evil 
onslaughts that are directed against us, and freeing us from all sorrow, for thee do we 
have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, and thine intercession have we acquired, 
that we who call upon thee be not put to shame. Hasten thou to make supplication 
for those who cry out to thee with faith: Rejoice, O Lady, thou help, joy and 
protection of all, and the salvation of our souls.  
At the blessing of Loaves, Troparion of the Theotokos, in Tone IV: 
To the Theotokos we the sinful and lowly ones, * do now earnestly hasten; * and 
we fall down in repentance, * crying out from the depths of our soul: * O Sovereign 
Lady, have compassionate pity and mercy upon us! * Hasten thou, for we are 
perishing * from the multitude of our transgressions! * Turn not thy servants empty 
away, ** for thee do we have as our only hope! (Twice) 
Another Troparion, in the same tone:  
Unworthy though we be, * we cannot cease to proclaim thy might, O Theotokos; * 
for if thou shouldst not intercede in prayer, * who would deliver us from such 
misfortunes? * Who would have kept us free until now? * We shall not forsake thee, 
O Lady, ** for thou dost ever save thy servants from all evil. (Once) 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the first Troparion of the Theotokos, in Tone IV: 
To the Theotokos we the sinful and lowly ones, * do now earnestly hasten; * and 
we fall down in repentance, * crying out from the depths of our soul: * O Sovereign 
Lady, have compassionate pity and mercy upon us! * Hasten thou, for we are 
perishing * from the multitude of our transgressions! * Turn not thy servants empty 
away, ** for thee do we have as our only hope! (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the second Troparion, in Tone IV:  
Unworthy though we be, * we cannot cease to proclaim thy might, O Theotokos; * 
for if thou shouldst not intercede in prayer, * who would deliver us from such 
misfortunes? * Who would have kept us free until now? * We shall not forsake thee, 
O Lady, ** for thou dost ever save thy servants from all evil.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Assuage thou the pain of my anguished soul, O thou who hast wiped every tear 
from the face of the earth; for thou dost drive pain away from all mankind, putting an 
end to the sorrows of the sinful. Thee have we all acquired as our hope and 
confirmation, O most holy Virgin Mother.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI:  
O good Virgin Theotokos, thou hope of the world, we beseech thine awesome 
intercession alone. Take pity upon helpless people and entreat the merciful God, that 
our souls be delivered from all threats, O thou who alone art blessed.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: It is meet to magnify thee, O Theotokos, 
who art more honorable than the cherubim and more glorious beyond compare 
than the seraphim.  
Or this magnification: We magnify thee, O all-immaculate Mother of Christ our 
God, and we honor thy labors and thy precious omophorion, for the holy 
Andrew beheld thee in the air, entreating Christ for us.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: He that dwelleth in the help of the Most High shall abide in the shelter of 
the God of heaven.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
The comfort of the sorrowing, the renewal of the ailing, art Thou, O all-hymned 
Theotokos, save thy city and thy people, O conciliation of those who do battle, calm 
of the tempest-tossed, O thou who alone art the intercessor for the faithful.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Hymn of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation 
and generation.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear. 
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 4 (LK. 1: 39-49, 56)  
In those days, Mary arose, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of 
Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came to 
pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; 
and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost: and she spake out with a loud voice, 
and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And 
whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo, as 
soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my 
womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of 
those things which were told her from the Lord. And Mary said, My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath re-
garded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all 
generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; 
and holy is His name. And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to 
her own house.  
Psalm 50  
Glory ..., Through the prayers of the Theotokos ..., 
Both now ..., Through the prayers of the Theotokos ...,  
“Have mercy upon me, O God ...,” 
Sticheron of the holy icon, in Tone VI:  
O ye faithful, like the Archangel let us hymn her who is truly the heavenly 
antechamber and the door which is shut, crying aloud: Rejoice, thou for whose sake 
Christ, the Savior of all, our God, the Giver of life sprang forth for us. Cast down 
tyrants, our godless foes, by thy hand, O most pure one, thou hope of Christians.  
Two canons of the most holy Theotokos: the first with 8 Troparia, including its 
Irmos, in Tone IV; the second with 6 Troparia, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I 
Canon I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
What worthy hymn can our infirmity offer unto thee? Only that of joy, which 
Gabriel hath mystically taught us: Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos, Mother unwedded!  
Rejoice, wellspring of grace! Rejoice, ladder and portal of heaven! Rejoice, 
candlestick and golden jar, and mountain-unquarried, who for the world hast given 
birth unto Christ, the Giver of life.  
O intercessor for all my life, deliver me from many misfortunes. O most pure 
Bride of God, rescue me from the torment to come, that I may chant to thee with a 
voice of thanksgiving.  
O good Lady Theotokos, joy of the sorrowful, who dost readily hear all who 
sorrow and dost help those who are grieved: grant thou grace unto those who dare to 
hymn thee.  
O Lady who hast acquired grace of great richness, by thy bold prayer do thou most 
gloriously rescue me from temptation, O joy of those who sorrow.  
O thou who alone dost defend those who fervently flee to thy protection amid 
temptations, O most pure one: As thou art good, accept these supplications which 
proceed from our hearts.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
Overwhelmed by the waves of the sea of life, held fast by evil temptations, I have 
set my course for the calm harbor of thy protection. Wherefore, deliver me from 
evils, O Theotokos.  
O pure one, God, Who was well pleased to take flesh from thee, hath set thee as a 
haven for those who find themselves amid misfortunes. Grant thou thy help unto thy 
servants.  
O thou who alone art blessed and divinely joyous, who hast given birth unto 
ineffable joy for us: Remove thou the grief of my soul, I pray, and gladden thou my 
heart.  
O most pure one, deliver me from demonic deception, from misery, harm and 
temptation, that with faith I may glorify thee who, after God, art my helper and 
protection.  
O thou who art the hope of the hopeless, the restoration of the fallen, the comfort 
of the grieving, who hast given birth unto the divine Light: Illumine my soul, which is 
in darkness.  
Come, ye faithful, to the Virgin, as did Gabriel, and let us cry out reverently: O 
pure one, who hast given birth unto Joy, truly hast thou been adorned! Rejoice, O 
blessed one!  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth ..., 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE III 
Canon I  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
O Virgin Birthgiver of God, be thou the confirmation, refuge and protection of 
those who flee to thee in faith and confess thee to be the Mother of God.  
O all-immaculate one, thou art my strength, joy and gladness, a steadfast rampart 
and an intercessor that deliverest me from temptation and misfortune.  
O Birthgiver of God, gazing with thy merciful and meek eye upon me who am 
surrounded by evil circumstances and sorrow, do thou quickly free me, for thee do I 
summon to mine aid.  
O Virgin, thou dost pour forth streams of healing everywhere, for the Lord of 
mercy, Who was born of thee in a manner surpassing understanding, hath revealed 
thee to be a wellspring of tender compassion, O Lady.  
Thou art a wellspring of mercy granting consolation unto the sorrowful. Where-
fore, O Lady, pour forth a fountain of the waters of thy mercies upon me, and 
quench thou the furnace of my passions.  
Bereft of all help, to thee, O all-immaculate one, my mighty preserver and 
protection, have I recourse. Therefore, refuse me not thy divine protection.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Thou art the hope, help and joy, the protection and refuge of the earth-born, O 
Lady, Mother of Life. Wherefore, we beseech thee: Send down thy help upon all who 
hymn thee, O most pure one.  
Delivered by thee from misfortune and having received joy for thy sake, we all 
glorify thee as a good benefactress and a right laudable helper, O Mother unwedded.  
Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O Virgin Theotokos, thou joy of all, for thou 
hast given birth for the whole world unto the Joy and Gladness which driveth away 
the grief of sin, O Bride of God.  
Thee have I acquired as a preserver amid temptations, thee have I as mine ever-
vigilant intercessor before God. May I find thee to be one that delivereth me from all 
condemnation on the Day of Judgment, O most pure one.  
Magnify the mercy and aid of thy prayers upon me, O most pure one, and deliver 
me from temptations and sorrows, O thou who hast given birth to the Joy of the 
world.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
O thou who didst receive the fullness of joy, accept from us, thy servants, the 
greeting of the Archangel: Rejoice, O thou that hast given birth unto the world’s Joy! 
Rejoice, jar, from whence the heavenly Manna hath been given to all the faithful! 
Rejoice, O blessed one!  
Sessional Hymn of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VII: 
Rejoice, O Sovereign Lady, thou cloud of the ineffable and noetic Sun! Rejoice, 
most radiant lamp! Rejoice, golden candlestick! Through thee, O most holy one, hath 
Eve been delivered from the curse. But, as thou hast boldness before thine easily-
appeased Son and God, fail not to pray for us in thy maternal supplication, O most 
pure one.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE IV 
Canon I  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
O Lady, thou hope of the hopeless, helper of the poor, consolation of the 
weeping, cleansing of the sinful, guide of those astray, healer of the sick and 
restoration of the fallen: Save thou thy servants!  
We are not strangers to thine aid amid sorrows, O Lady. Wherefore, do thou now 
quickly help, stretching forth thy hand unto us who are cruelly tossed about by the 
tempest, O pure one, be thou merciful unto our infirmities, granting swift joy, O 
Mother of God.  
O most pure Birthgiver of God and Lady, thou supremely good and fervent helper 
of the sinful and humble: Save thy servants from misfortune, sorrow and sin.  
O Christ, accept Thou Thy most glorious Mother that prayeth for the world and 
mercifully crieth out to Thee: O my Son, accept mine entreaty and calm Thy wrath 
upon the earth!  
O Virgin, be thou unto me, thy servant, shelter, help and refuge; and deliver me 
from boundless evil, that I may sing to thee, O most pure one: Glory to thine 
ineffable birthgiving!  
O good one, thou art my hope, shield and confirmation, my deliverance from evils, 
the enlightenment of my soul, my praise, rampart and might.  
Canon II  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Thou dost ever save me from great and divers offenses and temptations; 
wherefore, as thou hast given birth unto the Lord, I pray to thee and have recourse to 
thee, the invincible help of the sorrowful: Lead me up from misfortune by thy 
supplications.  
“O my God of tender compassion, God and Lover of mankind, Who dost will 
mercy: Pour forth Thy mercy on me now!” Thus doth Thy Mother, my hope and 
helper, entreat Thee.  
O pure one, stretch forth thy mercy and tender compassion upon thy servants 
who ever beseech thee, saving them from all sorrow and torment by thy 
supplications.  
Rejoice, beautiful palace of the Word, virginal bridal chamber of Christ! Rejoice, 
boast of all the bodiless host! Rejoice, joy, help and hope of mankind!  
Grant me salvation of soul and body, O all-immaculate one, and grant healing unto 
one who is infirm, and deliverance from evil.  
Who can entreat the Judge concerning my wicked deeds and my many 
transgressions, if not thee, O thou who alone art the helper of the sinful?  
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Thou art my strength, thou art my boast, joy and protector, my help and refuge, 
and invincible intercessor, O most holy Virgin Theotokos. Wherefore, save thou thy 
servant.  
Save me from the depths of temptation and sorrow, of grief and the passions of 
my body, O Lady, and preserve thou my soul in divine tranquility.  
O sure intercessor, hope of Christians, divinely joyous one: Accept these entreaties 
from us who invoke and pray to thee.  
Thou art my protection and steadfast praise, O Lady Theotokos, for thou dost in 
no wise disdain those who have recourse unto thee.  
O pure one, the Son of God, Who made His abode within thee, wrought of thee a 
house of glory, a holy mountain of God, a bride and bridal chamber, a temple of 
holiness and a paradise of everlasting sweetness and light for us.  
O pure one, having acquired thy prayer as an unassailable rampart, we cry out to 
thee: O Lady, take pity and dispel our enemies, visible and invisible.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: Disperse, O Word, the darkness from my soul, * O Christ God, the 
Light-Giver, * Having driven out the primordial darkness of the abyss, * grant 
unto me the light of Thy commandments, * that early in the morning I may 
glorify Thee. 
O Virgin Maiden, God hath loved thee, the comeliness of Jacob, adorning thee 
with all that from the beginning had been enshrouded by the gloom of the 
transgression.  
As the apple of thine eye do thou keep my soul under the shelter of thy wings, O 
good and most pure one, and deliver it from the vengeance and torment of evil 
spirits.  
Delivered by thee from the grief of our first mother, O Birthgiver of God, we have 
been filled with consolation, O thou who for all hast given birth unto Gladness and 
universal Joy. Wherefore, O all-hymned one, by thy prayers do thou keep those who 
hymn thee from misfortune.  
Delivered by thee from our many sins, weaknesses, infirmities and cruel afflictions, 
we thank thee, O most pure Lady, for thou art a steadfast hope for thy faithful 
servants.  
Joining with the divine Gabriel, we faithfully cry out to the Theotokos: Rejoice, O 
holy Virgin, full of grace! The Lord is with thee, He Who, having destroyed grief for 
thy sake, hath granted joy to the world.  
Heal thou my pain-wracked soul, O thou who hast given birth unto Him Who 
taketh away afflictions, O most pure Lady!  
ODE VI  
Canon I  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
O Theotokos, I entreat thee, the healer of the sick, the restoration of the fallen, the 
cleansing of the sinful; and with tears I fall down and cry to thee: As thou art mighty, 
do thou thyself save me who am perishing.  
Thou art an impregnable rampart. Thou art a steadfast protection, O good 
Theotokos. Thou art a mighty intercessor for thy servant. Wherefore, I ever call upon 
thee and have recourse unto thy protection.  
With the angel we faithfully cry out to thee, O Virgin: Rejoice, O pure Theotokos, 
who art the joy of the world! Grant us thy joy and cast down our grief.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
O Virgin Mother of the Lord, thou art the delight of the angels, the joy of the 
sorrowful, an intercessor for Christians. Help us, and deliver us from eternal torment.  
On the Day of Judgment, when I shall be loosed from the bonds of the flesh, 
intercede for me, O Birthgiver of God, and rescue me from the grasp of the demons.  
Look down upon me, lowly as I am, O Lady, and save me against all hope, for 
thou art my hope and protection, the life and light of my heart, and my confirmation, 
O Theotokos.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Held fast by a multitude of sins O Lover of mankind, * like the 
Prophet I fall down before Thy tender compassions. * Accept me O 
Lord and save me. 
Night and day, openly and in secret, we who faithfully glorify thee flee to thy 
protection, O most pure Virgin.  
We have thee as a helper amid temptations, a mighty salvation amid sorrows and 
an aid amid misfortunes, O ever-Virgin.  
O Virgin Theotokos, thou art the beauty of the holy and honored angels, the joy of 
men. Guide me to life.  
Thou wast the palace and fiery throne of the King of glory, O Virgin, who art 
more exalted than the cherubim and seraphim. Wherefore, every creature that hath 
breath doth glorify thee as the Mother of the Creator.  
Rejoice, thou tongs which held the divine Ember! Rejoice, seal of the prophets and 
boast of the apostles, O most pure Theotokos, for whose sake we have been freed 
from corruption!  
O Virgin Theotokos, who hast given birth unto the Abyss of compassion, save 
thou my soul from the sorrows of life, and open unto me the doors of spiritual life; 
for I have placed mine only hope in thee.  
Kontakion of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VI:  
We have none other help but thee, * we have none other hope but thee, O Lady. * 
Do thou help us, for in thee have we placed our hope * and in thee do we glory. * Let 
us never be put to shame, ** for we are thy servants.  
Ikos: Stretch forth thy hands, wherewith thou didst receive the Master of all as a 
Babe, that we may receive therefrom an abundance of goodness. In thy mighty prayer 
forsake us not who trust in thee, and take pity on us in thine infinite humbleness, and 
grant our souls thy tender compassion, pouring it forth everlastingly; for thee do we 
sinners have as a protectress against the evils and misfortunes that beset us. And as 
thou hast the compassion of loving-kindness, do thou make haste to help us and 
hasten to save us, ever interceding for those who honor thee, O Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Having grown old through the passions, unremitting temptation and sorrow, and 
having reached the sunset of my life bereft of virtue, overcome by sloth, I cry aloud 
to thee, O Lady: Have mercy on me, thou consolation of mortals!  
Rejoice, thou wellspring of the water of immortality, paradise of delight! Rejoice, 
rampart of the faithful! Rejoice, thou who hast not known wedlock! Rejoice, universal 
joy, through whom the praised and supremely glorious God of our fathers hath shone 
forth upon us!  
Thou art a helper for all in the world, a rampart for Christians and a sure refuge, O 
pure Mary. Wherefore, honoring thee with faith, we cry out to Christ: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Oh, the depth of thy tender compassion, O Virgin! For thou dost loose the bonds 
of boundless grief and temptation of those who cry out to thee in need and every evil 
circumstance, wherefore, help thou now those who praise thee, O blessed one.  
As thou art the sole hope and help of the faithful, O Birthgiver of God, hasten 
thou to help thy servants who are overwhelmed by sorrows and in pain, and have 
recourse to thee with heartfelt love.  
O Mother of God, we offer thee joyous thanksgiving, for truly, through thee we 
have been delivered from every evil circumstance, and, as thou hast said, we cry out 
to thee: Blessed art thou!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
We have spent the evening in the lamentation of grief and the expectation of evil; 
yet, deified by thy godly protection, O Virgin, we have found joy in the morning, for 
thou hast saved us.  
Having acquired thy protection before God as a divine refuge, O Lady, we all have 
recourse to thee amid our temptations, persecutions and sins, and through thee are 
we transformed, O most pure one.  
O Lady, thou art the refuge of sinners, the restoration of those who have been cast 
down; wherefore, I flee to thy protection. Save me, O Bride of God!  
In perplexity and grief, and amid misfortunes, I fervently call upon thee from the 
depths of my heart, O most pure one: Haste thou to deliver me, and grant me 
consolation, O pure one.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
O blessed Virgin, joy of all the faithful who sorrow, rescue me from all temptation 
and grief, from the malice of those who hate me; and from sins and divers infirmities 
deliver me.  
O pure Virgin, thou art resplendent with light, having received within thyself the 
unwaning Light, enlightening those who cry out to thee with faith: Blessed is the Fruit 
of thy womb, O most pure one!  
ODE VIII 
Canon I  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Rejoice, glorious throne of God! Rejoice, rampart of the faithful, through whom 
Christ the Light hath shone forth upon those who are in darkness, yet bless thee and 
cry aloud: O all ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
We hymn thee, O most pure Mother of God, and who doth not glorify thee who 
art truly good and the hope of our souls? Wherefore, O most pure one, accept thou 
my supplication.  
Thou art the salvation of all mankind, for thou hast ineffably given birth unto 
God, O Theotokos, saving the faithful and guiding the blind, and restoring the fallen. 
Wherefore, praising thee, we cry out to Christ: O all ye works of the Lord, praise ye 
the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
O pure one, thou dost ever pour forth streams of healing upon the faithful; where-
fore, availing ourselves of their abundant grace, we praise thine Offspring, O pure 
one, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
To thee have I entrusted my heart, soul and body, O Lady; for I have none other 
hope, save thee, through whom I receive mercy. Wherefore, grant me thy rich grace.  
Look down mercifully now upon my prayer, and grant me joy instead of grief, that 
I may praise thee, O Lady, and cry out to thy Son: Bless ye the Lord, O all ye works 
of the Lord!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the mystery of the 
Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning bush: * praise ye and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Foretelling thee, O most pure one, the Spirit of God hath said: Thou art all fair, 
my love; there is no spot in thee.  
O Mother of God, boast of angels and salvation of mankind: Be thou my surety, 
that I may acquire and receive remission of the sins I have committed in the past, 
wittingly or unwittingly.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
We, the faithful, having thee, after God, as our hope of salvation amid 
temptations, cry aloud: O all ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
O all-praised Virgin, accept this hymn from blasphemous lips which cry out: 
Rejoice, thou healing of pain-wracked bodies and salvation of despairing souls!  
Disdain not those who are held fast in pain and temptation, O good one, but, 
hearkening unto this poor supplication, free us from great sorrows, that we may 
hymn thy mercy and aid, O pure one.  
O Virgin, thou art the confirmation of those who stand fast and the restoration of 
the fallen; wherefore, raise me up, who am fallen, that I may glorify thee who art 
blessed and joyous.  
ODE IX 
Canon I  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Rejoice, O Mary, great wonder of all creation! Rejoice, daughter of David and 
Mother of the Lord! Rejoice, hymn of Gabriel! Rejoice, refuge, confirmation and help 
of all sinners on the earth, O most holy one!  
O Master, mercifully accept Thy Mother as an intercessor on our behalf, as Thou 
hast been pleased so to do, that all things may be filled with Thy goodness, and that 
all may magnify Thee as Benefactor.  
O good Virgin! O joy and refuge of all the world! O abode of the faithful and 
deliverance from sorrow! Intercede for me at the hour of my death, and deliver me 
from the demons who seek to devour me!  
Thou art the joy of the angels; thou art the beauty of the righteous; thou art the 
hope of the faithful; thou art our preservation; thou art the bridge which leadeth 
those who magnify thee with faith and love unto the life which ageth not.  
O Mother of the Maker of all, most splendid consolation of the grieving, 
intercessor for the afflicted and protector of the weak: Preserve me, O good one, 
from misfortune and the assaults of the enemy.  
O Lady, who alone art the visitation of the sick, who alone art the restoration of 
the fallen, who alone art a guide and access to God, who alone art the mediatress of 
eternal blessings: Have mercy on me who alone have sinned more than all others!  
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, * Who hath exalted the horn of 
salvation on our behalf * in the house of His child David, * wherein the 
Dayspring from on high hath visited us, * and guided us on the path of peace.  
O pure Birthgiver of God, in a manner transcending nature hast thou revealed to 
us the joy of eternal life, O Mediatress who hast given birth unto the Savior of all, 
Who hath manifestly wiped every tear from the face of the earth, granting joy unto 
all.  
O Virgin who hast not known a man, thou hast increased for us the joy, gladness 
and divine bliss of God; for, lo, weeping grievously, we are gladdened by thy prayers.  
Those who have recourse to thy tender compassion with faith are delivered from 
the sorrowful misfortunes of life; wherefore, even I have fled to thy protection, O 
Theotokos.  
We chant psalms unto thee, O gracious one, and unceasingly offer thee the hymn, 
Rejoice; for thou hast poured forth joy upon all.  
Dropping down divine sweetness like the dew, O thou who hast given birth unto 
the Sweetness of all, do thou sweeten my soul which hath been embittered by the 
venom of the serpent, and by thy mediation remove from me bitter harm, O 
Sovereign Lady, thou intercessor and joy of the faithful.  
Blessing, I bless thee; and glorying, I glorify thee fervently, O most pure one. 
Therefore, bless me who bless thee; deliver me from all want and grief, and with thy 
hand sustain me undefeated.  
Exapostilarion of the most holy Theotokos,  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy chamber ...”:  
Under thy shelter do all the generations of mankind flee, O Virgin Sovereign Lady; 
illumine with the light of thy birth giving us, thy sinful servants, who earnestly pray 
and bow down before thee, and beg peace for the world and great mercy for our 
souls. (Thrice)  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone II:  
Come, let us rejoice in the Theotokos and Queen, the mighty helper of our race; 
come ye in gladness to her calm and wondrous protection; for to the faithful the 
Theotokos doth grant abundant gifts of healing from the inexhaustible wellspring of 
her mercy; from myriads of temptations, misfortunes and evil circumstances she doth 
deliver us who piously glorify and honor her in a God-pleasing manner. Wherefore, 
joyously we cry out to her: Rejoice, thou palace of the Word! Rejoice, Bride 
unwedded! Rejoice, O our joy! Rejoice, Mother of Life! Blessed is the Fruit of thy 
womb!  
Rejoice, all-blessed Mary, Mother of Christ! Rejoice, thou who art the joy of all the 
world! Rejoice, supremely good helper of Christians! Rejoice, protector of the 

--- PAGE 20 ---
oppressed! Rejoice, ready and certain refuge for the afflicted! Rejoice, divine 
consolation of orphans and widows! Rejoice, protection and nourisher of all the poor! 
Rejoice, quick deliverance for all amid misfortune! Rejoice, Lady, Bride of God, the 
hope of all Christians!  
Rejoice, hope and protection of all Christians, all-immaculate Mother of God, who 
art more honorable than all creation, and more glorious than all in heaven and on 
earth; for thou didst give birth unto the Creator and God of all. Yet, O Lady, 
mercifully accept our supplications, and ever save us, in that thou art good and 
merciful, that with gladness we may venerate thy most holy icon, and, ever rejoicing, 
praise and magnify thee, O gladdening joy of thy faithful servants. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI 
Gathering together, O ye assemblies of the faithful, let us spiritually keep festival 
today, and with hymns of praise let us bless the divine Maiden, the Virgin Theotokos, 
saying: Rejoice, thou who alone wast chosen from among all generations to be the 
Mother of the pre-eternal Word! Rejoice, thou abode of Him Whom naught can 
contain! Rejoice, joy of the angels and seraphim! Rejoice, proclamation and boast of 
the prophets! Rejoice, adornment of the apostles and holy hierarchs! Rejoice, strength 
of the martyrs and glory of all the righteous! Rejoice, divine consolation of the 
sorrowful! Rejoice, quick deliverance for them amid misfortunes and temptations! 
Rejoice, refuge and good protector of all sinners! Rejoice, O thou who art full of 
grace and joy, the Lord is with thee, Who doth grant the world great mercy through 
thee.  
Great Doxology and the Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
AT THE LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I, and 4 from ODE 
VI of Canon II, of the most holy Theotokos.  
O Virgin Birthgiver of God, be thou the confirmation, refuge and protection of 
those who flee to thee in faith and confess thee to be the Mother of God.  
O all-immaculate one, thou art my strength, joy and gladness, a steadfast rampart 
and an intercessor that deliverest me from temptation and misfortune.  
O Birthgiver of God, gazing with thy merciful and meek eye upon me who am 
surrounded by evil circumstances and sorrow, do thou quickly free me, for thee do I 
summon to mine aid.  
O Virgin, thou dost pour forth streams of healing everywhere, for the Lord of 
mercy, Who was born of thee in a manner surpassing understanding, hath revealed 
thee to be a wellspring of tender compassion, O Lady.  
Night and day, openly and in secret, we who faithfully glorify thee flee to thy 
protection, O most pure Virgin.  
We have thee as a helper amid temptations, a mighty salvation amid sorrows and 
an aid amid misfortunes, O ever-Virgin.  
O Virgin Theotokos, thou art the beauty of the holy and honored angels, the joy of 
men. Guide me to life.  
Thou wast the palace and fiery throne of the King of glory, O Virgin, who art 
more exalted than the cherubim and seraphim. Wherefore, every creature that hath 
breath doth glorify thee as the Mother of the Creator.  
After the Entrance, the Troparion of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone IV: 
To the Theotokos we the sinful and lowly ones, * do now earnestly hasten; * and 
we fall down in repentance, * crying out from the depths of our soul: * O Sovereign 
Lady, have compassionate pity and mercy upon us! * Hasten thou, for we are 
perishing * from the multitude of our transgressions! * Turn not thy servants empty 
away, ** for thee do we have as our only hope! 
Glory ..., another Troparion, in the same tone:  
Unworthy though we be, * we cannot cease to proclaim thy might, O Theotokos; * 
for if thou shouldst not intercede in prayer, * who would deliver us from such 
misfortunes? * Who would have kept us free until now? * We shall not forsake thee, 
O Lady, ** for thou dost ever save thy servants from all evil.  
Both now ..., the Kontakion of the most holy Theotokos in Tone VI: 
We have none other help but thee, * we have none other hope but thee, O Lady. * 
Do thou help us, for in thee have we placed our hope * and in thee do we glory. * Let 
us never be put to shame, ** for we are thy servants.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone III, the Hymn of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my Spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 320 (HEB. 9: 1-7)  
Brethren: The first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly 
sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and 
the table, and the showbread; which is called the sanctuary. And after the second veil, 
the tabernacle which is called the holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the 
ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that 
had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it 
the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy seat; of which we cannot now speak 
particularly. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into 
the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the 
high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, 
and for the errors of the people.  
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 54 (LK. 10: 38-42,11: 27-28)  
At that time, Jesus entered into a certain village; and a certain woman named 
Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat 
at Jesus’ feet, and heard His word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, 
and came to Him, and said, Lord, dost Thou not care that my sister hath left me to 
serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me. And Jesus answered and said unto 
her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing 
is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from 
her. And it came to pass, as He spoke these things, a certain woman of the company 
lifted up her voice, and said unto Him, Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the 
paps which Thou hast sucked. But He said, Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the 
word of God, and keep it.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
