--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 31st DAY OF THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLES STACHYS, AMPLIUS & THOSE WITH 
THEM COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR EPIMACHUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy apostles, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Throughout all the earth * your proclamation of salvation hath gone forth, * O ye 
glorious apostles of the Lord, * illumining the ends of all the earth * with the radiance 
of grace, and dispelling the gloom of deception. * Wherefore, make supplication, * 
that He grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
The most godly Stachys, * the preacher and apostle of Christ, * and the wondrous 
Apellius, Aristobulus and Urban, * Amplius and the divine Narcissus, * who preached 
the all-holy Trinity, * have enlightened the nations * and delivered from bondage ** 
all who bless them with faith.  
O most radiant beacons of Christ, * most pure vessels who, through your faith, * 
contained all the effulgence of the Spirit, * O pillars of the Church, * most glorious 
heavens * declaring the glory of God: * entreat Him, that He grant unto our souls ** 
peace and great mercy.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Thou wast revealed to be a divine habitation * by the inspiration of the Holy 
Spirit, * O glorious Epimachus, * and, receiving from Him the ability to accomplish 
healings, * thou dost richly impart health to the sick, * who ever cry aloud: * O Jesus, 
Bestower of life, * Thou art the gladness, the glory and boast ** of Thy martyrs.  
With boldness didst thou preach the truth, * O glorious one, * as a most lawful 
warrior of Christ, * unafraid of the bestial rage of him who judged thee. * By thy 
divinely inspired words * thou didst put to shame * him who commanded thee to 
worship gods who do not exist, * O spiritual athlete, ** wherefore thou didst preach 
unto all our God Who reigneth over all.  
In that thy feet are beautiful, * they were adorned * to traverse the path of 
martyrdom unhindered, * and, finishing thy course, thou didst preserve the faith, * 
receiving a crown from the hand of the Master. * Him do thou entreat, * that those 
who with faith celebrate * thy most honored memory ** may be delivered from 
corruption and tribulations.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
I have been cast down to the ground, * I have been slain by sins, * by passions, 
spiritual and bodily; * wherefore, I am covered with the darkness of despair. * But 
raise me up now, * guiding me to the life of incorruption * and to the homeland on 
high, * where the pure voice of those who keep festival is heard, ** O most holy 
Bride of God.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone III:  
O holy Apostles * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins * 
unto our souls 
Glory ..., Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Epimachus O Lord, * received an imperishable 
crown from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the 
tyrants and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save 
Thou our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion:  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Octoechos, and two canons for the saints.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy apostles, the acrostic whereof is:  
“With faith I praise the servants of God”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it shattered 
the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the deep.  
Deliver from the darkness of the passions those who honor your memory with 
faith and celebrate it joyously, O right eloquent ones, and make them partakers of 
everlasting joy.  
Following in the steps of Christ, Who became incarnate in His loving-kindness, O 
most noetically rich apostles, and serving His divinely authored precepts, ye have 
been revealed to be guides to piety for all those astray.  
Having assembled with faith, let us bless as is meet those who were disciples of 
Christ: Stachys and the wise Amplius, Urban and Apellius, Narcissus and Aristobulus.  
Theotokion: Let us bless her who is blessed among women: the manifest 
mountain of God, the holy tabernacle and table, the golden jar, the pure palace of 
Jesus.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord my God, * for Thou hast led Thy people out of 
the bondage of Egypt, * and hast drowned in the waters * the chariots and the 
might of Pharaoh. 
I raise a hymn to Thee, O Lord my God, for Thou hast shown unto us the 
memorial of the martyr, which illumineth all things, in that Thou alone art greatly 
merciful.  
I raise a hymn to Thee, O Lord my God, for Thou hast shown Thy martyr to be 
invincible, a champion among martyrs against ungodliness.  
I raise a hymn to Thee, O Lord my God, for Thou hast adorned Thy spiritual 
athlete Epimachus with divine gifts, and hast crowned him with honor.  
Theotokion: I raise a hymn to Thee, O Lord my God, for Thou wast born without 
seed from the womb of the Virgin, for whose sake Thou savest all, in that Thou alone 
art greatly merciful.  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy apostles  
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thou wast shown to be greatly fertile grain, nurturing with the word of knowledge 
those who are famished with a hunger for faith, O divinely blessed and wise Stachys, 
making them partakers of better food through grace, by the power of the Spirit.  
Casting right skillfully with the net of thy tongue, thou didst draw forth divine 
food from the deep of deception, O apostle Narcissus, offering it to the King and 
Master of creation Who came to save the lost.  
Thou didst proceed from the east like a star, and, traveling, reached the cities of 
Britain, preaching the Gospel and illumining with grace those who accepted thy word 
with faith, O blessed Aristobulus.  
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be the splendid bridal chamber and most exalted 
throne of Christ, O all-immaculate Birthgiver of God; for He alone, resting within 
thee, hath taken away our toils and prepared ease in the future for those who are 
found worthy.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
Boasting in the all-praised Cross, the martyr Epimachus, the invincible one 
crowned by Christ, cast the savagery of the impious into the darkness.  
Disdaining transitory glory, the divinely wise martyr Epimachus, the heir of Christ, 
rejoiced, drawn to his contest.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O Ever-virgin Mother, who held God the Word in thy 
womb and hast given birth to the Incarnate One, as both God and man!  
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostles, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Your proclamation went forth to the earth, enlightening the souls of the 
unbelieving with your sacred mediations, O glorious apostles. Wherefore, we joyfully 
celebrate your most honorable and splendid memory today, rejoicing with faith.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine faith ...”: 
An animate tower, thou wast a witness to the truth amid thy suffering, vanquishing 
invisible foes with visible torturers and receiving a crown from Christ, O most 
excellent one. Wherefore, we cry out to thee: Cease thou never to pray that we be 
granted great mercy, O glorious one.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence, * when taking flesh in thy 
womb, * He remained God though He had became a man; * and even after thy 
birthgiving, preserved thee, His Virgin Mother, * as immaculate as thou wast before 
giving birth. * Him do thou earnestly beseech, ** that He grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy apostles  
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain overshadowed 
by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy One of Israel * 
would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and restoration. 
Shining forth on earth, the Sun of righteousness manifestly emitted mystic rays: 
Stachys and Narcissus, Urban and Amplius, Aristobulus and Apellius, who enlighten 
those who are in darkness.  
Fortified by the strength of the divine Spirit, O apostle Amplius, thou didst show 
forth as children of the light those who live in darkness, performing most glorious 
works of miracles and setting at naught legions of demons.  
Full of divine waters, O most blessed Urban, thou didst flow like a torrent of 
salvation, driving away bitter and un-potable waters, watering the pious with grace.  
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to surpass the angels, O Lady; for thou wast 
deemed worthy to ineffably contain in thy womb Him Whom they hold in awe, and 
to bear in thine arms as a babe Him Who is more ancient than time itself.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Proclaiming the advent of Thine appearance on earth, O Christ God, * 
the prophet cried aloud with gladness: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Scorning the threats of the ungodly, the right glorious Epimachus arrayed himself 
for the struggle, crying out with boldness: Glory to Thy power, O Lord! (Twice)  
Having spurned earthly things, the glorious Epimachus inherited the kingdom 
through death, crying out with faith: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: He Who by the Faith and the Spirit is glorified in the highest did the 
right victorious Epimachus preach to all the ignorant in the arena.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy apostles  
Irmos: O Hou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O 
Christ, * and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * enlighten with 
the light of thine understanding * the hearts of those who with right worship 
hymn Thee.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
The divinely chosen sheep of the good Shepherd were manifestly sent by Him 
among wolves, taming and leading them to the noetic fold by faith.  
The great Andrew ordained thee bishop of Byzantium, O most sacred Stachys, 
who by divine grace dost guide to calm havens those who sail to there with faith.  
The honorable Church of Heraclium hath thee as its precious cornerstone, O 
blessed Apellius, strengthening it with the word of truth. Wherefore, we honor thee 
as is meet.  
 
Theotokion: In a manner transcending all telling, thou didst conceive and give 
birth to the Word Whom the Father begat from the womb before the ages, O pure 
one. Wherefore, we call thee, His Mother, blessed, as is fitting.  
Canon of the holy martyr:  
Irmos: Do Thou O Lord send down upon us * Thine enlightenment, and free 
us * from the gloom of transgression, O Good One, * granting us Thy peace. 
Defending himself with the weapon of the grace of the Cross, the martyr cried out 
to the impious ones: “Neither the sword nor fire will cut me off from the love of 
Christ!”  
Standing before the tribunal of the iniquitous, the right glorious Epimachus cried 
out with great boldness: “Your gods did not create heaven and the earth! Let the 
ungodly perish!”  
Inspired by God, the right glorious Epimachus preached to the ignorant the 
Trinity: the Father, the Word and the Holy Spirit.  
Theotokion: Who is able to describe the most glorious manner of thy birthgiving 
which transcendeth all telling, O pure one? For thou didst indescribably and 
essentially give birth to God the Word incarnate.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy apostles  
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to deliver 
us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save Thy people 
O our God, * for Thou art the strength and restoration of the weak. 
Having stirred up the sea of the nations with divine ascents, O divinely blessed 
ones, ye saved those who of old drowned in the bitter sea and brought them saved, to 
the Redeemer.  
Thou didst preach God, Who willeth mercy, and didst free the souls of the pious; 
O divinely blessed and godly Narcissus, as the great primate of the Athenians and 
planter of beauteous gardens.  
Pouring forth life-giving discourse and the grace of healings, the divine Urban 
drew all to the enlightenment of divine knowledge, as an emulator of Him Who 
became incarnate and saved the world.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: We hymn thee through whom we, who before were condemned, have 
been justified, and through whom we have joined the immaterial ministers and have 
been deemed worthy of paradise, O divinely joyous one who art blessed among 
women.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
Epimachus forsook the world and the things of the world and manfully gave his 
body over to tortures for the Master; and he became an heir of Christ.  
Epimachus abolished the delusion of the idols and hath been deemed worthy of 
true glory, receiving the grace of healings, from which all the faithful draw forth.  
Sharing in the sufferings of Christ through the power of Christ God Who was 
crucified in the flesh; Epimachus received crowns of glory from Him, as one who is 
faithful.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, entreat our God, Who became incarnate 
through thee, on behalf of thy servants, for we know thee to be our only intercessor.  
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “As first-fruits ...”:  
Let us hymn the wise apostles as is meet: * Apellius, Urban and Aristobulus, 
Amplius, Narcissus and Stachys, * whom the grace of our God brought together, as 
sacred treasures ** of the all-holy Spirit and the effulgence of the Sun of glory.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy apostles  
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; * 
for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so hath He 
wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou praised and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
By enduring perils ye were delivered from the enemy who tested you, and with the 
showers of the living Word ye quenched all the flame of deception, O glorious 
apostles, crying aloud: O praised and supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Most splendidly and excellently didst thou counsel thy disciples, O blessed 
Aristobulus, and didst perfectly instruct them; for thou wast possessed of the 
hypostatic Wisdom, which instructed thee to proclaim the praised and supremely 
glorious God of our fathers.  
With sacred voices the hallowed concourse of the faithful calleth thee blessed, O 
Apellius, for thou didst have a blessed and an angelic life, ever hymning the praised 
and supremely glorious God of our fathers.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: Deliver us from perils, tribulations and divers griefs, and from the 
invasion of aliens, O all-hymned Lady, that we may glorify thee and cry out to thy 
Son: O praised God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Manfully trampling upon falsehood with fire, the right victorious Epimachus cried 
out to the Crucified One: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Fearing neither the flame, nor wild beasts, nor tortures, the invincible Epimachus 
cried out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Preaching the Father, the Son and the all-holy Spirit to those who knew not God, 
Epimachus cried out: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Thou wast prefigured by the unconsumed bush and the dew-laden 
furnace, O pure Mother; for thou didst ineffably give birth to Christ God incarnate, 
O blessed one.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy apostles  
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone more 
brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed: Bless 
the Lord all ye works of the Lord, * hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Ye appeared in the world like lightning bolts, O beholders of God, consuming 
delusion and showing forth as children of the day those who chant and cry out: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  
With the sweet salt of thy teachings, O Amplius, thou didst cleanse away the 
corruption of delusion. Wherefore, honoring thee, we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord; Hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Let the glorious Stachys and Amplius, Apellius and Narcissus, Urban and the all-
wise Aristobulus be hymned, crying out with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord; Hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be a rampart, a refuge and a ladder which leadeth 
mankind up to heaven, O pure one, we cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord! Hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Christ God, Who appeared in the form of an Angel * in the fiery furnace 
* to those who sang therein, * ye children, hymn; ye people, bless * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Him Who showed forth the crowned Epimachus as victor over iniquitous men do 
ye hymn, O children; bless O ye priests! O ye people supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
Him Who hath given the spiritual athlete Epimachus to us as a physician of 
sufferings and cruel infirmities men do ye hymn, O children; bless O ye priests! O ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Christ Who magnified the memory of Epimachus on earth and through him hath 
healed divers infirmities, do ye hymn, O priests, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
the ages!  
Theotokion: The Virgin, who ineffably conceived and gave birth to Christ our 
God without seed, do ye hymn, O children; bless O priests! O ye people, supremely 
exalt her throughout the ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy apostles  
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy pure 
birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * quench the 
raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may unceasingly 
magnify Thee. 
That Thou mightest illumine with the light of the goodness of knowledge the ends 
of the earth, which were full of the deception of the enemy and replete with the 
darkness of ungodliness, Thou didst send forth Thy saving rays upon them, O 
Compassionate One.  
Thou wast shown to be the namesake of the wheat of salvation which beareth for 
those in need the grain which imparteth confirmation of divine knowledge and easeth 
the noetic starvation of those who with faith and love hymn thee, O glorious and 
sacred preacher.  
Ye are living God-seers in the heavens, O divine apostles. Grant that those who 
honor you on earth in a pure manner and ever sincerely call you blessed may be 
partakers of everlasting radiance.  
 
Theotokion: Thou didst hold Him Who holdeth all things and didst nurture with 
milk Him Who nourisheth all. Great and awesome and past understanding is thy mys-
tery, O Virgin Theotokos, ark of precious sanctity. Wherefore, with faith we call thee 
blessed.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thee who contained the infinite Word within thy womb, * and art more 
spacious than the heavens * and more glorious than the cherubim * O pure 
Theotokos, * with hymns do we magnify thee.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
As thy love was perfect, thou didst desire to die for Christ Who died for our sake. 
Wherefore, thou hast been enrolled by Him in His army in the highest, O martyr. 
With hymns we magnify Him with the Father and the Spirit.  
As Thou didst with faith confess God the Savior on earth before the impious 
torturers, O martyr Epimachus, thou hast now been crowned by Him and the Father 
and the Spirit in the highest, in the presence of the angels.  
Theotokion: Thee, the pure and glorious Virgin and Mother of God, the light-
bearing cloud, the unconsumed bush who mystically appeared to Moses on Mount 
Sinai, do we magnify in hymns.  
Exapostilarion of the holy apostles:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Let the godly Aristobulus, most noetically rich Stachys, the divinely wise Apellius 
and Narcissus, and the all-wise Amplius and Urban now be honored by us as apostles 
of Christ by whom the world hath been delivered from all manner of falsehood.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Thou hast been shown to surpass the cherubim, O all-hymned one; for thou didst 
hold in thine embrace Him Who sitteth upon their shoulders, O most pure Maiden, 
and didst nourish Him with milk as a babe. Him do thou earnestly entreat on behalf 
of us who hymn thee as the true Theotokos.  
 
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone III:  
O holy Apostles * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins ** 
unto our souls 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Epimachus O Lord, * received an imperishable 
crown from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the 
tyrants and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save 
Thou our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone VIII: 
Let us hymn the wise apostles as is meet: * Apellius, Urban and Aristobulus, 
Amplius, Narcissus and Stachys, * whom the grace of our God brought together, as 
sacred treasures ** of the all-holy Spirit and the effulgence of the Sun of glory.  
