--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS ACINDYNUS, PEGASIUS, 
APHTHONIUS, ELPIDEPHORUS & ANEMPODISTUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Let us hymn the company of the five martyrs: * the wise Acindynus, * Pegasius 
and Elpidephorus, * Aphthonius and Anempodistus, * the valiant spiritual athletes * 
and fervent protectors, * who pour forth grace unhindered * and hope unashamed, ** 
bestowing them freely upon the pious.  
Neither hunger, nor tribulation, * neither life, nor death, * neither the boiling of 
cauldrons, * nor the precipices of the earth, * nor yet the mouths of the wild beasts * 
could separate your brave deeds of patient endurance from the love of Christ; * for, 
directing your gaze continually toward Him, * and desiring Him alone, ** ye 
vanquished the enemy.  
Delighting in sweetness * and full of light, * having inherited everlasting life, * 
from misfortunes, bondage and imprisonment * deliver those who have recourse to 
you * at the site of your martyrdom, O divinely wise ones; * for ye have boldness 
before God * and manifest tender compassion, ** in that ye are truly emulators of 
Christ.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Today the martyrs’ choir of fivefold splendor, illumining the faithful like a 
constellation of stars, summoneth all to mystical gladness. Today the servants of the 
noetic Sun, the destroyers of the traditions of the Persians, who adore the material 
sun and worship fire, have led all to piety, and having filled the cup of their suffering 
to abundance, they have been crowned with their blood shed for the sake of Christ, 
calling us, the lovers of piety, saying: “Come, feast your eyes upon our sufferings, and 
behold our crowns and honors! For he who endureeth to the end is saved, Christ 
hath said in truth, that ye may share our crowns and have us as intercessors before 
the Lord!”  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure Virgin Mother, * beholding the most iniquitous 
people * who unjustly nailed Thee to the Tree, ** was wounded within, as Symeon 
foretold.  
The Aposticha from the Oktoechos, and this Sticheron, in Tone I:  
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
The martyrs of fivefold radiance, equal in number to the wise virgins, have shone 
forth in beams of light; and, gazing upon their icon, we commune in their memory. 
Wherefore, through their supplications, O Christ, save our souls from the enemy, and 
by their entreaties preserve our life bereft of want, for Thou pourest forth Thy rich 
mercies unceasingly upon those who glorify Thee without hesitation. By their prayers 
grant great mercy unto our souls, which trust in Thee.  
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
Come, let us rejoice in the Lord today, on the day of the commemoration of the 
passion-bearers! O ye who love the feasts of the Church, come, let us praise them, 
mystically offering laudation unto them: Rejoice, O Acindynus! Rejoice, O Pegasius! 
Rejoice, O Anempodistus! Rejoice, O Elpidephorus! Rejoice, O Aphthonius! who 
drowned in the abyss the falsehood of idolatry and preached Christ the Lord openly 
in the midst of the arena! Wherefore, O all-blessed ones who suffered exceedingly, 
pray without ceasing on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Tree of the Cross. O Jesus, she 
that kneweth not wedlock said weeping: “O sweet Child, why hast Thou abandoned 
me who alone gave birth to Thee, O unapproachable Light of the beginningless 
Father? Hasten Thou, and glorify Thyself, that those who glorify Thy divine 
sufferings may receive divine glory!” 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
O spiritual athletes of the Lord, * blessed is the earth which drank in your blood, * 
and holy the habitations which have received your bodies; * for ye vanquished the 
enemy in the arena preaching Christ with boldness. ** Entreat Him, in that He is 
good, we pray, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos; and that of the martyrs, with 4 Troparia, the 
acrostic whereof is: “Through the entreaties of the multitude of Thy martyrs preserve 
me”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
As ye have Christ our God, the Sun of righteousness, ever illumining you with 
immaterial light, O saints, dispel the clouds of mine ignorance.  
Pouring forth grace free from danger, O saints, ye untiringly bestow it upon those 
who approach with faith, causing all tribulation, all despondency, tempest and tumult 
to cease.  
Girded about with invincible might, O saints, ye gave no thought to the weakness 
of the flesh; but, fearlessly showing forth wisdom, ye braved the fire and torment.  
Theotokion: Thou alone, O Bride of God, didst bear in thine arms Him Who is 
enthroned in the highest, though He took flesh; for from ages past thou wast shown 
to be a worthy receptacle for the Almighty.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Made steadfast by the power of Christ, O most excellent ones, with firm resolve ye 
passed through fire and water to the heavens, suffering all the while.  
Taking heart with an unfaltering hope of things to come, O all-glorious martyrs, 
with most courageous resolve ye put aside the pangs of the present. 
Reasoning like the three youths in Babylon, O all-praised ones, ye were shown to 
quench the first of the Persians’ foolishness, bedewed by the Spirit.  
Theotokion: Having acquired thee as a renowned intercessor, O Mother of God, 
and placing our trust in thee, we are saved, and having recourse to thee we are kept 
safe.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Suffering in their struggle, with hope the right glorious ones ran the race of piety 
unharmed, strengthened by their crowns; for utterly destroying the adversaries, they 
gained their victory without faltering. Wherefore, they ever pour forth a multitude of 
healings abundantly upon those who ask with faith. To them we cry aloud together: 
Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who honor your holy 
memory with love!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Made brilliant by the beauty of a most excellent contest, O splendid luminaries, ye 
were revealed to be martyrs of Christ, enlightening with most splendid rays those who 
cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!  
The blood of the martyrs was an offering of cleansing, freely giving a truly most 
fragrant sacrifice unto God, and pouring forth upon all a well-spring of healing.  
By your supplications to Christ ye have fended off the assault of divers 
temptations and misfortunes for those who diligently keep your most sacred and all-
festive memory, O right wondrous ones.  
Having rejected the idolatrous ungodliness of delusion, and showing forth the life-
creating activity of the God of all by your deeds, O most blessed ones, ye cried aloud: 
Glory to Thy power, O Christ!  
Theotokion: We wield thee as a most mighty weapon against the enemy; we hew 
down all sorrow and the harm of grievous circumstances; and we flee from the 
tumults of the heretics, O Mother of God.  
ODE V  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thou didst offer thyself to Christ, O Aphthonius, mightily denouncing the 
ungodly wickedness of the tyrant; and, rejoicing, thou didst make haste to the light of 
faith, O glorious one.  
When thou didst emulate the suffering of Christ, O Aphthonius, for Whose sake 
thy head was severed; for thou didst hasten toward immutable and undying rest.  
Steadfast in unshakeable hope, thou didst spit upon the beautiful things which are 
in the world, O all-wise Elpidephorus; for thou didst run in haste to the arena of thy 
contest.  
Theotokion: The noetic Sun, shining forth from thee, hath shed radiant beams of 
His divinity upon all, O Lady Theotokos. Wherefore, we all glorify thee.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Having disdained corruptible and transitory things, ye have been deemed worthy 
to behold incorruptible things; wherefore, from temptations and misfortunes deliver 
those who call upon you with faith, O all-praised ones.  
O most glorious martyrs, by your entreaties move the beginningless Trinity to 
spare and loose those who are cruelly bound and held inescapably in prisons.  
Committing themselves to death for Thee, O my Savior, the valorous ones 
received immortality and are become the saviors of those amid tempest, dangers and 
sorrows.  
Theotokion: Rend asunder the record of my transgressions, O Maiden, granting 
release from the grief and sufferings which hold me fast, and preserving me ever 
unharmed, O Lady.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”: 
The pious and God-bearing martyrs, * who forsook all things on earth: * 
Acindynus, Pegasius and Anempodistus, and with them Aphthonius and 
Elpidephorus, * didst Thou receive into the delight of Thy good things and into rest, 
** O Thou Who alone are supremely good.  
Ikos: Open my mouth, O Christ my Lord, that I may hymn and praise with honor 
the struggles of Thy spiritual athletes; for, forsaking all, and loving Thee, the Creator 
of all, they considered all things on earth corruptible. Thus, making the honored sign 
of Thy life-bearing Cross, they have diligently taken their place before their King, as 
valiant soldiers and martyrs, crying out to Thee, O Thou Who alone art supremely 
good.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
As Thou didst deliver the three pious youths from the flame, so also didst thou 
preserve in the midst of a fiery furnace the spiritual athletes who chanted unto Thee 
with divine wisdom: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Abundant gifts dost Thou bestow, and Thou pourest forth miracles, O Christ, 
acting and working through Thy spiritual athletes, in that Thou art full of tender 
compassion, and revealing this to those who chant unto Thee: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
A multitude of martyrs truly assembled by faith have ye led to Christ, effecting the 
manifestation of most glorious miracles, and chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Theotokion: Delivered from the ancestral curse by thee, and having passed on to 
everlasting sustenance, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, O exceedingly glorious Lady, who 
hast given birth to the incarnate God for us!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The most devout feast of the martyrs hath now joyously arrived, illumining the 
world, bringing gladness and splendidly adorning those who chant with faith: O all ye 
works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Having as your helper the invincible Lord of glory, O most excellent ones, ye 
braved wild beasts, the pit and cruel tortures. To Him do we now cry aloud: O all ye 
works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Having you as a mighty rampart, O valiant spiritual athletes Acindynus, Pegasius 
and Anempodistus, with Aphthonius and the ever-memorable Elpidephorus, we 
praise the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Adorned with a crown of victory, and resplendent in a diadem of beauty, O 
blessed martyrs, ye ultimately received unwaning radiance in the heavens, crying 
aloud: Praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Regarding thee with mouth and mind to be the Theotokos, we hymn 
thee, O all-immaculate one; for thou hast given birth to Christ, the Creator, God and 
King, Who wrapped Himself in flesh, O most pure one. Wherefore, we hymn thee, O 
Virgin, and supremely exalt thee throughout the ages.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Your labors on earth received the gladness of heaven, where the choirs of martyrs 
and the armies of the godly and all the first-born rejoice in your triumph, O all-
blessed ones.  
O all-blessed ones, from cruel bonds and misfortunes deliver all who with faith 
celebrate your holy festival, asking peace and tranquility and salvation, O blessed 
ones.  
Illumined with rich light and shining with grace, O spiritual athletes, entreat the 
Benefactor, that He grant to those who have recourse unto you and those who 
struggled with you, remission of sins and grief.  
Theotokion: Eve was driven away from the tree of life of which she had been 
forbidden to eat; but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, hast given birth to everlasting Life, 
granting life-bearing activity to the world through faith.  
Exapostilarion:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
With hymns we crown Acindynus, Pegasius and Elpidephorus, together with 
Aphthonius and Anempodistus; for, having denounced the superstitious deception of 
the Persians, and endured beating and wounds for Christ, they have received ineffable 
glory.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O palace of God! Rejoice, mountain overshadowed! Rejoice, 
bush unconsumed! Rejoice, throne of glory! Rejoice, divine table! Rejoice, golden jar! 
Rejoice, fiery candle stand! Rejoice, O Mary, Virgin Mother, thou light cloud!  
Aposticha from the Oktoechos, and this Sticheron of the martyrs, in Tone II:  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
Having empurpled thy body with streams of blood, thou didst tread the path of 
martyrdom without faltering, O spiritual athlete Acindynus; wherefore, girded about 
with divine strength, thou didst hew down the devices of the enemy. Entreat Christ 
God on our behalf, that our souls may be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
The fivefold lit lamp of the spiritual athletes hath hewn down the deceit of the 
enemy like an axe in a grove of trees, as David depicted; and having confessed Christ 
before the emperor, they pray unceasingly on behalf of our souls.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee * nailed to the Cross, O Lord, * the ewe-lamb 
Thy Mother marveled * and cried out: “What is this that I see, * O my Son most 
desired? * How hast Thou been rewarded * by the unfaithful and iniquitous assembly 
* which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? ** Yet glory to Thine ineffable condescen-
sion, O Master!”  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT LITURGY  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
O spiritual athletes of the Lord, * blessed is the earth which drank in your blood, * 
and holy the habitations which have received your bodies; * for ye vanquished the 
enemy in the arena preaching Christ with boldness. ** Entreat Him, in that He is 
good, we pray, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
The pious and God-bearing martyrs, * who forsook all things on earth: * 
Acindynus, Pegasius and Anempodistus, and with them Aphthonius and 
Elpidephorus, * didst Thou receive into the delight of Thy good things and into rest, 
** O Thou Who alone are supremely good.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §233(EPH. 6: 10-17) 
Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
amour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole amour of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; And your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; Above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God: 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §36(MT. 10: 16-22) 
The Lord spake unto His disciples saying: Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the 
midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware 
of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 

--- PAGE 10 ---
synagogues; And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a 
testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no 
thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what 
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh 
in you. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: 
and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end 
shall be saved. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
 
 
