--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 6th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, PAUL THE 
CONFESSOR, ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
The divinely eloquent Paul, * ordaineth thee, O all-blessed one, * as his namesake 
and emulator, * adorned with his character and piety * and his endurance of evil 
circumstances, * and aflame with his zeal, * O champion of Orthodoxy. * With him 
thou art now glorified ** in the mansions of heaven. (Twice)  
With the strong cords of thy dogmas * thou didst strangle the ungodly Arius * and 
the impious Macedonius; * and with thy right discourse on doctrine * thou didst 
make multitudes of the Orthodox steadfast, * O hieromartyr and father. * Wherefore, 
accepting thy most radiant confession, * the Lover of mankind ** hath shown thee to 
share in His kingdom. (Twice)  
With a splendid wreath of righteousness * hath Christ crowned thee, * O blessed 
hierarch * who finished thy race * and kept the Faith; * and He hath adorned thy 
confession, O right wondrous one. * Wherefore, having received a heavenly 
inheritance, * pray thou to the Savior ** on behalf of those who hymn thee. 
O all-blessed Paul, * namesake of confession, * as intercessor for those who 
fervently praise thee, * deliver us from all misfortune and every sin, * from the 
tempest of the passions and tyranny, * in that thou art an invincible martyr * and a 
right acceptable hierarch, O father; * for thou hast acquired boldness ** before Christ 
our God.  
Glory ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone I:  
Arrayed in hierarchal vestments, O venerable father, thou didst emulate thy 
namesake Paul: having endured persecution and tribulations, in thy constant pangs 
thou didst put to shame the pernicious opinions of Arius; and having suffered for the 
beginningless and consubstantial Trinity, thou didst cast down the impious 
Macedonius, the opponent of the Spirit, and, having made the Orthodox Faith clear 
to all, thou dwellest with the immaterial angels. With them pray now, that our souls 
be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thine unjust slaying, O Christ, * the Virgin, 
cried out to Thee, weeping: * “O my sweetest Child! * How is it that Thou diest 
unjustly? * How is it that Thee Who hast suspended the whole earth upon the waters 
* dost hang upon the Tree? * Leave me not alone who am Thy Mother and 
handmaiden, ** I pray, O greatly merciful Benefactor!”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos.  
And this Sticheron, in Tone I: 
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
O venerable father Paul, invested with virtue by Christ God, strengthened by the 
Faith thou didst valiantly conquer every horde of demons and barbarians, establishing 
thy flock upon a rock, un-assailed by any heresy. Wherefore, joining chorus with the 
angels, pray thou to the Savior, that our souls be preserved in peace.  
Glory ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone II:  
Sailing the deep of fasting with the sail of abstinence, thou didst escape the 
tempest of passions, O venerable one. Wherefore, being the namesake of the divine 
Paul, thou didst endure persecution and tribulations, maltreated amid the blasphemies 
of the heretics. Wherefore, having cast down the opinions of Arius, and, vanquished 
the heresy of Nestorius, thou hast been revealed to be a zealot of the Church of 
Christ. Him do thou entreat, O blessed hierarch, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb * willingly 
led as a man to the slaughter, * she said, weeping: * “Dost Thou now hasten to leave 
me childless * who gave Thee birth O Christ,? * What is this that Thou hast done, O 
Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine extreme goodness, * which 
is beyond understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of mankind!”  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: 
Through thy confession of the divine Faith the Church hath shown thee to be 
another Paul, * a zealot among her priests; * and Abel crieth out to the Lord with 
thee, as doth the righteous blood of Zachariah. * O venerable father, entreat Christ 
God, ** that we be given great mercy.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos; and that of the holy hierarch, with 6 Troparia, the 
acrostic whereof is: “I most wisely hymn Paul, the teacher of the mysteries”, the 
composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
We proclaim thee, O Paul, to be the confirmation of the Faith, a teacher of the 
Church, an unshaken pillar of confession, a greatly luminous lamp of grace and the 
mouth of the fiery Spirit.  
Paul the most great, the sun of the whole world, setteth thee forth as a mighty fire, 
like a second Paul mightily consuming heresies, and as a scythe cutting down 
ungodliness.  
Thou didst contend lawfully, O divinely eloquent one, bearing the brunt of the 
divine battle of preaching; and as a faithful hierarch thou didst strangle like a wild 
beast with the cords of thy dogmas, the vain-minded Arius.  
Theotokion: Come ye, let us hymn the most pure Mary, who alone hath adorned 
the race of mankind, giving birth to God incarnate, and remaining an intact virgin.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Adopted through divine grace, O Paul, thou didst not assume the nature of the 
only-begotten Son to be a created being, following the dogmas of the God-bearing 
Paul.  
With thy mouth, heart and tongue thou didst preach the wisdom and power of 
God, the hypostatic Word, O divinely wise and venerable Paul, denouncing the 
impious Arius.  
O all-wise one, thou didst preach God Who in essence is all-creating and 
omnipotent, through the righteous judgment of the transcendent authority of the 
Holy Spirit of God, whereby we are deified.  
Theotokion: The Word of the beginningless Father Who is beyond any beginning, 
hath now received a beginning, incarnate, from thee, O pure one; and He hath come 
under time Who transcendeth all time.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Holding fast to Orthodox dogma, thou didst reject ungodly words, O divinely 
wise Paul, putting Arius to shame; for thou didst preach the Son as one in essence 
with the Father, making the faithful steadfast. O venerable Father, entreat Christ 
God, that we be granted great mercy.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
As the namesake and emulator of the chosen vessel, O father, thou didst endure 
tribulations and persecution for the Faith; and like him, thou didst also go to Rome, 
everywhere preaching that all the Hypostases of the Trinity receive equal adoration. 
Wherefore, having reached the end of thy course in Armenia, thou didst receive from 
the Lord a crown, as is meet, putting to shame Macedonius and the ungodly Arius. 
Therefore, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with 
love celebrate thy holy memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
With His life-bearing right hand the Creator hath set upon thy head the crown of 
confession as a most precious honor, in that thou wast victorious, O divinely revealed 
and blessed Paul.  
In that thou didst struggle beforehand for the sake of the dogmas of piety, O all-
wise one, thou hast received rewards, having now attained unto the Tree of life, O 
divinely revealed, blessed and wondrous Paul.  
As a splendid struggler and champion of the truth, O most honored Paul, thou 
hast been deemed worthy to join chorus in the land of heaven, where the feet of the 
meek dance.  
Theotokion: Desiring to save humanity, O Savior, as the Son, visibly 
consubstantial with the Father, thou became incarnate from the Virgin in a form 
consubstantial with us.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE V  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Thou didst bring the pasturage and corruption of heresy to an end, O divinely wise 
father, applying a most excellent remedy: thy splendid confession of Orthodox 
dogmas, which is pure beyond understanding, and by thy divine zeal.  
The grace of the Holy Spirit was poured forth in abundance through thy lips, O 
all-blessed one, truly finding thee to be a mighty and most excellent champion of 
Orthodoxy for the faithful. Wherefore, thou hast illumined the councils of the godly.  
Thou didst smite the blasphemy of Arius and Macedonius with the sling of thy 
divinely inspired dogmas and doctrines, O Paul, as David did the Philistine, and, 
having first strangled them, thou didst utterly cast them down.  
Theotokion: The timeless and beginningless Word hath now come under time, 
receiving animate and rational flesh from thee, O pure Virgin who knewest not 
wedlock, granting peace to all who hymn thee.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 
Arius, who uttered blasphemy against the highest and belittled the Son and Word 
of God as a creature, hath been damned, anathematized by thee, O divinely wise one.  
The mindless, foolish and ungodly Macedonius, who rejected the Spirit of God, O 
father, hath been cast down by thy mighty opposition, O divinely manifest one.  
The creeping serpent who raised up a horde of heresies is slain by thy vivifying 
words, O all-blessed hierarch of God, most sacred and divinely eloquent one.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother of God, we hymn thy birth giving and undefiled 
purity, which transcend nature; for in thee virginity and an incorrupt birthgiving 
wondrously meet.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
O Paul, who shone forth upon the earth * like a star of heavenly splendor, * thou 
dost now enlighten the universal Church for which thou didst suffer, * laying down 
thy life. ** And like that of Zachariah and Abel thy blood crieth out to the Lord.  
Ikos: Thou didst receive thy name from on high, and thy birth from the earth 
below, O Paul; and ripe as a comely garden, thou didst blossom forth like a garden in 
fasting, perfuming all with the sweet scent of the labor of thy manifold struggles, thy 
sweat, imprisonment, starvation, thirst and all thy tribulations. Therein thou didst 
successfully pass on, adorned with a wreath of victory, for thy blood crieth out to the 
Lord.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Thou hast passed over to the tabernacles of heaven, O divinely wise and venerable 
one, and, drawing nigh unto God, deified by communion with Him, thou hast 
become divine, chanting: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
Made wise by thy words, O all-praised Paul, we learn to worship the indivisible 
and inseparable Godhead in three Suns, and to the Trinity do we chant: O all-hymned 
Lord and God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having purified thy most sacred, divine and God-pleasing confession like gold, 
with gladness thou didst offer thyself to God as a right acceptable sacrifice, O 
venerable one, emulating the suffering of our Savior.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be the only mediatress of divine 
deliverance for all mankind, having given birth to the Redeemer of all, O all-
immaculate one. To Him do we all chant: O all-hymned Lord and God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Springs of thy dogmas gush forth watering the whole Church, O father; and with 
thy precious blood thou hast hallowed all who follow thee in the Orthodox Faith and 
cry aloud: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Having thrust aside the threefold waves of life thou hast now anchored in the calm 
harbor; for thou didst have the Lord; Who createth all things with His hand, as thy 
helmsman, steering the passage, O all-praised Paul, Him do we supremely exalt 
throughout all ages.  
Dwelling within thee, the thrice radiant light of the supremely divine Trinity hath 
shown thee to be a secondary luminary illumining the council of the Orthodox and 
darkening the horde of the heretics, O father, who dost chant: Hymn the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Following the words of the prophets, O Virgin, we proclaim thee to 
be the Theotokos; for thou hast given birth to the Child named Emmanuel, Who is 
more ancient than all things. To Him do we now cry aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye 
works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
My whole self do I offer to thy godly protection, O divinely eloquent one, for, 
having received from Christ, as a hieromartyr, the authority to loose transgressions, 
save me by thy supplications and illumine me with the divine light, cutting away the 
bonds of mine offenses.  
Thou hast been revealed to be a new Paul aflame with zeal, O most excellent 
father Paul, in that thou hast now heard ineffable words in paradise; for thou dost 
share his character, having shared also his name, and hast received a most magnificent 
crown in the kingdom of Christ.  
Thou hast been revealed to be a temple denouncing every heresy, and a godly 
champion of Orthodoxy, O all-glorious hieromartyr Paul, manifestly illumined with 
rays of grace and filled with the light of the uncreated Trinity.  
Theotokion: Clad in flesh He received from thee, O all-immaculate one, the Word 
dwelt, incarnate, in the world, in that He is compassionate; and suffering no 
diminution, in that before He was incorporeal, with His divine power He cast down 
the one who from of old hath tormented all.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”:  
Aflame with the zeal of thine ardent heart, thou wast revealed to be a spiritual 
champion of grace, mowing down the assemblies of the heretics with the sword of 
thy words, O holy hierarch; and, having finished thy race, thou hast earned a place 
with the multitude of the martyrs.  
Theotokion: Thou wast a most immaculate Bride and a most honored temple of 
an ineffable pregnancy, O Theotokos; for the pre-eternal Light made His abode 
within thee, and thou didst give birth to the Word of God. Hymning thy birthgiving, 
O all-immaculate Maiden, we magnify thee as is meet.  
Aposticha Stichera from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone VII: 
Thou didst penetrate to the depths of the Spirit, living on earth like one of the 
incorporeal ones; and from thence thou didst draw forth a wealth of divine 
knowledge and hast enriched men by thine Orthodox teachings, O venerable father.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VII:  
The ewe-lamb, the Virgin, seeing her Lamb stretched out upon the Tree between 
two thieves, cried aloud: “Woe is me, my sweet Child! What is this strange and most 
glorious mystery that I see? How hath the iniquitous assembly nailed Thee to the 
Cross and given Thee vinegar to drink, Who hast fed men with manna?”  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes: 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the holy hierarch.  
Adopted through divine grace, O Paul, thou didst not assume the nature of the 
only-begotten Son to be a created being, following the dogmas of the God-bearing 
Paul.  
With thy mouth, heart and tongue thou didst preach the wisdom and power of 
God, the hypostatic Word, O divinely wise and venerable Paul, denouncing the 
impious Arius.  
O all-wise one, thou didst preach God Who in essence is all-creating and 
omnipotent, through the righteous judgment of the transcendent authority of the 
Holy Spirit of God, whereby we are deified.  
Theotokion: The Word of the beginningless Father Who is beyond any beginning, 
hath now received a beginning, incarnate, from thee, O pure one; and He hath come 
under time Who transcendeth all time.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: 
Through thy confession of the divine Faith the Church hath shown thee to be 
another Paul, * a zealot among her priests; * and Abel crieth out to the Lord with 
thee, as doth the righteous blood of Zachariah. * O venerable father, entreat Christ 
God, ** that we be given great mercy.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
O Paul, who shone forth upon the earth * like a star of heavenly splendor, * thou 
dost now enlighten the universal Church for which thou didst suffer, * laying down 
thy life. ** And like that of Zachariah and Abel thy blood crieth out to the Lord.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The saints shall boast in glory, * and they shall 
rejoice upon their beds.  
Verse: Sing unto the Lord a new song; His praise is in the church of the saints.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 318,(HEB. 8: 3-6)  
Brethren: every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore it is 
of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer. For if he were on earth, he 
should not be a priest, seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to the 
law: Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was 
admonished of God when he was about to make the tabernacle: for, See, saith he, 
that thou make all things according to the pattern shewed to thee in the mount. But 
now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator 
of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §64(LK. 12: 8-12) 
The Lord said: Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man 
also confess before the angels of God: But he that denieth me before men shall be 
denied before the angels of God. And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son 
of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy 
Ghost it shall not be forgiven. And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and 
unto magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, 
or what ye shall say: For the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same hour what ye 
ought to say.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
