--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS ONESIPHORUS AND PORPHYRIUS 
OF EPHESUS AND OF OUR VENERABLE MOTHER MATRONA, ABBESS, OF 
CONSTANTINOPLE 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE MOTHER THEOCTISTIA OF THE ISLE 
OF LESBOS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O martyred spiritual athlete, blessed Onesiphorus, * thou didst confess Christ 
God, * suffering greatly * before the tribunal of the iniquitous, * enduring the wounds 
of blows * and the immolation of thy whole body. * Wherefore, thou hast been 
crowned with the wreath of victory * by the hand of the Creator of life, ** O all-
praised one.  
O martyred spiritual athlete Porphyrius, * by the grace and power of the Spirit, * 
thou didst dye a purple robe for thyself in baths of thy blood, * and, arrayed therein, * 
thou wast shown to be most splendid, * reigning with our one God, * Who reigneth 
forever, O glorious one. * Him do thou now beseech, ** that we all be saved.  
O right victorious martyrs, * for the Life of all * thou wast slain in sacred manner, 
* and, rejoicing, ye were stretched out * on a searing gridiron, * made fast to horses 
and dragged about, * and ye thus received a blessed end. * Wherefore, ye are glorified 
and blessed, ** O ever-blessed ones, who ever pray for us.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
The uprisings of the flesh * didst thou honorably subject to thy soul * through 
ascetic feats of fasting, * and thou didst follow Christ, * and didst dwell most 
devoutly in the midst of the fasters, O Matrona, * quenching the burnings of pleasure 
* with divine showers of tears, * enkindling a most intense desire ** for the Creator.  
A sacred habitation * didst thou erect in many, * for the use of God, * being 
thyself a temple of the Spirit, O all-wise one, * and by thy spiritual purity thou hast 
guided souls * to the beneficial struggles of fasting, * and thou hast brought them, 
saved, to the Master * as a dowry, O Matrona. ** With them we honor thee faithfully.  
The maidens loved * the Bridegroom and Lord, * submitting to His teaching; * 
and having disdained in, the Spirit the weakness of the flesh, * with diligence they 
piously * restrained the passions, * and with thee, O Matrona, * have been led into 
the heavenly bridal chamber of God, ** ever rejoicing.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
O all-pure one, * who hath contained the infinite God in thy womb * Who, in His 
love for mankind, hath become a man, * and hath received our substance from thee, 
* deifying it: * disdain me not who am now sorrowing, * but quickly take pity * and 
free me from divers enemies ** and the malice of the evil one.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee * nailed to the Cross, O Lord, * the ewe-lamb 
Thy Mother marveled * and cried out: “What is this that I see, * O my Son most 
desired? * How hast Thou been rewarded * by the unfaithful and iniquitous assembly 
* which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? ** Yet glory to Thine ineffable condescen-
sion, O Master!”  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O mother, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, 
thou didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Matrona.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT COMPLINE  
Canon of the venerable Theoctistia, in Tone VI:  
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
As thy life and manner of living were wondrous, O Theoctistia, the immaterial 
angels were touched by thy new and extraordinary character and the ascetic strictness 
of thy way of life, which transcended nature.  
From childhood thou didst spurn all worldly food and every carnal pleasure, 
loving fasting, by which thou didst constrain all the movements of thy body.  
The Sower of the good seed found good soil in the childlike innocence of thy soul, 
and He planted therein the seed of life and gathered in fruit a hundredfold.  
Theotokion: Theoctistia, loving thee, the most pure Maiden and mighty aid of the 
faithful, with all her soul from childhood, became a receptacle of all the virtues, in a 
manner surpassing nature.  
ODE III  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Living a God-pleasing life, thou didst not hide from the evil one; wherefore, he 
beset thee with evils and led a multitude of Arabs against Lesbos, thy native land.  
The enemy strove to hand thee over, bound, to the enemies of the righteous; but 
the Redeemer, rescuing thee straightway from the vile ones, preserved thee in purity.  
Eluding like a bird the hands of thine enemies on the island of Paros, thou didst 
desire to become a nun thereon, ever abiding there as a custodian in the temple of the 
Ever-virgin Mother of God, which was in that place.  
Theotokion: Placing all her hope on thee, O Virgin Mother and Maiden, 
Theoctistia acquired thee as her protection, nourishment and mighty aid amid evils.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Secretly departing into the inner islands, thou didst escape thy visible enemies, 
upon which the intense battle of thine invisible enemies was launched against thee.  
Who can recount in any way the struggles in which, exerting thyself, thou didst 
engage the princes of darkness, whose darts were like fire and whose words were 
perplexing?  

--- PAGE 4 ---
O the divine grace which preserved thee! How, alone and young in years, thou 
didst put to shame the hordes of noetic Ethiopians, vanquishing them in thy feminine 
nature!  
Theotokion: Theoctistia, living in her young body with a most perfect 
understanding, set all her hope in Thy Mother, O God, and reached a goodly age.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
Elevating thy mind unto God, thou didst pass over all the needs of the body and 
all stumbling of desire. Wherefore, neither hunger, nor thirst, nor cold, nor 
nakedness, nor burning heat was able to vanquish thee, O glorious one.  
Seeing thy strange manner of life, the enemy raged with hatred, vexing thee and 
tempting thee with all manner of snares; yet he could not trip thee up, O blameless 
one.  
Treating all the temptations of the evil one as though they were the arrows of 
children, thou didst finish the race of thine asceticism without turning back, putting 
to shame his vain arrogance.  
Theotokion: In that thou art blessed among women, O most blessed Theotokos, 
our noetic Helper set thee apart for Himself, creating power within thee, setting at 
naught those who oppress us.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Living with complete lack of necessities, thou didst transcend the laws of nature. 
Wherefore, though tangible, yet abiding in the flesh like one of the immaterial ones, 
thou didst desire unseen things.  
Through the Holy Spirit thou didst foresee thine end approaching. Wherefore, as 
was God's good pleasure, thou wast seen by a hunter, so that thine awe inspiring 
manner of life not remain hidden.  
When the hunter saw thee in church, possessing an appearance transcending that 
of flesh and blood, O venerable one, he marveled, O the wonder! thinking that he 
had beheld a phantom, for so great was the change wrought in thee. 
Theotokion: O most pure Lady, reject me not who am full of grievous impurity; 
but be thou merciful and amenable to me, and accept me who bring as supplication 
the entreaties of thy Theoctistia.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Dedicated to God from thy childhood, O Theoctistia, as a goodly building fit for 
the Creator, taking up His easy yoke with zeal from thy youth, thou didst not take 
part in the turmoil of life, but preserved blameless all thy senses. Wherefore, like one 
of the incorporeal ones, thou didst live a wondrous life on earth.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O pure Virgin Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, thou sole intercessor and 
protection of the faithful: from tribulations, sorrows and cruel circumstances deliver 
all who place their trust in thee, O Maiden, and save our souls by thy divine 
supplications.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Thou didst quickly end the fear of him who was frightened byt the sight of thee, 
revealing what had befallen thee according to the providence of God, O pure one, for 
which thou didst render glory to God with thanksgiving in his presence.  
Having fasted for thirty-six years, and been unable to commune of the Savior's 
Body and Blood, thou didst ask him who happened upon thee to bring thee 
reverently a portion thereof.  
Having arrived bearing that which thou didst desire, with utmost reverence he 
placed it in thy hand; and receiving it, thou didst say unto God in gladness: “Now 
mercifully let me, Thy handmaiden, depart, according to Thy word!”  
Theotokion: O all-hymned one, thou wast well-pleased to receive thy servant, and 
didst grant her ineffable good things. By her supplications make us also partakers of 
the incorruptible food, O pure one.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Having partaken of the fearful Mysteries with faith as thou didst desire, O 
venerable mother, thou didst leave dust unto dust and with honor the angels bore thy 
precious spirit unto the Lord.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
The faithful hunter, approaching thee again to receive a blessing from thee, found 
thee lying dead in thy mortal nature; and marveling, he reflected on the same fate that 
awaited him.  
He who was not accustomed to doing good pondered in his thoughts, and boldly 
laying hold of thy precious hand in a God-pleasing fashion, promised to keep it in 
honor of thy holy memory and as a remembrance of thy life, O blessed one.  
Theotokion: I honor thy holy virtues, O Lady, though I have in nowise acquired 
virtuous activity; but as thou art merciful, have pity on my senses and deliver me from 
my most wicked habits.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Thou didst restrain the ship of him who stole thy hand, together with its sailors, at 
the island of Paros until, having understood, he returned it, replacing it with the rest 
of thy precious body. 
Those who had been cast forth and restrained, having experienced the power 
inherent in thee, hastened together to thy relics to venerate them and embrace them; 
yet they found nothing, for they had vanished from sight, in a way known only to 
God.  
Having accepted the infliction of great pain, the more so for Christ, O venerable 
one, and possessing great boldness to entreat Him, be thou mindful of those who 
honor thy divine memory, and ask that we may receive the cleansing of sins and 
correction of life.  
Theotokion: Desiring to save all mankind, the Lord chose thee to be His own 
Mother and set thee to be the cause of every good thing for the faithful, but having 
embittered Him by our iniquity, O merciful Lady, we hope to obtain mercy through 
thee.  
Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Desiring to receive everlasting good things, thou didst consider every pleasure of 
transitory things to be the merchandise of wickedness, and food to be the burning of 
the passions. Wherefore, from childhood thou didst join thyself to the ranks of 
monastics, O pure one.  
Recognizing all the wiles of the unclean spirits, thou didst valiantly oppose them, 
uprooting the movements of the passions and, as David says, laying hold of the 
children of evil and dashing them against the stone which is Christ.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Eluding the hands of the soldiers by the intervention of God, thou didst dwell in 
the wilderness, seeking Christ, and noetically passed over the worldly sea of the 
passions of life to the calm haven of the tranquility of the Most High, Whom thou 
didst desire, and dost now behold Christ.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Rejoice, O mountain of curds! Rejoice, seat of God! Rejoice, divine dominion! 
Rejoice, bush unburnt! Rejoice, O Theotokos! Rejoice, thou bridal-chamber! Rejoice, 
ladder of heaven! Rejoice, O temple! Rejoice, O jar! Rejoice, O tabernacle! Rejoice, 
thou joy of the world unending!  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb * lifted up upon the Cross, * the 
immaculate Virgin cried aloud, weeping: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this 
new and most glorious sight? * How is it that Thou Who holdest all things in Thy 
hand ** hast been nailed to the Tree in the flesh?”  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, and two canons of the saints:  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is: “Thou dost bring benefit unto 
those who praise thee,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord my God, * for Thou hast led Thy people out of 
the bondage of Egypt, * and hast drowned in the waters * the chariots and the 
might of Pharaoh. 
The day of thine honored memorial hath dawned, rendering divine profit unto 
those who praise thee well, and thereon we entreat thee, O blessed one: Remember us 
all!  
Having thy valorous mind full of boldness, O divinely inspired one, thou didst 
scorn the mindless command, and, rejoicing, thou didst suffer, O blessed one.  
Empowered with heavenly might, O Onesiphorus, thou didst hasten forth to cruel 
torments, overcoming all the strength of the adversary.  
Theotokion: Having given birth unto Life immortal, Christ our Creator and 
Redeemer, O Virgin who knewest not wedlock, thou didst abolish the tyranny of 
death.  
Canon of the venerable Matrona, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the glory of 
Matrona, as is meet,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord all ye people * Who engulfed Pharaoh in the 
Red Sea, * singing a hymn of victory, * for He hath been glorified.  
As thou art, ever with the ranks of angels and art deified by communion with God, 
by thy supplications save those who honor thee.  
Wholly consumed with divine desire, with showers of abstinence thou didst 
extinguish the burnings of soul-destroying pleasures.  
Thou wast shown to be an honored vessel of the Master, having cleansed thy heart 
of carnal-passions through fasting, O Matrona.  
Theotokion: O divinely joyous one, entreat Him Who was well pleased to be born 
from thee in a manner surpassing nature, that He save and bring peace unto all.  
ODE III 
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
Confessing the Word to be equall with the Father and the Spirit, the martyrs 
manfully repelled the threefold waves of torments in the arena.  
Having set thy feet firmly upon the rock of confession and faith, O martyr 
Onesiphorus, thou wast not moved by the winds of wounds.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Striving with all thy mind towards Christ, the Desired One, O blessed martyr, thou 
didst not feel the pangs of thy wounds, O all-blessed one.  
Theotokion: Look down and save me, O most pure one, for, in a manner beyond 
all telling and inconceivable, thou hast given flesh to God the Word, Who ordereth all 
things by divine command.  
Canon to the Venerable One  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
With the staff of divine faith didst thou cleave apart the sea of the passions, 
creating in a godly manner, a straight passage for souls.  
Having attained the pure and blameless life of monastics, O all-honored one, thou 
wast revealed to be the adornment of solitaries.  
Thou didst strip thyself of the mortality of destructive passions, and by thy pious 
life stripped the enemy naked.  
Theotokion: The Creator united Himself to flesh in thy womb, O most pure one; 
and, abiding there, He became a man, that He might give mankind that which is 
good.  
Kontakion to the venerable Matrona, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having received grace ...”:  
For love of the Lord, O venerable Matrona, * thou didst ignore thy desire for rest, 
* illumining thy spirit with fasting; * by thy supplications cast down the arrogance of 
the adversaries, ** for mightily didst thou vanquish the wild beasts.  
Ikos: O my God, grant me a stream of discourse, making my mind a wellspring of 
reverent order, and blessing my tongue, that I may hymn the ewe-lamb whom Thou 
hast crowned with Thy goodness; for if Thou dost not grant me fitting words, how 
would I be able to offer even a meager gift unto her who is rich in both words and 
deeds? Wherefore, grant me the power to confess her contest, for mightily did she 
vanquish the wild beasts.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Consumed with the fire of divine desire, ye were in no wise scorched by the touch 
of material fire, O blessed ones, burning up deception, and mercilessly stretched out, 
O passion-bearers, ye received an ever-memorable end, obtaining glory.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn to the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded ...”: 
O mother, elect of God, thou didst pass through the tempest of life without 
foundering, guided to the harbor of life, where thou dost hymn the Redeemer and 
prayest unceasingly on our behalf, that Christ grant us grace and mercy; and thou 
preservest the flock which thou didst gather together with effort.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
O thou who hast given birth to the immutable God, * by thy maternal 
supplications * make steadfast my heart which is ever-changing due to sin, * 
slothfulness and the attacks of the deceiver; * that in thanksgiving I also may glorify 
thee O good one. * O all-immaculate Mary, Birthgiver of God, * have mercy on the 
flock ** which thou hast acquired.  
Stavrotheotokion: Ever protected by the Cross of thy Son and God, O Virgin, we 
vanquish the assaults and wiles of the demons, hymning thee who art truly the 
Theotokos; and all generations bless thee with love, O most pure one, as thou didst 
foretell. Wherefore, by thy supplications grant us forgiveness of sins.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: For the sake of love for Thine image, * O compassionate One, * Thou 
didst ascend the cross * and the nations melted away. * For Thou, O Lover of 
mankind, * art my strength and my praise. 
Radiant with the effulgence of thy pangs, O blessed martyr Onesiphorus, with love 
thou didst draw the blessed Porphyrius to suffer with thee.  
Laying them on a fiery gridiron, the tormentors bound together the warriors of 
Christ, who rejoiced and burned in spirit.  
Rejoicing, O passion-bearers, ye offered yourselves to the Master of all as a perfect 
immolation and a pure sacrifice; wherefore, ye are blessed.  
Deceitful discourses were in no wise able to deceive thee who wast knowingly 
inclined toward the Master, O most divinely wise and noetically rich martyr 
Porphyrius.  
Theotokion: O Maiden, thou hast given birth to God the Word incarnate, Whose 
good pleasure it was to become like us all in the loving-kindness of His mercy, O all-
immaculate Lady.  
Canon to the Venerable One  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
 Having watered thy heart with the drops of thy tears, O Matrona, with the grace 
of God thou didst cultivate the grain which beareth the fruit of the virtues an 
hundredfold.  
Setting the contemplative steps of thy thought towards Christ, O right glorious 
one, thou didst remain unblemished by the temptations of the wicked demons.  
Having left behind thy husband and the tumults of life in thy valorous wisdom, 
thou didst love the yoke of Christ, following in His steps.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Without departing from the heavens, O most pure one, God poured 
Himself forth into thy womb, and the Infinite One became finite, loosing the 
boundless transgressions of the world.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
O immoveable pillars of the Church of Christ, through the might of the Spirit ye 
were shown to be unaltered by the leverage of tortures.  
Ye shattered the idols of abominable gods and were shown to be models of piety 
and manliness, O honorable great martyrs.  
Having through faith forsaken transient might, ye were girt about by God with a 
the skill of a true warrior, and rejoicing, ye suffered.  
Theotokion: The Infinite One, limiting Himself, made His abode within thee, O 
Virgin, and showed thee to be more spacious than the heavens. Wherefore, we call 
thee blessed.  
Canon to the Venerable One  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Having been vested in the holy habit, O Matrona, thou didst clothe the malevolent 
enemy in a vesture of shame.  
Thou didst trade transitory things for those of the future, and a husband for the 
immortal Bridegroom, Who leadeth our souls to God.  
Offering up night-long praise to the Master, O Matrona, thou didst lull to sleep the 
pleasures of the flesh.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth unto the Master of the quick and the dead, O 
all-immaculate one. Slay thou the passions of my heart.  
ODE VI  
 Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 
The pangs of wounds didst thou endure, O martyr Onesiphorus; and having 
finished the contest and emerged a victor, thou hast received heavenly honors.  
Bound to one another by love, and bound and led forth together, united to the 
Lord, as mighty spiritual athletes ye achieved separation from your bodies.  
Bound to horses and forcibly dragged thereby to the most cruel of torments at the 
command of the judge, ye were deemed worthy of a blessed end, O right glorious 
martyrs of the Lord.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: In a manner transcending the laws of nature, O Virgin, thou hast 
given birth to the Bestower of the Law, Who renewed our damaged nature. Him do 
thou entreat, that He save me who am crushed by sins.  
Canon to the Venerable One  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Like a melodious bird sweetly lifting up its voice in the meadows of fasting, thou 
didst attract an assemblage of most sacred women, as though noetic sparrows, 
escaping the net of the enemy with the aid of the Spirit, O Matrona.  
Restraining the flesh through love of wisdom, reining in the passions, splendidly 
adorning thy soul as a most comely adornment for Christ, thou art known to be 
beauteous and magnificent in the Spirit, O Matrona.  
Thou didst love the angelic life while on earth, unceasingly, hymning Him Who for 
our sake became incarnate from the holy Virgin in the magnitude of His goodness 
and Who strengthened thy feminine nature against the wicked foe.  
Theotokion: Human nature was enslaved to sin; but thou hast delivered it from 
evil bondage, O Theotokos, giving birth to the Master of all, Who hath shown us the 
ways of entering into life, O all-immaculate one.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the Highest ...”:  
Having suffered mightily, the two martyrs * cast the arrogance of the enemy down 
to the ground, * being illumined by the grace of the uncreated Trinity, * O glorious 
Onesiphorus and Porphyrius. ** Pray ye unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
Ikos: Made steadfast by divine might, the warriors of Christ were able to set at 
naught the counsels and devices of the enemy; bound together to wild horses and 
suffering in accordance with the law, they beseech God for us, that we receive the 
remission of debts, freedom from the trials to come, and deliverance from evils. 
Wherefore, we ever praise them, as great favorites of God who pray unceasingly on 
behalf of us all.  
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Manifesting the noble traits of thy most noble soul, thou didst confess the 
incarnate God before thy tyrant, O Onesiphorus.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Enamored of the everlasting freedom of God, as a right obedient slave thou didst 
share in thy master's suffering, and dost now join chorus with Him, O all-blessed 
Porphyrius.  
Having extinguished the burning flame of godlessness by the drops of your divine 
blood, O all-praised ones, ye cried aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
That ye might receive blessed and immortal glory, ye suffered a blessed death, O 
divinely radiant stars of the noetic Sun.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth unto the Word Who became incarnate from 
thy blood, and Whose good pleasure it hath been to deify those who chant on earth: 
O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon to the Venerable One  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages'.  
Like a most comely turtledove, thou didst protect the fruitfulness of chastity from 
the barrenness of the passions for God's sake, O blessed one, having truly deified 
those saved by thee.  
Having left behind the world and all things in it, through hope in God thou hast 
now inherited a heavenly inheritance, O honored Matrona, who art truly the 
adornment of solitaries.  
Theotokion: He Who lifted the curse of Eve made His abode in the all-immaculate 
Virgin, pouring forth a fountain of blessings upon those who cry aloud: Blessed is the 
Fruit of thy womb, O most pure one!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: He Who was nailed to the Cross in the flesh, * hath shown it to be a 
weapon for our salvation, * O ye children, supremely exalt Christ our God 
throughout the ages.  
Giving your members over to rending, ye rent asunder the insensitive heart of the 
enemy, remaining unshaken in mind, O greatly renowned and crowned ones.  
The fire of ignorance was extinguished by your blood, O sufferers, and ye have 
watered the hearts and souls of all the faithful with the restoration of the knowledge 
of God.  
By the guidance of Christ ye passed through the waves of cruel torments, and in 
incorruption ye found shelter in the harbor of God's heavenly kingdom.  
The martyrs were clearly revealed to be embers burning with the fire of the Para-
clete, whereby they burned up the deceit of the enemy and illumined the whole world.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Theotokion: The Word of God found thee to be a choice flower in the vales of 
life, and He desired thy beauty and, becoming incarnate, perfumed the whole world.  
Canon to the Venerable One  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Having adorned thy soul with qualities of piety, O pure Matrona, by the divine 
Spirit thou didst lead to God a choir of virgins, who chant aloud: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Through divine grace the torrents of thy sweat dried up the turbid torrents of the 
passions, ever watering the hearts of those who approach thee with faith. Wherefore, 
we honor thee throughout all ages.  
Having arrayed thyself in the armor of faith and abstinence, thou wast not 
wounded by the arrows of pleasure, abiding, though thou didst, among men; and him 
who of old wounded Eve didst thou wound with the spear of chastity, O blessed 
Matrona.  
Theotokion: Behold, as Isaiah saith in the Spirit, a Virgin shall conceive in her 
womb Him Who delivereth from the belly of Hades those who piously cry aloud: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
The adamantine diamonds and pillars of the Faith, strengthened by the might of 
Christ, were able to battle with the bodiless foe while yet in the flesh, and now they 
rejoice in the heavens with those who suffered from of old.  
Like a noetic sacred chariot of the Word, ye were bound to irrational beasts, O 
divine martyrs, and, rejoicing, ye attained unto the refuge of heaven and received 
crowns of honor. Wherefore, ye are fittingly blessed.  
The glorious city of Pankeanon now holdeth your bodies, O divine martyrs, and is 
enriched by you, its helpers and physicians, who ever heal the infirmities of the souls 
and bodies of those who approach with faith.  
O ye divine and splendid pair, ever-glorious passion-bearer Porphyrius and right 
wise Onesiphorus: Entreat the most holy Trinity, that peace and deliverance from 
evils be granted to our souls.  
Theotokion: Having clothed Himself wholly in me, O all-immaculate one, the 
Master issued forth from thy divine womb like a Bridegroom; and He, Who 
sustaineth all creation by His command, is fed with milk, O blessed ever-Virgin.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Canon to the Venerable One  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God's ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin's womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
As a divine dove, O glorious Matrona, thou hast flown aloft on golden wings of 
virtue, and dost now abide with the choirs of the venerable, and the ranks of the 
righteous, amid eternal gladness and ineffable joy.  
Loving the Sun of righteousness, Who, in the loving-kindness of His compassion, 
shone forth from a woman, O pure one, thou didst easily traverse the hot and 
difficult path of fasting, burning the demons and withering the passions of the flesh.  
Thy divine memorial hath shone forth upon us more brightly than the sun, 
illumining our hearts and minds; thereon be thou mindful of us who celebrate it 
faithfully, O glorious Matrona, as one who truly hast boldness before God.  
Theotokion: O Maiden, who didst hold in thine arms Him Who beareth all things 
by divine command; by thy mediation deliver me from the hands of the alien, illumine 
my mind with thy light, and dispel the passions which persistently war against me.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Let us honor the glorious martyrs Onesiphorus and Porphyrius, who shone forth 
in their sufferings, enlightening the ends of the world with the splendors of 
martyrdom, for they pray for us who celebrate their memory with love.  
Glory ..., of the venerable one:  
Dwelling amongst men, O ever-glorious Matrona, thou didst receive the monastic 
habit. O strange wonder! How, O venerable one, didst thou hide from the tyrant, 
who doth ever persistently spread bitterness? By fasting, prayer and unceasing vigils 
thou didst crush his head.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, palace of God! Rejoice, mountain overshadowed! Rejoice, bush unburnt! 
Rejoice, throne of glory! Rejoice, divine table! Rejoice, golden jar! Rejoice, most 
splendid candlestick! Rejoice, O Mary, Virgin Mother, thou light cloud!  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O mother, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, 
thou didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable Matrona.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
For love of the Lord, O venerable Matrona, * thou didst ignore thy desire for rest, 
* illumining thy spirit with fasting; * by thy supplications cast down the arrogance of 
the adversaries, ** for mightily didst thou vanquish the wild beasts.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
Having suffered mightily, the two martyrs * cast the arrogance of the enemy down 
to the ground, * being illumined by the grace of the uncreated Trinity, * O glorious 
Onesiphorus and Porphyrius. ** Pray ye unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
