--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 4th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER JOANNICIUS THE GREAT  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR NICANDER, BISHOP OF MYRA; 
& OF HERMAS THE PRIEST  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
O thou who wast illumined * with divine light, * when, with purity of mind, thou 
didst lift up thine eyes * and preferring eternal things to come * to those which are 
inconstant, * didst then receive fire in thy heart, O father, * and like a deer thirsting 
for divine love; * unmindful of flesh and blood, * didst prepare thyself for the 
struggles of asceticism, * by which thou didst make the passions of thy body ** 
subject to thy soul.  
To ascend the mountains of God * thou didst make thy dwelling in the heights, * 
without being brought low by the needs * of this lowly body, O father Joannicius; * 
for, uniting thyself to the Good One * by standing whole nights and days in prayer, * 
thou wast illumined and received the gift of prophecy, * to behold things afar off as 
though they were near, * and to foretell to the faithful things which are to come. * 
Wherefore, we glorify thee ** as a divine teacher.  
Mightily staunching * the assaults and darts of the demons * by thy prayers, and 
the power of God, O right glorious one, * thou didst triumph over them. * 
Wherefore, refreshed by the humility of thy heart, * the Good One granted thee * 
miracles as honors. * For which cause, thy precious relics * pour forth fragrant myrrh, 
* for thou hast been revealed * to be the sweet fragrance of Christ, ** O father 
Joannicius.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Receiving a name befitting thee * through divine providence, O father, * thou 
didst confirm it with signs; * for in thine endurance * thou didst vanquish multitudes 
of adversaries * and the assembly of torturers. * Wherefore, receiving a crown of 
victory, thou didst cry out with faith: * Glory to Thine invincible might, ** O Lover 
of mankind!  
On this, thy divine memorial, * thou pourest forth * the most fragrant myrrh of 
healings upon us today, * O wise Nicander; * driving away the darkness of sorrows 
and bodily sufferings, * and filling with rich grace the assembly of all * who cry out to 
Christ: * Thou art the inexhaustible myrrh perfuming all ** who hymn Thee!  
As thou hast boldness before Christ, * Who alone is glorious in His saints, * 
entreat Him, O venerable Nicander, * on behalf of all who with love * celebrate thy 
memory * and praise thy corrections, * that through grace * we may become par-
takers of His ineffable good things ** and incorruptible glory.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; 
wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, having destroyed 
hordes of demons and attaining unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst 
blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask peace for our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth birth to 
Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son How is it 
that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
We honor thee as the instructor of a multitude of monks, O Joannicius our father; 
for through thy steps we have truly recognized how to walk aright. Blessed art thou 
who, laboring for Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O converser with 
the angels, companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them pray thou to the 
Lord, that our souls find mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician * and healer of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, * and with sighs 
from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, * 
becoming a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. ** O Joannicius 
our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Nicander O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos; and two canons for the saints, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: “I praise thee, the emulator of 
the Forerunner”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
Illumined by the light of grace, O venerable Joannicius, enlighten those who with 
faith celebrate thy memory, and by thy supplications deliver them from the darkness 
of sin.  
Without turning back thou didst tread the path which leads to the heavenly city, O 
Joannicius, for the Holy Spirit guided thee, resting in thy heart.  
Thou wast possessed of exalted humility, O Joannicius; wherefore, we entreat thee: 
Take pity on our lowliness, O venerable one, and ease all the pangs of our hearts.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, as thou art the restoration of the fallen and 
strengthening of those who stand fast, I entreat thee: Set aright my mind, which hath 
fallen through sin, that I may glorify thee, O Sovereign Lady.  
Canon of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: The people of Israel passed dry-shod across the watery deep of the Red 
Sea * and beholding the riders and captains of the enemy * swallowed by the 
waters, they cried out for joy: * ‘Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been 
glorified.’ 
The most sacred Church of Christ is now adorned with hymns, celebrating in a 
sacred manner with spiritual odes, the honored feast of the spiritual athletes and 
hieromartyrs today, rendering them tribute.  
Anointed with the precious oil of the priesthood, O hierarch Nicander, by faith 
thou didst render it yet more precious with the dye of thy blood, crying out in joy: Let 
us chant to our God, for He hath been glorified!  
Running the course of martyrdom and manifestly showing true gladness, ye were 
enriched with the grace of miracles and heavenly gifts, crying out together, O martyrs: 
Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been glorified!  
Theotokion: Christ, Who is uncircumscribable in the bosom of the Father hath 
been circumscribed in the flesh in the womb of His Mother, preserving her a true 
Virgin even after giving birth in a manner past understanding. To Him let us cry 
aloud: Let us chant to our God, for He hath been glorified!  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Thou didst exchange transitory things for things which last, consciously taking up 
thy cross, O Joannicius, and ascending un-scalable mountains like the great Elijah, 
and remaining there.  
The path which thou didst greatly desire was shown thee by two of the fathers, 
whom thou didst find hiding in the mountains for many years, O blessed one who 
wast illumined with the gift of prophecy.  
Beset by divers passions, we flee with faith to thy protection, O Joannicius: By thy 
holy mediation visit us all, entreating the Lover of mankind.  
Theotokion: With the sprinkling of thy mercy, O divinely joyous Virgin, extinguish 
the burning embers of my passions, and having quenched them, light the lamp of my 
heart, O all-immaculate one, thou golden lampstand.  
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: Likened to a barren woman * the Church from among the nations hath 
given birth, * and the assembly abundant in children, hath grown weak. * Let 
us cry out to our wondrous God: * Holy art Thou, O Lord!  
Spreading out noetic nets, by working miracles thou didst catch those who dwelt 
in delusion, bringing them as a great offering to Him Who shone forth from the 
Virgin, O Nicander.  
Thou wast a most fruitful branch of the plant of Titus, the enlightener of Crete, O 
blessed Nicander, bearing noetic grapes which exude for us the sweetness of 
salvation.  
With the godly Hermas ye cultivated stony hardened hearts with the plough of the 
Cross, O wise ones, and revealed them to be fertile through grace. Wherefore, ye are 
blessed.  
Theotokion: Even a heavenly intelligence is unable to describe thy birthgiving, 
which passeth understanding, O Maiden; for thou didst conceive in thy womb the 
primal Mind Who hath formed all things by His word.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Having washed away the darkness of the passions and truly received the light of 
the commandments of Christ, thou didst shine forth in fasting; and having mortified 
the body, thou didst live in the Spirit, trampling underfoot the snares of the enemy, O 
blessed one. Wherefore, through the grace of the Spirit thou hast become a 
companion of the angels on high. O Joannicius our father, entreat Christ God, that 
He grant remission of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Truly illumined with the divine anointing of the true hierarchy and with the truly 
sacred blood of martyrdom, O glorious ones, ye have joined the ranks of the 
incorporeal angels, rejoicing. Wherefore, we celebrate your honored memory, praying 
that, by your supplications, O saints, cleansing may be granted to all.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
exceedingly glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
Stavrotheotokion: O most immaculate Virgin Mother of God, a sword passed 
through thy most holy soul when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of His 
own will. Cease not to beseech Him, O blessed one, that He grant us forgiveness of 
our transgressions.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Reaching the loftiest of mountains, thou didst bring low the upraised heads of the 
demons by thy humility, O wise one, contending manfully against them, O thou glory 
and confirmation of monastics.  
Armed with the fear of Christ as with a two-edged sword, thou didst noetically and 
rationally bring low the apostate serpent, O blessed one, glorified by sacred victories.  
Wholly enkindled by the divine Spirit, O father, thou didst endure the cold, 
dwelling in the wilderness for many years, seeking the Lord, Who kept thee warm by 
divine grace.  
Theotokion: With faith I fall down and entreat thee, the cleansing of all mortals: 
Render thy Son the Judge merciful to me, that I may glorify thee as is meet.  
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Ye showed yourselves to be chariots of the Word, bearing Him noetically; 
wherefore, bound to horses and cruelly dragged by them, ye did not deny Him, nor 
were ye vanquished thereby, manifestly drawn to the path of heaven.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Cast into prisons and weighed down with chains, ye saved the city and its people 
from the bonds of delusion, having been bound with the bond of love for Him Who 
was bound in the flesh for our sake, O all-blessed ones.  
Imprisoned, the all-glorious ones glorified the Master with the angels, and were 
given heavenly bread to eat. Wherefore, they paid no heed to the pangs of the flesh, 
since they were mightier than wounds.  
Theotokion: He Who is awesomely seated upon a lofty throne, having become a 
babe doth sit in His Mother’s arms, restoring His fallen image and granting deification 
to the descendents of Adam.  
ODE V  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
O venerable one, thou didst tread the narrow and difficult path with heartfelt 
divine ascents, clearly enriched through visions and deified by adoption. Wherefore, 
thou hast become the confirmation and adornment of monastics.  
The grace of prophecy, which cleanseth the eye of the mind, was granted thee, 
whereby thou didst behold the things of the future as though they were present, and 
things afar off as though they were near, O venerable Joannicius, thou abode of God. 
Deliver me from the pangs of sins and sorrows, ease the pain of my heart, and 
grant me remission of my falls into sin, for thou hast God our Benefactor hearkening 
to thine honored supplications.  
Theotokion: Heal thou the defections of my heart, O all-immaculate one, cure 
thou the passions of my soul and drive away the darkness of despondency that I may 
praise thee in hymnody, O ever-blessed and all-hymned Theotokos.  
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: Send down upon us Thine enlightenment, O Lord, and free us from the 
darkness of transgressions, granting us Thy peace, O Good One.  
Thou didst lead the people into the enlightenment of the Faith, O Nicander, and, 
having forsaken the darkness of the madness of idolatry, they became children of the 
light through Thy mediations.  
Shining with the enlightening rays of the Spirit, ye passed through the night of 
tortures, dispersing the darkness of ungodliness, O glorious luminaries.  
Titus, full of the waters of Paul, gave thee to drink thereof, showing thee to be a 
river inundating the swollen streams of ungodliness, O Nicander.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: O Virgin who hast given birth to the Lamb and Lord in the flesh, O 
only undefiled tabernacle, divine ark, precious lampstand: Illumine thou my soul.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Causing the passions of the body to wither away, thou wast seen to be a tree of 
lofty stature bearing wondrous fruits and precious corrections in a most sacred 
manner, O divinely blessed one.  
Through the appearance of the martyr Eustathius the Lord cured thee who wast in 
peril of death, having been given a most deadly poison to drink by the hand of an 
unrighteous man, O all-blessed one.  
Though infirm of body, O Joannicius, thou didst undergo myriads of pangs; 
wherefore, I cry to thee with faith: Ease thou the pain of my heart.  
Theotokion: O only help of all, help us who are in peril: extend thou thy hand 
unto us, and lead us to the havens of salvation, O Maiden full of the grace of God.  
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
The bodies of the martyrs, pierced with nails, were revealed to emulate the 
sufferings of the Savior Who was nailed to the Cross and thereby saved the world 
from corruption.  
By the guidance of the holy and omnipotent Spirit, O martyrs, ye passed over the 
abyss of torments and, full of glory, reached the divine harbor.  
O ever-memorable hierarch Nicander, true to thy name thou didst vanquish all the 
opposition of the slayers of mankind, and, standing before God, hast received crowns 
of glory.  
Theotokion: O Maiden, thou didst destroy the reproach of our first mother, 
having given birth in the flesh to Him Who hath crowned us with blessings, 
transforming her sorrow into true joy.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To the chosen ...”:  
Thou wast revealed to be a most radiant star, * shining forth in the world and 
bringing light to those in the gloom of the passions, * showing thyself to be a most 
mighty physician. * But as thou hast received the grace of healing, grant healing unto 
those who ask it of thee, ** that we may chant: Rejoice, O father Joannicius!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Ikos: O wondrous father Joannicius, thou hast been revealed to be another 
physician and intercessor for those held fast by sickness and sorrows, healing all who 
flee beneath thy divine protection with faith. Wherefore, hearken unto us who chant 
to thee: Rejoice, O scion of the root of a good father! Rejoice, O goodly offspring of 
thy mother! Rejoice, thou who didst set aside their love! Rejoice, thou Who didst 
accept God alone! Rejoice, for thou didst leave an earthly army! Rejoice, for thou 
didst cast down the pride of the barbarians! Rejoice, O thou Who wast a rampart and 
protector for kings! Rejoice, thou who wast revealed as a weapon and tower of 
defense for the world! Rejoice, thou who dost bring to naught the battles of the 
heathen! Rejoice, O beacon resplendent with miracles! Rejoice, thou who dost clothe 
the naked! Rejoice, deliverer of captives! Rejoice, O father Joannicius!  
ODE VII  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Thou didst make thy heart a dwelling-place of the Trinity, and having built three 
churches, O Joannicius, by divine grace thou dost pour forth myrrh therein, unto the 
enlightenment and purification of those who approach thee with faith.  
Thy soul, ever illumined by the effulgence of the divine Spirit and rendered 
wondrous by prophetic foreknowledge in a most sacred manner, O blessed one, 
foresaw the thoughts of those souls who approached thee with faith.  
By thy holy supplications, O blessed one, do thou quickly deliver me from 
afflictions of both soul and body which ever beset me, and cause me to chant: O all-
hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O divinely joyous one who alone hast given birth to the immutable 
Lord, O pure one, pray thou, that by His right hand He turn toward higher things my 
mind, which hath been sorely crippled by the griefs of life.  
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Having stained thy sacred vesture in the dye of thy blood, O blessed Nicander, 
thou didst render it resplendent, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Drawing nigh to the fire with unwavering love for the Creator, O blessed ones, ye 
were not consumed, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having, through the all-accomplishing Spirit, transformed into dew the flame of 
the furnace prepared for your torture, ye cried aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: O pure Virgin, ineffably thou hast given birth to the incarnate Word 
Who hath delivere from death those who cry: O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Standing high upon a mountain, like a lamp set upon a lampstand, O venerable 
one, thou didst illumine the thoughts of all with faith, pointing out most excellently 
the path of life by word and deed, and leading them to the summit of dispassion by 
thy divine discourse.  
Thou didst converse with the Lord Almighty, Who cleansed thy mind by 
dispassion, O venerable one; and, taught ineffable things by Him, thou didst give 
utterance beforehand in prophecy, illumining men’s souls, O all-blessed one, in that 
thou art greater than the prophets; wherefore, we, the faithful, praise thee together.  
Grievous wounds have afflicted me and divers infirmities vex me. Deliver me from 
them, I pray thee, O father Joannicius, in that thou hast received from God the grace 
to heal the sufferings and to ease the pain of the faithful.  
Triadicon: Hymning the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the indivisible 
Trinity, the uncreated Godhead, the one Dominion, Power and Kingdom, with all the 
hosts on high let us cry out in joy: Holy, Holy, Holy!  
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to be more exalted than the angels, having 
ineffably given flesh unto God. Him do thou entreat, O all-immaculate Lady, that by 
the exaltation of humility I may become in mind above the carnal passions and may 
hymn thy great grace.  
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, descending into the midst of the flame for 
the pious ones, Thou didst bedew them and teach them to chant: O all ye 
works, hymn and bless the Lord!  
O Nicander, thou wast an honorable hierarch who entered into the temple on high 
with thine own blood, not that of another, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord!  
Praising the priests of the Lord at the tribunal, and adorned with the blood of 
martyrdom, the glorious Hermas cried aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Having performed holy rites before in a sacred manner, ye showed yourselves to 
be honorable sacrifices and offered yourselves to the Lord as a fragrance of sweet 
savor, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: O Virgin, having given birth to the Redeemer and Lord, the Abyss of 
compassion, dry up the abyss of mine evils, for to Him do we cry: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Thou wast strengthened when God made thy mind steadfast to restrain the 
passions, O father, and thus thou didst become an angel in the flesh and livest forever 
with the angels in the heavens, standing before the throne of glory, filled with never-
waning light.  
Thou didst make thine abode amid the mountains and caves as if in heaven, O 
venerable Joannicius; therefore, having subdued the passions of thy soul which are 
subjugated only with difficulty, the wild beasts became tame before thee, for thou 
didst become truly righteous. Wherefore, we honor thee with faith.  
Lying in the tomb, thy sacred and holy relics ever drown infirmities and bum up 
hordes of the demons through the grace of God, O wise Joannicius, ever pouring 
forth healings upon all who bless thee with faith.  
Drawing nigh unto Christ with greater clarity and purity, O Joannicius, be thou 
mindful of those who commemorate thee with faith, asking that we be forgiven our 
sins, delivered from all sickness, and granted an inheritance in the kingdom of heaven.  
Theotokion: O pure one who hast given birth to the Light, illumine the eyes of my 
soul, lest the most heavy darkness of sin come upon me and the depths of despair 
engulf me. Save me and guide me to the safe haven of the will of God.  
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Patiently enduring dismemberment and burning with torches while upon the tree, 
O wise martyr Nicander, thou didst receive the dew of heaven from the hand of an 
angel, and by thy life-bearing supplications showed others to be consumed by fire.  
Stripped naked, ye were seen to be a most awesome sight; and, bound to irrational 
beasts, and dragged over the ground by them repeatedly, O spiritual athletes, ye were 
shown to remain whole; and though put into the fire, ye were not consumed, 
preserved by the divine Spirit.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Today the sacred metropolitanate of Myra doth celebrate out loud, summoning 
every city to participate in gladness O all-praised ones, on your memorial, whereon ye 
completed your sacred suffering.  
Heaven was opened to you, the angels clapped their hands at your ascent, the 
ranks of the venerable and the righteous rejoiced, and the martyrs leapt for joy. 
Dwelling with them, O saints, be ye mindful of those who commemorate you.  
Theotokion: With thy light, O all-immaculate one who hast given birth to the 
unapproachable Light, illumine me; drive the clouds from my soul; rescue me from 
darkness, I pray, and grant unto me divine salvation, O only most pure Ever-virgin.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
The grace of God abounded in the soul of thee who lived like one of the 
incorporeal ones, O wise Joannicius; wherefore, deliver those who honor thee from 
the dark clouds of the passions, leading them to the calm harbor and repelling the 
hordes of the demons.  
Theotokion: Through thee the pre-eternal Son hath truly wrought great things, by 
the counsel of the Father; for without pain thou hast given birth to Life incorruptible; 
and, avoiding the pangs of maternity, even after giving birth remained as thou wast 
before childbirth, a virgin.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos. 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Having preserved the image of God intact, and by fasting set thy mind above the 
pernicious passions, thou didst mightily ascend to the Master in accordance with His 
likeness; for, manfully constraining thy nature, thou didst strive to subject that which 
is worse to that which is better, and to enslave the flesh to the spirit. Wherefore, thou 
hast been revealed as a summit of monastics, a desert-dweller, an instructor of those 
who run the good race, a most renowned model of the virtues. And now in the 
heavens thou dost clearly behold the Holy Trinity, reflections having been abolished, 
O Joannicius our father, ever hastening to pray for those who honor thee with faith 
and love.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: A sword pierced thy heart, * O most pure Lady, * as Symeon 
said, * when thou didst behold Him Who shone forth from thee ineffably, * 
condemned by the iniquitous * and lifted up upon the Cross, * tasting vinegar and 
gall, * His side pierced, * His hands and feet run through with nails; * and, lamenting, 
thou didst exclaim, crying out maternally: * “What is this new mystery, * O my Child 
most sweet?” 

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, * and with sighs 
from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, * 
becoming a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. ** O Joannicius 
our father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received an imperishable crown from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Thou wast revealed to be a most radiant star, * shining forth in the world and 
bringing light to those in the gloom of the passions, * showing thyself to be a most 
mighty physician. * But as thou hast received the grace of healing, grant healing unto 
those who ask it of thee, ** that we may chant: Rejoice, O father Joannicius!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
 
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, §213(GAL. 5: 22-6: 2)  
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections-.and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth. 
  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §10(MT. 4: 25-5: 12)  
At that time, there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, and 
from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond Jordan. And 

--- PAGE 13 ---
seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was set, his disciples 
came unto him: and he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, Blessed are the 
poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for 
they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed 
are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. 
Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for 
they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children 
of God. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is 
the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, 
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be 
exceedingly glad: for great is your reward in heaven. 
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
