--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 3rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS ACEPSIMUS THE BISHOP, JOSEPH 
THE PRIEST AND AITHALAS THE DOCTOR  
COMMEMORATION OF THE CONSECRATION OF THE CHURCH OF THE GREAT 
MARTYR GEORGE IN LYDDA 
 AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! * the comely Acepsimus, minister to the martyrs, * is 
crowned today with a wreath of hymns. * He setteth before us the suffering * to 
which he was subjected for his worship of God, * and thereby wounded the 
incorporeal foe. * O, what liberal gifts of grace he hath received! * through his prayers 
save Thou our souls, O Christ, ** in that Thou art compassionate.  
O most glorious wonder! * Joseph hath shone forth as a star from Persia. * 
Destroying the abomination of sorcery * by the Spirit, * he hath extinguished the 
impious worship of fire * with the streams of his blood. * O, the strength wherewith 
he cast down the demons! * Through his prayers, O Christ, save Thou our souls, ** in 
that Thou art compassionate.  
O most glorious wonder! * The steadfast Aithalas, * the namesake of a champion 
of suffering, * is shown to be an ever-blossoming garden, * which, cut down, doth 
bloom with wounds, * and when slain doth but begin to live. * O, the strength of 
nature which he endured! * Through his prayers, O Christ, save Thou our souls, ** in 
that Thou art compassionate.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
O passion-bearer George, * converser with the angels, * dweller with the martyrs, 
* who art ever the refuge of the sorrowful: * Be thou a haven of tranquility! * 
Preserve me as I sail upon the sea of life, * and pilot my life, I implore thee, * that 
with unwavering faith ** I may bless thy supra-natural struggles.  
As I sleep at night; * and when I am awake * illumine my mind, O George, * and 
instruct me to do the will of the Lord, * that on the day of Judgment * I may find 
remission of the sins * I have committed in my life, * by fleeing to thy protection, ** 
O glorious one.  
Arrayed in the breastplate of faith, * armed with the shield of grace * and the spear 
of the Cross, * thou wast invincible to the adversary, O George. * And as a divine 
warrior, * having conquered legions of demons, * thou dost hold chorus with the 
angels, * and, entreated by the faithful, ** thou dost sanctify and save them, 
preserving them.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Thou didst live in accordance with the meaning of thy name, as is meet, O warrior 
George; for, taking the Cross of Christ upon thy shoulders, thou didst work well the 
ground which had been made barren by the deceit of the devil, and, having uprooted 
the thorns of idolatrous worship, thou didst plant the vine of the Orthodox Faith. 
Wherefore, thou dost pour forth healings upon the faithful throughout all the world, 
and hast been shown to be a righteous laborer of the Trinity. Pray thou, we entreat 
thee, for peace for the world and the salvation of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding our Life suspended upon the Tree, * the all-
immaculate Theotokos cried aloud, * maternally lamenting: ** O my Son and my 
God, save those who with love hymn Thee!  
On the Aposticha: Glory ..., of the holy martyrs, in Tone VI: 
The composition of Ephraim of Karyes: The three children who were preserved 
unconsumed by the fire in Persia aforetime, were mystically a foreshadowing of your 
thrice-radiant oneness of mind and your martyrdom in Christ, O ye spiritual athletes 
of the ineffable Trinity and the super-essential Unity; for as they stood up against the 
flame and did not rail against God, so did ye also accept death when your lives were 
not spared by those who hate Christ. For just as in their midst there appeared a 
Fourth Who bedewed them, so also Christ, Who is one of the Trinity, hath received 
you into a place of coolness. O Acepsimus, Joseph and Aithalas, elect of God, pray ye 
for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth birth to 
Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son How is it 
that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Glory ..., of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV: 
O great martyr George, * thou liberator of captives, * defender of the poor, * and 
physician for the afflicted, ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; the canon to 
the holy martyrs, with 4 Troparia, in Tone IV; and that of the holy great-martyr, with 
4 Troparia, also in Tone IV.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O most noetically rich ones, equal in number to the most holy Trinity, of Whom 
ye were revealed to be honorable worshipers, intercede before the throne of the 
Trinity on behalf of those who have recourse unto you, O fervent helpers.  
As worshipers of the three-sunned Trinity, O holy ones, ye destroyed the 
deception of polytheism, enduring divers torments and an unjust death, O ye blessed 
of God.  
Traversing the abyss of torments by faith, without being capsized, O blessed ones; 
ye came to the land of life without grief, anchoring in the harbor of heavenly radiance 
in ineffable glory.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate one, thou hast been revealed to be our mediatress 
of joy, in that thou didst receive within thyself the fullness of the Divinity. Wherefore, 
together we all call thee the joy of the angels, O thou divinely joyous one.  
Canon to the holy great-martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “O blessed one, I glorify thee, 
husbandman of God ...,” in Tone IV:  
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
Thou didst manifest the prosperous husbandry of God, O passion-bearer George, 
nurturing by thy pious example the faithful who in a sacred manner celebrate thy 
splendid memorial, fervently glorifying thee.  
Divine love truly inflamed thy heart, O passion-bearer, and, unbidden, thou didst 
proceed to torment, consuming the deception of polytheism with fire and illumining 
thy mind with rays of salvation.  
Confident as a lion, thou didst confront the tribunal, proclaiming the incarnation 
of Christ, by which the world hath been delivered from the ancient fall; and thou hast 
received the primal blessed fruit, O thrice-blessed George.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: Delivering us from our ancient condemnation, the Son of God 
became, as a man, the Son of the Virgin. Wherefore, with right believing hearts, we 
glorify Him in two natures and wills.  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Not in the learning of Hellenic vanity, O wise ones, but with divine knowledge did 
ye denounce the godlessness of the Persians, setting at naught their madness.  
Illumined With the divine anointing of the episcopate, O sacred Acepsimus, thou 
didst adorn thyself with the blood of martyrdom, O divinely blessed one.  
The crushing of thy limbs, O ever-memorable Joseph, hath utterly crushed the 
wiles of the deceiver and brought thee imperishable glory.  
Theotokion: Finding thee a most pure habitation, the Wisdom of God took flesh 
of thy blood, yet revealed thee as incorrupt even after thou hadst given birth.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have girded 
themselves with strength: * therefore is my heart established * in the Lord. 
Joyously renouncing the glories of lineage and homeland, thou didst follow after 
Christ, O martyr, and hast been shown to be a most comely citizen of the heavenly 
Zion.  
As thou didst reveal thyself to be a special heir and dutiful son of the living God, 
thou didst endure the tormentors’ waves of scourgings, O valiant martyr.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate one, He Who alone created mankind, clothing 
Himself in all of Adam, hath become a new Adam through thee, for the sake of His 
tender compassion.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
 
Thou didst celebrate the mysteries blamelessly, O wise one, * and wast thyself an 
acceptable sacrifice, O divinely blessed one; * for thou didst gloriously partake of the 
cup of Christ, * with thy fellow sufferers O holy Acepsimus, ** and prayest 
unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
Ikos: Who among the faithful can in any wise fittingly hymn the most wise 
hierarch Acepsimus, the beacon of Christ? For he hath destroyed the deception of 
idolatry and put the demons’ wiles to shame by the mighty power of Christ God, 
piously instructing us to worship the most holy Trinity and to honor the Father, the 
Son and the Holy Spirit in One Godhead; and he prayeth unceasingly on behalf of us 
all.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of wisdom ...”: 
Joseph, the valiant struggler, Acepsimus, the destroyer of deception, and Aithalas, 
the invincible and glorious sufferer, the radiant stars, are today truly praised by the 
faithful in hymns, as is meet. For they did not accept the falsehood of the Persians 
and did not sacrifice to the sun nor honor fire. To them let us cry out with love: 
Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who celebrate your 
holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., that of the holy great-martyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb ...”: 
Disdaining military service on earth, thou didst desire glory in the heavens, O 
martyr, enduring pain and a grievous death. Wherefore, celebrating thy holy memory 
today, we offer praise unto Christ, O thrice-blessed George.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE IV  
Canon to the Martyrs  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Disdaining that which is below and turning their gaze towards those things that are 
alone everlasting, the valiant Acepsimus and the glorious Joseph and Aithalas received 
dwelling places therein; wherefore they are praised.  
O mighty martyr Acepsimus, most wondrous passion-bearer of Christ, during thy 
suffering thou didst stretch forth thy thought unto Him Who alone is Master, and He 
lightened thine unbearable torments.  
Harvested like a fruitful vine, O passion-bearer Aithalas, thine honored 
martyrdom poureth forth the wine of compunction upon the faithful, who cry out in 
gladness: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!  
Theotokion: The holy Theotokos, in whom the Word of the Father, Who is co-
equal in divinity with Him, was well pleased to make His abode, did not lose her 
purity, nor was she wearied by the pangs of labor; for she gave birth to Emmanuel, 
God and man.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: For the sake of love for Thine image, * O compassionate One, * Thou 
didst ascend the cross * and the nations melted away. * For Thou, O Lover of 
mankind, * art my strength and my praise. 
O blessed one, thy body, slain by torture, represented the sufferings of the Word, 
Who was slain and Who hath given thee eternal life.  
Protected by the shield of truth, with thy mighty mind thou didst altogether 
destroy the false contenders, O divinely wise George.  
The Word, Who on earth put on our weakness, hath been glorified by thy 
members. Wherefore, we everlastingly glorify thee, O George.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, He Who hath given us existence, by becoming a 
man Himself, hath granted the acquisition of goodness unto those corrupted by the 
transgression.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Calling upon the great and precious name of the Lord, O Acepsimus, rejoicing, 
thou didst drain the saving cup of sufferings.  
The Most High, Who is our nourishment, hath received thee who wast summoned 
through wounds, O Joseph, as have the choirs of martyrs with whom ye now rejoice.  
O blessed Aithalas, thou hast truly been revealed to be an ever-flowering garden 
nourishing the ends of the earth with the fruits of thy struggles.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate one, within time thou didst give birth for us unto 
the timeless Light, the Radiance of the Father, becoming a wealth of goodness.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Having manfully entered upon the struggle of martyrdom, with thy broken body 
thou didst put an end to the audacity of idolatry, O passion-bearer.  
In His crown the Master hath set thee as a brilliant gem, thus illumining His 
Church, O passion-bearer.  
Slaughtered like a lamb, thou didst well represent the death of the good Chief 
Shepherd, offering thyself as an unblemished sacrifice at His exalted altar.  
Theotokion: O most pure Theotokos, from misfortunes, tribulations and the 
torments which are to come save us by thy prayers.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
 
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
When thy head was severed from thy body, O Acepsimus, by faith thou didst 
inseparably join thy soul to Christ, ever enlightened by rays of heavenly light.  
Slain by stoning like the protomartyr, thou didst not deny Christ, the living Stone, 
O martyr, but passed over to the radiant mansions of heaven.  
Beaten mercilessly with staves, thou didst rejoice, possessed of a staff of power, 
the Cross and boast of the Lord, O most noetically rich and divinely wise passion-
bearer Aithalas.  
Theotokion: The bush prefigured the great mystery of thy birthgiving, which 
surpasseth comprehension, for it was in no wise killed by the fire, nor consumed, O 
all-hymned Virgin.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 
Though the vessel of thy body hath been broken by sufferings, O martyr, thou 
hast manfully destroyed all the evil machinations of the enemy, O all-blessed George.  
Aflame with the love of God, thou didst in no wise fear the hot irons of the 
furnace or the blades and wheels which lacerated thy body, O martyr.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, thou wast a holy temple for Him Who resteth in 
the saints. Wherefore, sanctify us who faithfully hymn thee, O Ever-virgin.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”:  
Having recourse to thine elect and speedy aid, O spiritual athlete of Christ, * we, 
the faithful, pray that those who hymn thee may be delivered from the snares of the 
enemy * and from all tribulation and afflictions, that we may cry: ** Rejoice, O martyr 
George.  
Ikos: Thou art shown to be great among earth’s intercessors, O friend and favorite 
of the Lord; for, protected by thee, faithful people are ever saved, O glorious one. 
Wherefore, with faith and love we cry to thee, O much suffering one: Rejoice, thou 
by whom the world hath been enlightened! Rejoice, thou by whom the army hath 
been made splendid! Rejoice, deliverance of the faithful from captivity! Rejoice, ready 
aid of the imprisoned! Rejoice, summit of those who fervently have recourse to thee! 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Rejoice, enricher of those who love thee! Rejoice, for thou art the protection of all 
people! Rejoice, for thou grantest victory in battle! Rejoice, star which illumines those 
at sea! Rejoice, banisher of all misery! Rejoice, thou to whom all the faithful have 
recourse! Rejoice, thou by whom the Creator is praised! Rejoice, O martyr George!  
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
Receiving dew from God amid the fire of torment, ye set the adversaries afire with 
the flames of your patience, O passion-bearers, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
The worshipers of fire are shown to be its inheritors, for they tried to compel 
those who worship the Sun of glory to worship fire, but cried aloud: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Let Acepsimus, Joseph and Aithalas, the three beacons of the most honored 
Trinity, who illumined all the ends of the earth with rays of piety, be honored 
throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, Whom the hosts of heaven and 
assemblies on earth bless, and Who hath delivered us from the original curse, O 
blessed one.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: The three youths in Babylon, * regarded the tyrant’s command as 
foolishness, * and cried aloud in the midst of the flame: * Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God of our fathers!  
Thou wast a living sacrifice unto Him Who was sacrificed like a lamb for our sake; 
and, strengthened by Christ, thou didst set at naught sacrifices vainly offered to 
demons.  
Thou art shown to be a fruitful branch which doth bear for us the grapes of 
patience, producing the divine wine which maketh glad the hearts of all the pious.  
Thou didst zealously give thy members over to be cut off for Christ’s sake, and, 
gladdened, thou didst remain inseparable from His love, O most blessed one, and an 
heir to all blessings.  
Theotokion: All creation doth offer praise unto God, Who was born of thy most 
pure womb, O most immaculate maiden, and Who hath delivered us all from the 
ancient curse.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Having become abodes of the Word and, through the savagery of the tormentors, 
bearing the burden of His stripes as though already lifeless, ye set yourselves against 
the mindless ones, O valorous martyrs, being subjected to testing by many torments, 
yet supremely exalting Christ throughout the ages.  
O ever-memorable martyrs, mediators of everlasting glory, adorned, ye went 
joyously forth, and ye loved the path of His testimony, crying aloud: Hymn the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Neither fire, nor stripes, nor beasts, nor the sword, nor family, nor death could 
separate the martyrs from Thy love, O Lord, Thou Wellspring of blessings, pouring 
forth inexhaustible streams of love. Praising them, O Christ, we bless Thee 
throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: Praising the Theotokos, the Mother who alone knew not a man, who 
alone is the most exalted of all created beings, the most holy mountain, the golden 
altar, with hymns, we cry aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages. 
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, descending into the midst of the flame, 
Thou didst bedew the pious and didst teach them to chant: Bless and hymn 
the Lord, ye works!  
O George, thou hast been revealed to be a special helmsman of those who sail and 
a great helper amid tribulations, saving those who have recourse unto thee with faith 
and an unwavering heart.  
Thou hast been revealed to be a champion of truth and a denouncer of falsehood, 
and the confirmation of us who chant with faith, O passion-bearer: Bless the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord!  
With the shedding of thy blood thou didst extinguish the burning coals of 
delusion, O George, watering the hearts of the faithful who faithfully hymn and keep 
thy glorious memory.  
Theotokion: Thou didst spring forth from the root of Jesse, and uprooted the root 
of malice by putting forth the Fashioner of creation, O maiden. To Him do we chant: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Let us praise the beacons of piety and destroyers of deception, the fragrant 
blossoms of the rational paradise, the honored vessels, the beholders of God’s beauty.  
The glowing coal which Isaiah beheld of old have ye received into your hearts; and 
illumined by the brilliance thereof, O martyrs, ye set at naught the dark worship of 
fire.  
Adorned, ye now stand before the life-creating Trinity, and, illumined with crowns 
of comeliness, ye commemorate those on earth who ever keep your memory, O 
blessed ones.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, who hath conceived the Savior and given birth to Him in 
the flesh, save me who am in despair. For, weighed down by the burden of sin, I cry 
out to thee in pain: Spare me, and help thy servant!  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Radiantly shining forth like the dawn, thou hast enlightened creation with the 
unwaning sunrays of thy sufferings and the manifestation of thy many miracles, O 
George, joy of martyrs. Therefore with love we bless thee.  
Thou hast revealed drops of divine sweetness which take away the bitterness of 
our passions, ever delighting the souls and hearts of those who bless thee with faith, 
O right glorious one.  
With thy blood thou didst hallow the earth and with the spirit of gladness thou 
hast filled the heavens, O martyr. Wherefore, all the souls of the pious love thee as a 
favorite of Christ and call thee their sure helper. 
Theotokion: We offer thee the cry of gladness of the divine Gabriel, crying aloud: 
Rejoice, joy of the universe, who hast given birth unto the Abolisher of sorrow, and 
who hast removed the reproach of Eve! Rejoice, O Virgin, who hast not known a 
man!  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
Ye endured unbearable torments as if ye were bodiless ones, O all-praised Acep-
simus, wondrous Joseph and marvelous Aithalas the deacon, initiates of the mysteries, 
and the incorporeal hosts are ever amazed by your pangs and sufferings.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., of the holy great-martyr, in the same melody: 
Thou didst extinguish the flames of delusion with the streams of thy blood, O 
blessed one, utterly destroying the audacity of thy tormentors; and thereby glorified 
Christ, O passion-bearer George. Wherefore, thou hast received a crown of 
incorruption and life from the right hand of the Most High.  
Theotokion: There is no hope of salvation for me, O Virgin, for I have miserably 
fallen into the abyss of transgressions and await the menace of dreadful torments and 
the portion of the goats. But take pity on me before the Judgment, for thou art a 
fervent aid, O Theotokos.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos.  
And this, of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
Verse: The righteous cried, * and the Lord heard them.  
O ye holy ones, having steadfastly struggled in piety for Christ, ye put to shame the 
audacity of the tormentors and cast the summit of idolatry into the abyss, O 
Acepsimus, Aithalas and Joseph. And now, holding chorus in the heavens, O 
crowned ones, pray ye on behalf of our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV, the composition of a Studite hymnographer:  
O brethren, let us spiritually praise George, the noetically firm, patient, and 
glorious martyr, who having been heated for Christ, was forged by misfortunes and 
sharpened by torments, and whose body, corrupt by nature, was laid waste by divers 
torments. For desire conquered nature, and through death gave him passage to Christ 
God, the object of his desire, and the Savior of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee * nailed to the Cross, O Lord, * the ewe-lamb 
Thy Mother marveled * and cried out: “What is this that I see, * O my Son most 
desired? * How hast Thou been rewarded * by the unfaithful and iniquitous assembly 
* which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? ** Yet glory to Thine ineffable condescen-
sion, O Master!”  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in the same tone: 
O great martyr George, * thou liberator of captives, * defender of the poor, * and 
physician for the afflicted, ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II: 
Thou didst celebrate the mysteries blamelessly, O wise one, * and-wast thyself an 
acceptable sacrifice, O divinely blessed one; * for thou didst gloriously partake of the 
cup of Christ, * with thy fellow sufferers O holy Acepsimus, ** and prayest 
unceasingly on behalf of us all.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Having recourse to thine elect and speedy aid, O spiritual athlete of Christ, * we, 
the faithful, pray that those who hymn thee may be delivered from the snares of the 
enemy * and from all tribulation and afflictions, that we may cry: ** Rejoice, O martyr 
George.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous, * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS(6:10-17) 
Brethren; be ye strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the 
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For 
we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, 
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high 
places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to 
withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your 
loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your 
feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of 
faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take 
the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
READING FROM THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE(21:12-19) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: Men shall lay their hands on you and persecute 
you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before 
kings and rulers for my name’s sake. And it shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it 
therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer: for I will give 
you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor 
resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and 
friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of 
all men for my name’s sake. But there shall not a hair of your head perish. In your 
patience possess ye your souls. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
 
