--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 5th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS GALACTEON AND EPISTEMIS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Nurtured on the milk of faith, * thou didst attain to maturity in Christ, * for the 
sake of thy many torments and tribulations, O Galacteon, * having become an 
acceptable sacrifice * and a perfect immolation * through thy voluntary onslaught, O 
spiritually rich martyr. * O thy firm and steadfast faith, * whereby thou didst receive 
God, ** O thou who art now most perfectly deified!  
Artfully didst thou seek out * the most earnestly desired Wellspring of good things, 
* and with the splendors thereof * illumined thy soul and mind, * O thou who art 
blessed of God; * and with mighty opposition * cast down the ancient tyrant of great 
craft, * much suffering martyr Epistemis, ** thou divine adornment of monastics.  
The two most radiant luminaries * of the noetic East * shine forth with grace * pi-
ously illumining all creation * with the transcendent splendors of their sufferings * 
and the divine flames of healings. * And honoring their most splendid feast, * we 
glorify Christ ** Who illumineth all for their sake.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Rejoice, enlightenment of souls, * forgiveness of the sinful, * correction of the 
negligent! * Rejoice, consolation, joy and helper of the sorrowful! * Rejoice, O blessed 
one, * thou healing of the souls of the infirm! * Rejoice, mediator and reconciler of 
mankind to God, * O pure one who art more holy ** than all the seraphim!  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Cross * and voluntarily accepting 
suffering, O Jesus, * Thy Virgin Mother, O Master, * cried aloud: Woe is me, my 
sweet Child! * How is it that Thou dost endure unjustly inflicted wounds, * O Physi-
cian Who healeth * the infirmities of mankind, * delivering all from corruption ** in 
Thy tender compassion?  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and this canon of the holy martyrs, with 4 
Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “It is fitting to hymn the un-conjugal pair of 
spiritual athletes”, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Unto Him Who overthrew the tyranny of Pharaoh in the sea * and led 
Israel over dry land, * let us chant unto Christ our God, * for He hath been 
glorified throughout the ages. 
Standing with joy before the life-creating Trinity, O all-blessed one, illumined with 
radiant lightning, do thou ask forgiveness for those who celebrate thy holy memory.  
Having set thy soul afire with the Holy Spirit, thou didst consume the carnal 
passions by fasting and extinguished the fire of ungodliness with the streams of thy 
blood.  
Having set aside family, wealth and power for the sake of Christ, and taken up thy 
cross, O venerable one, with the blessed Epistemis, thy spouse, thou didst struggle 
monastically in a God-pleasing manner.  
 
Theotokion: O all-hymned Theotokos, helper of the sorrowful, salvation and hope 
of the hopeless: pray thou earnestly that we be delivered from misfortunes.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Thou Who established the heavens by Thy word * and founded the 
earth upon the multitude of waters, * establish me unto the hymning of * Thy 
glorification O Lord.  
She who gave birth to thee brought thee forth from her barren womb as the day-
star which dispelleth the night of ungodliness.  
Held fast by the purity of love, thou didst teach thy spouse to live in virginity with 
thee; and having suffered lawfully with her, O martyr Galacteon, thou hast been 
glorified.  
Behold a woman who through divine revelation learned all the trials of the 
torturers before they took place, and thereby cast down the tormenter.  
Theotokion: O Maiden who hast given birth to the Life Who hath destroyed all 
the power of death, make me live who have been slain by harmful passions.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV. 
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Having adorned the visage of thy soul with fasting, thou dost enlighten the faithful 
with the rays of thy sufferings, O blessed Galacteon. Wherefore, piously celebrating 
thy holy and light-bearing day with faith, we cry out to thee: As thou hast boldness 
before God, pray that we be saved!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
most glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
Stavrotheotokion: O most immaculate Virgin Mother of God, a sword passed 
through thy most holy soul when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of His 
own will. Cease not to beseech Him, O blessed one, that He grant us forgiveness of 
our transgressions.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Ye showed yourselves to be reason-endowed sheep manifestly following your 
Shepherd, the King of all, and ye rejoice now with the martyrs in the heavenly fold, O 
crown-bearers.  
Ye were shown to be an elect team, plowing the furrow of an honorable and 
valiant martyrdom; cultivating the grain which is laid up in the granaries of heaven.  
Your noses, heads, nails and hands cut off for Christ, O valiant ones, ye uprooted 
the delusion of impiety and were shown to be victors.  
Theotokion: The tongue of mortals is unworthy to fittingly hymn thee as the 
Theotokos, for thou hast been revealed to be the refuge of Christians, O all-
immaculate and most pure one.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Having nurtured thyself on fasting as with milk, O Galacteon, thou didst attain 
unto the perfect fullness of the suffering of Christ.  
Taken up far above to the resting-place of the saints, O Epistemis, thou dost see 
with a cleansed mind.  
O venerable martyrs, ye have received a habitation with the martyrs in the highest 
and have obtained immortal glory.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth in time to the Timeless One Who became a 
man, that He may save man, O most pure one.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Through the laver of divine enlightenment ye approached those who wed not, 
being most perfectly baptized by blood afterwards, O spiritual athletes.  
Having enlightened thy soul with the great harshness of fasting, thou didst show it 
forth to be comely with the light of suffering, O Galacteon.  
Having mounted the chariot of your blood, O martyrs, ye traversed the path and 
reached heaven, wherein ye rest.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth to the Son Who is equal in honor with the 
Father, O thou who knewest not wedlock, and in a manner past understanding thou 
didst nurture the Nurturer of all with milk.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Having struggled splendidly, * ye were reckoned among the legions of Christ’s 
martyrs * having fought valiantly, O glorious Galacteon, with Epistemis, * thine 
honored spouse, who suffered with thee. ** Unceasingly entreat the one God on 
behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: By an angel didst Thou refresh the Children in the furnace * 
transforming the roaring flames to dew. * O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
O Epistemis, wedded to the Word of God, thou didst smite with blindness the 
unbelievers who strove to strip thee naked, and didst show them to be children of the 
light when they repented.  
Utterly refusing to sacrifice to inanimate gods, as honorable sacrifices ye offered 
yourselves to our true God, the Master of souls, O martyrs.  
Led into the fire of torment, O wise martyr Galacteon, thou didst extinguish the 
flame of ungodliness by the torrents of thy blood, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: With all the ranks of heaven on high, we who have been saved by 
thee cry aloud calling thee blessed, O Maiden Birthgiver of God.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Beginningless King of glory, * before Whom tremble all the hosts 
of heaven, * ye priests hymn, and ye peoples * supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
Being equal in purity and equal in fasting and suffering, O valorous spiritual 
athletes, ye have received equal gifts from God.  
Desiring the life of the angels, ye maintained your union with incorruption, and 
with them ye joyously join chorus as is meet, O passion-bearers of the Lord.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Standing manfully before the tribunal, O martyr, thou didst preach the one true 
God, and thereby destroy the arrogance of polytheism.  
Theotokion: O ye people, let us hymn the one Mother who after giving birth 
remained a Virgin, as the precious and most exalted throne of the Lord Most High.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire of 
the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the salvation 
of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we magnify thee. 
Thou hast been revealed to be a tower of heaven, a foundation of the Church, a 
pillar of piety, and the confirmation and divine adornment of martyrs and fasters, O 
divinely wise Galacteon.  
Amid the flowers of virginity thou didst blossom like a rose, spreading thy 
fragrance like a lily in the valleys of martyrdom, O Epistemis, thou virgin martyr of 
the Lord. Wherefore, together we call thee blessed.  
Illumined with the light of the three-Sunned splendor, ye have now passed on 
thereto, having been shown to be children of the Light. Pray ye, O martyrs, that He 
grant enlightenment unto those who praise you with faith.  
Theotokion: Thou art our sword and rampart, O Theotokos! Thou art the help of 
those who have recourse to thee! We move thee now to prayer, that we may be 
delivered from our enemies.  
 
AT LITURGY 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone II:  
Having struggled splendidly, * ye were reckoned among the legions of Christ’s 
martyrs * having fought valiantly, O glorious Galacteon, with Epistemis, * thine 
honored spouse, who suffered with thee. ** Unceasingly entreat the one God on 
behalf of us all.  
 
