--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 8th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
 SYNAXIS OF THE ARCHANGEL MICHAEL, COMMANDER OF THE HEAVENLY 
HOST, AND THE ARCHANGELS GABRIEL, RAPHAEL, URIEL, SALAPHIEL, JEGUDIEL, 
AND BARACHIEL, TOGETHER WITH THE ANGELS, THRONES, DOMINIONS, 
PRINCIPALITIES, AUTHORITIES, POWERS, SIX-WINGED SERAPHIM, MANY EYED 
CHERUBIM AND THE OTHER BODILESS POWERS  
If the temple be dedicated to St. Michael and all Angels, or if the pastor so desireth, a vigil is served. 
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy angels, in Tone I 
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
O ye incorporeal angels * that stand before the throne of God, * luminous with the 
brilliance therefrom * and everlastingly shining with radiance: * being secondary 
luminaries, * entreat Christ, * that He grant unto our souls ** peace and great mercy. 
(Twice) 
O immortal messengers * of the truly incorruptible Life, * ye all-blessed ones that re-
ceived life * from the first Life: * ye have become holy beholders of the eternal 
Wisdom, * full of light, * and reflecting lamps ** shown forth as is meet.  
O ye archangels and angels, * principalities, thrones, * dominions, six-winged 
seraphim, * and divine, many-eyed cherubim, * instruments of wisdom, * virtues and 
powers most divine: * pray ye to Christ, that He grant our souls ** peace and great 
mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Commander of the angelic choirs, standing in the heavens before the throne of the 
three-sunned Godhead, and richly illumined with the divine rays of light which are 
ceaselessly emitted therefrom: deliver from the darkness of the passions us on earth 
who joyously chant the thrice-holy hymn, and enlighten us with radiance, O Michael, 
supreme commander, intercessor for our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
The angelic hosts, O Christ, * which stand before Thy throne, * pray for the human 
race. * Wherefore, at their entreaties, * do Thou cast down the audacity of the pagans, 
** bestowing peace upon all the faithful.  
Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His ministers a flame of fire.  
O ye ranks of angels, * that ever hold chorus * about the throne of the King of all: * 
preserve us * who with faith call upon you, ** and deliver us all from torment.  
Verse: Praise Him, all ye His angels; * praise Him, all ye His hosts.  
The Father, Who is God over all, * brought forth the only Word and the Spirit, * 
and the hosts * of heavenly intelligences, * formless and immaterial, ** that hymn His 
three-sunned glory.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos! * we cry to thee * in company with Gabriel: * for, 
having received the first Joy * from on high, ** thou hast filled us all with joy.  
Troparion of the holy angels, in Tone IV:  
O supreme commanders of the heavenly hosts, * we entreat you unworthy though 
we be, * that by your prayers, you will encompass us * with the protection of the wings 
of your immaterial glory * preserving us who fall down before you and earnestly cry 
aloud: * deliver us from all misfortunes, ** for ye are the commanders of the hosts on 
high. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through it 
hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS 
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first Antiphon  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy angels, 4 in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Revealing thyself as a most radiant intercessor * before the three-sunned Godhead, * 
O Michael, supreme commander, * with the heavenly hosts dost thou cry out, rejoicing: 
* Holy art Thou, O Father! * Holy art Thou, O co-beginningless Word! * Holy also art 
Thou, O Holy Spirit! * One glory, one Kingdom, one nature, ** one Godhead and 
power. (Twice) 
Thy visage is fiery, * and thy beauty wondrous, * O Michael, chief among the angels! 
* For in thine immaterial nature * thou dost traverse the ends of the earth, * fulfilling 
the commands of the Creator of all, * acknowledged as mighty in thy strength, * 
making thy temple a wellspring of healings, ** honored in thy holy calling.  
Thou hast made Thine angels spirits, * as hath been written, * and Thy ministers a 
flame of fire, O Lord. * And Thou hast appointed Michael supreme commander, * pre-
eminent among the ranks * of Thine archangels, * who is obedient to Thy commands, 
O Word, * and with fear doth utter the thrice-holy hymn ** unto Thy glory.  
And 4 Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
The pre-eternal Mind * appointed thee as a secondary light, O Gabriel, * which hath 
illumined all the universe * with divine communications, * revealing to us the truly 
divine and great mystery * which was hidden from before the ages, * of Him Who, 
though incorporeal, * was incarnate in the Virgin's womb, and became man, ** that He 
might save man. (Twice) 
Standing before the throne of the three-sunned Godhead, * and richly illumined by 
the rays of divine light * which are ceaselessly emitted therefrom, * deliver from the 
darkness of the passions * those who on earth joyously join chorus * and praise thee, * 
illumining them with thy radiance, * O Gabriel, supreme commander, ** intercessor for 
our souls.  
Set at naught the fury of the Hagarenes * who often descend upon thy flock. * 
Cause thou schisms in the Church to cease. * Quell the tempest of countless 
temptations. * From misfortune and tribulation * deliver those who honor thee with 
love * and take refuge under thy protection, * O Gabriel, supreme commander, ** 
intercessor for our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Rejoice with us, all ye captains of the angels, for your chief and our intercessor, the 
great supreme commander, appearing today in his honored temple, doth most 
gloriously sanctify it. Wherefore, singing praises as is meet, we cry out to him: Protect 
us in the shelter of thy wings, O most magnificent Archangel Michael.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Rejoice with us, all ye choirs of virgins, for our intercessor and mediatress, our 
protection and great refuge, doth comfort the sorrowful today in her honored and 
divine temple. Wherefore, singing her praises as is meet, we cry out: Protect us by thy 
divine intercession, O most pure Lady Theotokos.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the Day. Three Lessons:  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF JOSHUA  
And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and 
looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against him with his sword drawn in his 
hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Art thou for us, or for our 
adversaries? And he said: Nay; but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come. 
And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him, What saith 
my lord unto his servant? And the captain of the Lord's host said unto Joshua, Loose 
thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did 
so.  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF JUDGES  
And it came to pass in those days, that the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: 
and because of the Midianites the children of Israel made them the dens which are in 
the mountains, and caves, and strongholds. And it came to pass, when the children of 
Israel cried unto the Lord because of the Midianites, there came an angel of the Lord, 
and sat under an oak which was in Ophrah, that pertained unto Joash the Abiezrite: and 
his son Gideon threshed wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the Midianites. And 
the angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him, The Lord is with thee, 
thou mighty man of valor. And Gideon said unto him, O my Lord, if the Lord be with 
us, why then is all this befallen us? and where be all his miracle which our fathers told 
us of, saying, Did not the Lord bring us up from Egypt? but now the Lord hath 
forsaken us and delivered us into the hands O the Midianites. And the Lord looked 
upon him, and said: Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of 
the Midianites: have not I sent thee? And he said unto him, O my Lord, wherewith 
shall I save Israel? behold, my family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the least in my 
father's house. And the Lord said unto him: Surely I will be with thee, and thou shalt 
smite the Midianites as one man. And he said unto him: If now I have found grace in 
thy sight, then show me a sign that thou talkest with me. Depart not hence, I pray thee, 
until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set it before thee. And he said, 
I will tarry until thou come again. And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and 
unleavened cakes of an ephod of flour, the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the 
broth in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it. And the 
angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them 
upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so. Then the angel of the Lord put 
forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the 

--- PAGE 5 ---
unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and 
the unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the Lord departed out of his sight. And when 
Gideon perceived that he was an angel of the Lord, Gideon said, Alas, O Lord God! 
for because I have seen an angel of the Lord face to face. And the Lord said unto him: 
Peace be unto thee; fear not; thou shalt not die. Then Gideon built an altar there unto 
the Lord, and called it Jehovah-shalom: unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the 
Abiezrites.  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: Let the whole earth break forth into singing. Yea, the fir trees 
rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon, saying: Since thou art laid down, no feller is 
come up against us. Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming: it 
stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth; it hath raised up from 
their thrones all the kings of the nations. All they shall speak and say unto thee, Art 
thou also become weak as we? art thou become like unto us? Thy pomp is brought 
down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols: the worm is spread under thee, and the 
worms cover thee. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! 
how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast 
said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of 
God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will 
ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the Most High. Yet thou shalt be 
brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit. They that see thee shall narrowly look 
upon thee, and consider thee, saying: Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, 
that did shake kingdoms; that made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities 
thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners? All the kings of the nations, even 
all of them, lie in glory, everyone in his own house. But thou art cast out of thy grave 
like an abominable branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through 
with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcass trodden under feet. 
Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and 
slain thy people: the seed of evildoers shall never be renowned.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone I:  
The composition of Cyprian: O supreme commander of the noetic powers that 
stand unceasingly before the throne of the Master: pray ye to the Lord, that He grant 
peace to the world and great mercy to our souls.  
The composition of Arsenius: Michael, preeminent among the divine ranks, 
commander of the hosts on high, who ever walketh with us and preserveth us all from 
every assault of the devil, hath today summoned us to a festival. Come, therefore, ye 
who love the feasts of the Church and Christ, and taking up the flowers of the virtues, 
with pure thoughts and an upright conscience let us honor the assembly of the 
archangel; for, standing unceasingly before God, chanting the thrice-holy hymn, he ever 
prayeth that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
The composition of the Studite: O ye supreme commanders, who govern the imma-
terial noetic hosts, and shed light upon the whole universe with rays of three-sunned 
glory: with ever chanting voices ye sing the thrice-holy hymn. Wherefore, pray ye that 
our souls be saved.  
Another composition of Arsenius: O ye noetic beings, divine and incorporeal, which 
surround the immaterial throne, with lips of flame ye chant the thrice-holy hymn to 
God the Ruler: Holy is God, the beginningless Father! Holy is the Mighty One, the co-
beginningless Son! Holy is the Immortal One, the Spirit one in essence, Who with the 
Father and the Son is glorified.  
The composition of Anatolius: With incorporeal lips and noetic mouths the ranks of 
the angels offer unceasing hymnody to Thine unapproachable Divinity, O Lord, and 
the pure intelligences and ministers of Thy glory, and with them Michael the 
incorporeal and Gabriel the exceeding magnificent, praise Thee, O Lord. And the 
supreme commanders of the angels, pre-eminent among the powers on high, have 
today become our hosts, commanding us to chant the hymn of hymns unto Thine 
unapproachable glory, O Lover of mankind, which they entreat unceasingly on behalf 
of our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
With lips of fire the cherubim hymn Thee, O Christ God, and with incorporeal 
mouths the choir of the archangels continually glorify Thee: And Michael, the 
commander of the hosts on high, doth unceasingly offer a hymn of victory to Thy 
glory; for he hath lighted our way to a radiant festival today, that, with lips of clay, we 
may fittingly give utterance with psalmody to the thrice-holy hymn of praise, for all 
things have been filled with Thy praise, and therefore Thou dost grant the world great 
mercy.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Keeping festival in the world angelically, * let us chant a hymn * to God Who is 
seated upon the throne of glory: * Holy art Thou, O heavenly Father! * Holy art Thou, 
O Word co-everlasting! ** Holy also art Thou, O all-holy Spirit!  
Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His ministers a flame of fire.  
Pre-eminent with great boldness among those of heaven, * and standing in glory 
before the dread throne, * O Michael, supreme commander, * beholder of ineffable 
things, by thy supplications * save us who are in need, misfortune and temptation, ** 
we beseech thee.  
Verse: Praise Him, all ye His angels; * praise Him, all ye His hosts.  
Thou art the first among the incorporeal angels, * the minister of God's divine 
radiance, * a beholder and initiate of the mystery, * O Michael, supreme commander: * 
save us who piously honor thee each year ** and who hymn the Trinity with faith.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VIII:  
O supreme commander, in that thou art the captain and champion, the princely 
leader of the angels, from all want and sorrow, infirmity and grievous sin do thou free 
those who faithfully hymn and entreat thee, O glorious one; for as thou art immaterial, 
thou dost manifestly behold the Immaterial One, and art illumined thereby with the 
unapproachable light of the Master's glory; He Who, in His love for mankind, took 
flesh from the Virgin for our sake, wishing to save mankind.  
Troparion of the holy angels, in Tone IV:  
O supreme commanders of the heavenly hosts, * we entreat you unworthy though 
we be, * that by your prayers, you will encompass us * with the protection of the wings 
of your immaterial glory * preserving us who fall down before you and earnestly cry 
aloud: * deliver us from all misfortunes, ** for ye are the commanders of the hosts on 
high. (Twice) 
“Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through it 
hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy angels in Tone IV:  
O supreme commanders of the heavenly hosts, * we entreat you unworthy though 
we be, * that by your prayers, you will encompass us * with the protection of the wings 
of your immaterial glory * preserving us who fall down before you and earnestly cry 
aloud: * deliver us from all misfortunes, ** for ye are the commanders of the hosts on 
high. (Twice) 
 Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through it 
hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Standing ever before the dread throne, illumined with the brilliant rays of the three--
sunned Godhead, dispelling the gloom of sin, enlighten us who celebrate your assembly 
with splendor; and pray ye earnestly that we be delivered from misfortune, O most 
radiant intercessors.  
Glory ..., in Tone I: Spec. Mel.: “The choir of angels ...”: 
The choir of angels, having the divine Michael as supreme commander, doth offer 
hymnody with him unto the Holy Trinity, for the Creator of all, by a word, did bring 
forth out of non-existence the host of the fiery ranks.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou unceasingly 
beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all telling, thou hast 
given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction of life unto those 
who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When Thou didst descend ...”:  
Thou hast been revealed as foremost among the legions of the angels, O Michael, 
supreme commander. Unceasingly entreat the King Most High to cast down the pride 
of tyrants here below. And as thou hast boldness at the fiery throne, pray for us, thy 
servants, without ceasing.  
 
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before “: 
The cherubim and seraphim, the many-eyed hosts of ministering archangels, 
together with the virtues, thrones, dominions, angels, powers and principalities, entreat 
Thee, our Creator, God and Master, that Thou disdain not the supplication of sinful 
people, O Thou greatly merciful God.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O all-immaculate Virgin * who hast given birth to the transcendent God: * do thou 
unceasingly entreat Him with the incorporeal ones, * that He grant forgiveness of trans-
gressions * and correction of life before the end, * to us who, as is meet, hymn thee 
with faith and love, ** O thou who alone art all-hymned.  
After the Polyeleos, the Megalynarion of the Bodiless Hosts: We magnify you, O 
archangels and angels, and all the hosts, cherubim and seraphim, which glorify 
the Lord.  
Or this Megalynarion: We magnify you, O archangels and angels, principalities, 
virtues, thrones, dominions, powers, cherubim and awesome seraphim, who 
glorify the Lord.  
The Selected Psalm:  
A: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; I will tell of all Thy 
wonders. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Having worthily become, at the command of thy Creator, the master of the ranks of 
heaven and minister of divine glory, thou art a saving mediator for Christians, watching 
over those who are on earth with thine immaterial glory. Wherefore, we all praise thee 
as is meet, hymning thy divine festivity today. O Michael, supreme commander, entreat 
Christ God to grant remission of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy feast.  
 
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
The ranks of angels stand with fear before Thy throne, O Master, Christ God, and, 
ever illumined with rays therefrom, they unceasingly chant to thee a hymn of victory. 
Through their sacred prayers do Thou grant peace to the world and great mercy to our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O pure, all-immaculate one who knewest not a man, who alone hast given birth 
within time to the timeless Son and Word of God, with the holy and honored 
patriarchs, the martyrs, prophets and the venerable, entreat Him, that He grant us 
purification and great mercy.  
Song of Ascents, in Tone IV, the first Antiphon.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His ministers a 
flame of fire.  
Verse: Praise the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou art become exceeding 
glorious.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW(13:24-30,36-43)  
Jesus spake a parable saying, The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which 
sowed good seed in his field: but while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares 
among the wheat, and went his way. But when the blade was sprung up, and brought 
forth fruit, then appeared the tares also. So the servants of the householder came and 
said unto him, Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field? from whence then hath it 
tares? He said unto them: An enemy hath done this. The servants said unto him, Wilt 
thou then that we go and gather them up? But he said: Nay; lest while ye gather up the 
tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. Let both grow together until the harvest: 
and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, 
and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my barn. Then Jesus 
sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and his disciples came unto him, 
saying: Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field. He answered and said unto 
them, He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man; the field is the world; the good 
seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked one; 
the enemy that sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the 
reapers are the angels. As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so 
shall it be in the end of this world. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they 
shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and 
shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth; Then 
shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears 
to hear, let him hear.  
After Psalm 50: Glory ..., Through the prayers of the archangels ..., 
Both now ..., Through the prayers of the Theotokos ..., 
This Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
Thine angels, O Christ, standing in fear before the throne of majesty, ever illumined 
by Thine effulgence, Thy chanters of hymns on high, and the ministers of Thy counsel 
sent down by Thee from on high, bestow illumination upon our souls.  
Canon of the Theotokos, in Tone VIII, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos, which is 
chanted twice; and two canons of the bodiless ones, with a total of 8 Troparia, also in 
Tone VIII.  
ODE I  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
Immaculate Mother of God, who hast given birth beyond nature to the incarnate 
and eternal Word, we sing thy praises. 
The Virgin hath given birth unto Thee, O Christ, the cluster of grapes from whence 
drippeth the life-bearing sweetness of the world‟s salvation. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
The race of Adam, having now been raised to blessedness beyond all telling, doth 
fittingly glorify thee, O Theotokos. 
Canon I of the bodiless hosts, the acrostic whereof is: “O ye divinely wise, let us solem-
nize praise to the assembly of the incorporeal ones ...,” the composition of John the 
Monk, of Damascus, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying aloud: 
* We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
Ye faithful let us all hymn the uncreated Trinity, Who doth govern all the immaterial 
ranks of the heavenly choirs, crying aloud: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O Almighty God!  
O Creator of the angels, Thou didst set as a beginning to Thy creations the 
immaterial essence which doth surround Thy most honored throne that it might cry out 
to Thee: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O Almighty God!  
Rejoice, O Gabriel, initiate of the mystery of the incarnation of God, and Michael, 
foremost among the immaterial ranks, who unceasingly cry out: Holy, holy, holy art 
Thou, O Almighty God!  
Theotokion: I tremble before the mystery of Thy condescension, O Christ; for, God 
in essence, Thou didst deign to be born from the Virgin as a man, that Thou mightest 
save the world from slavery to the enemy.  
Canon II of the bodiless hosts, also by John of Damascus, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in the 
figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while it 
saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn unto 
God. 
Come ye, and, joining chorus, let us praise the noetic choirs of the incorporeal ranks, 
for they are divine ministers who unceasingly pray for our salvation and rejoice over 
our repentance.  
The chief captains of the angels, chosen before others, the valiant commanders, the 
incorporeal intelligences, today arise for the celebration of the feast of their radiant 
memory. With them we also rejoice, offering a hymn to the Trinity.  
O ye people, with spiritual joy let us be glad today with the angels, for Gabriel again 
announceth glad tidings: the union of the Churches and the destruction of all adverse 
heresies, in the commemoration of the supreme commanders.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, through the Holy Spirit thou hast given birth unto 
the Word of the Father, Who transcending nature made His abode within thee, being 
of two natures and wills, yet immutably one in hypostasis; and Whose countenance we 
venerate.  
Katavasia: I will open my mouth ..., 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Grant help unto me by thine intercessions, O all-pure one, by warding off the 
assaults of dreaded dangers. 
When thou, O Theotokos, didst give birth to the prince of life on behalf of all the 
world, Thou didst become the restoration of our foremother Eve. 
By thy power grant me life, O all-pure one, who hath truly given birth to God in the 
flesh, the hypostatic power of the Father. 
Canon I of the bodiless hosts  
Irmos: Thy fear, O Lord, do Thou plant * in the hearts of Thy servants * and be 
Thou the confirmation of us * who in truth call upon Thee.  
With strength, O Immortal One, hast Thou appointed the mighty ones who fulfill 
Thine all-holy will, ever standing before Thee in the highest.  
O Christ, accept those who pray on our behalf, the commanders of the angels, 
initiates of the mystery of Thine incarnation and Thine honored Resurrection.  
Thou hast appointed angels as guardians for all mankind, in that Thou art 
compassionate; and Thou hast shown forth the ministers of the salvation of Thy 
favored ones.  
Theotokion: O Bride of God, thou hast ineffably conceived the Lord and Savior, 
Who delivereth from evil those who call upon thee in truth.  
Canon II of the bodiless hosts  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
O Michael, chief captain, foremost among the angels, as a secondary luminary of the 
Trinity hast thou revealed thyself to those who faithfully praise thee.  
Having proclaimed the coming of God in the flesh, Gabriel faithfully filled the 
whole world with the effulgence of divine grace.  
O ever-hymned couple, radiant and immaterial pair, show forth the light of God 
upon those who faithfully celebrate your memory.  
Theotokion: O pure one, Isaiah hymned thine Offspring, Who transcendeth nature; 
and I too sing, that I may obtain His cleansing. 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded ...”: 
O ye captains of the heavenly hosts, foremost among those who are enthroned on 
high, and awesome in divine glory, O Michael and Gabriel, supreme commanders, chief 
captains of the angels, and all ye bodiless ones, ministers of the Master: praying 
unceasingly on behalf of the world, ask for the remission of the sins we have 
committed, and that we may find mercy and grace on the day of Judgment. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O pure and blessed one, who art full of divine grace, out of the compassion of thy 
tender compassion, with the hosts on high, the archangels and all the bodiless powers, 
unceasingly entreat Him Who was born from thee, that, before the end, He mercifully 
grant us forgiveness of sins and correction of life, that we may find mercy.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
O Theotokos, thou art the un-ploughed land that brought forth the ear of corn 
which granteth life unto the world, do thou save those who sing thy praises. 
All we who have been enlightened know thee, O all-pure one, to be the Mother of 
God, for thou, O Ever-Virgin, didst bear the Sun of righteousness. 
Grant us the pardon of our offences, as thou alone art without sin, and grant peace 
unto thy world, O God, by the supplications of her who hath given birth to Thee. 
Canon I of the bodiless hosts 
Irmos: Thou didst mount Thy steeds O Lord, * Thine apostles, * and taking 
their bridles in Thy hands, * Thy chariot became salvation unto those who sing 
with faith: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Thou didst mount the angels like steeds, O Lover of mankind, and taking their 
bridles in Thy hand, Thy chariot became salvation unto those who unceasingly cry 
aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Thy virtue covereth the angels, O Lover of mankind, and with Thy divine, glorious 
praise, O Beginningless One, filleth the ends of the earth, which cry out with them: 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Thou didst go forth unto the salvation of Thy people, O compassionate Christ, 
summoning Thy friends, the powers; and Thy coming hath been gladness unto all who 
faithfully cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Thou hast been supra-naturally revealed to be both Virgin and Mother, 
O all-pure one; for thou hast given birth to Christ, both God and man, to Whom the 
ranks of the angels cry out with fear: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Canon II of the bodiless hosts 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I cry 
unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
In Jericho of old the great Michael, supreme commander of the hosts of the Lord 
and chief among the bodiless ones, appeared unto Joshua, son of Nun, who was waging 
war, and he gave them victory, fighting for him; and the servant of God, receiving 
power from him, conquering them with the spear by which the enemy was captured. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Once the great Gabriel, the truly divine archangel, chief among the bodiless hosts, 
appeared, bearing the glad tidings of a child to Zechariah the priest. Wherefore, the 
voice of the Word, who was born John, restoreth the voice of prophecy to his own 
father.  
All the ends of the earth rejoice today with exceeding joy, O God, celebrating the 
honored memory of Thine archangels, the divine Michael and Gabriel of divine 
wisdom. And together with them all the ranks of angels rejoice, for by their protection 
the world is preserved.  
Theotokion: Thou alone didst remain pure after giving birth, and only thou hast 
been shown to be without husband, O thou that with milk didst nourish the true Word 
of the Father, Who through the Holy Spirit assumed our form, that of a servant, O 
Virgin Theotokos. And venerating the divine likeness of His countenance, Him do we 
honor.  
ODE V  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Calm the stormy tempest of my passions, O thou who hast given birth to God, my 
guide and my Lord. 
The ranks of Angels and the companies of mortals worship thine Offspring, O 
Immaculate Theotokos. 
O Mary Theotokos thou who without bridegroom hast brought to naught the 
expectations of our enemies, bring joy to those who hymn thy praises. 
Canon I of the bodiless hosts 
Irmos: Guide me out of the night of ignorance * with the light of Thine 
understanding, O Lord, * for I am lost on the path that ensnares the soul, * and 
direct me to the way of Thy commandments.  
Borne up to the heights by inexorable longing for Thee, O Christ, Thou ultimate of 
all desires, the angelic powers unceasingly glorify Thee.  
Thou hast made Thine angels noetic by nature and incorrupt by Thy grace, that they 
may hymn Thy majesty, O Christ, having fashioned them according to Thine image, O 
Unapproachable One.  
Through their nearness to Thee, O Christ, Thou hast kept Thy servants un-inclined 
towards evil, for Thou art the Source of all goodness, and Thou doest good unto those 
who serve Thee as is meet.  
Theotokion: Enliven my soul which hath been slain by vile passions, O all-
immaculate one, for thou hast given birth unto the Preserver of life, and direct it to the 
path of eternal and blessed life.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Canon II of the bodiless hosts 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
When, of old, Balaam the prophet refused to submit to the ineffable and divine 
wonders of God, an angel appeared to his donkey at the crossroads and strangely 
denounced him, showing his irrational animal to be unnaturally rational.  
When Peter had been arrested and languished in prison, an angel of God appeared, 
delivering him from the hands of Herod, from bonds and death. Wherefore, come ye, 
let us all honor the wise angels as divine protectors of our souls.  
O angels and archangels, ye divine powers of God, by your ever-offered 
supplications to God put an end to the uproar of battles, heresies in the Church and all 
temptations, and maintain us in peace.  
Theotokion: We know Thee to be the God of creation: One in two natures, two 
actions and wills, though uncommingled, the Son of God Who took flesh from a 
woman, whose image depicted in Icons we venerate.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of light, 
* O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
O Theotokos, we the faithful proclaim thee to be the Temple and Ark, the living 
Bridal Chamber of God, and the gate of heaven. 
Mary, bride of God, thine Offspring, Who hath become the destroyer of wooden 
idols, is worshipped together with the Father and the Spirit. 
The Word of God revealed thee to mortal mankind to be a heavenly ladder, for 
through thee He descended to us. 
Canon I of the bodiless hosts 
Irmos: Thou O Lord, didst place Jonah alone within the sea monster. * Do Thou 
save me, * who am ensnared in the nets of the enemy, * as thou didst save him 
from corruption. 
By Thy Word, O Lord, Thou didst in a godly manner bring the heavenly beings, the 
immortal hosts, out of non-existence, making them luminous.  
Honored initiates of the mysteries of the praise of God have ye been, O incorporeal 
ones, citizens of heaven, truly divine tabernacles, who serve the Creator as is meet.  
Thee, O beginningless Son of God, do the noetic ranks of the bodiless ones 
unceasingly praise and glorify as the Creator and Fashioner of all things.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, thou hast been deemed worthy to cradle in thine 
embrace Him Who eternally sitteth with the Father in the highest. Render Him merciful 
unto us, thy servants, O pure one.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Canon II of the bodiless hosts 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up from 
the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou hast 
hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Taking flight in mind away from material corruption, let us with fear honor the 
immaterial ones who are bodiless like flames of fire and light, chanting hymns unto 
them with lips of clay.  
Calm the tempests of the passions, O archangels, and quell all revolts against the 
Faith, for ye are the holy and fiery chief commanders of the Trinity.  
O captains Michael and Gabriel, ye chief commanders and archangels of God, 
leaders of the bodiless ones, preserve us from all heresies by your protection.  
Theotokion: O Christ, being incorporeal in that Thou art God, Thou didst manifest 
Thyself incarnate from the womb of her who knew not a man, and, as man, thou wast a 
bearer of our flesh, Whose likeness we honor, O ye faithful.  
Kontakion of the holy angels, in Tone II: 
Supreme Leaders of God's armies * and ministers of the divine glory, * princes of 
the bodiless Angels and guides of mankind, * ask ye for that which is beneficial for us, 
and for great mercy, ** as Supreme Leaders of the Bodiless Hosts. 
Ikos: In Thy Scriptures, O immortal Lover of mankind, Thou didst say that a 
multitude of angels rejoiceth in heaven over one man that repenteth. Wherefore, O-
Sinless One, Who alone knowest the hearts of all people, amid our transgressions we 
ever make bold to beseech Thee to have compassion and send down compunction 
upon us, unworthy though we be, granting us forgiveness, O Master; in that Thou art 
compassionate, for the supreme commanders of the bodiless host entreat Thee on 
behalf of us all.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: 'O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.' 
For our salvation Thou didst appear incarnate from a virginal womb, and knowing 
Thy Mother to be the one who gave birth to God, we cry with thanksgiving, „Blessed 
are Thou O God of our Fathers!‟ 
O Virgin, thou art the all-blessed rod from Jesse‟s root, blossoming with a salvific 
fruit for those who with faith cry to thy Son, „Blessed are Thou O God of our Fathers!‟ 
O Hypostatic Wisdom of the Most High, through the Theotokos fill with wisdom 
and divine power all those who sing to Thee in faith, „Blessed are Thou O God of our 
Fathers!‟ 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Canon I of the bodiless hosts 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, * 
changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages'.  
O Compassionate One, Thou didst reveal the immaterial essence of Thine angels to 
be light, for they are unceasingly filled with Thine ineffable light, crying aloud: Blessed 
art Thou, O God, throughout the ages!  
The myriads of ministering angels cannot endure to behold the sight of the 
Countenance before which they unceasingly stand, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O 
God, throughout the ages!  
Thou didst create the nature of the angels by Thy hypostatic Word, and having 
sanctified it by the divine Spirit, O God, Thou didst teach it to bless the Trinity 
throughout all ages.  
Trinitarian: Mindful of the three hypostases, we glorify the un-circumscribed essence 
of the Father, the Son and the Spirit, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O God, 
throughout the ages!  
Canon II of the bodiless hosts 
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: 'O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.' 
Come ye, O human race, and with the choirs of the bodiless ones let us worship, 
celebrating on this auspicious day the memory of the wise archangels of Christ, singing: 
Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O God of our fathers!  
Of old, Abraham the God-seer, and the glorious Lot, gave shelter to the angels, in 
that they were hospitable, and they found fellowship with the angels, crying: Holy, holy, 
holy art Thou, O God of our fathers!  
To the valiant Manoah and the most wise Tobit appeared the angels who give 
rewards for the struggles of life as is meet; and once the Angel of the children quenched 
the flame in the fiery furnace.  
Theotokion: All that is ours by nature didst Thou take from the Virgin, except 
change, O Jesus, and with the fathers we proclaim Thee to be of two natures, but One 
in hypostasis; and, depicting the visage thereof, we faithfully venerate it.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let us 
praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Do thou quench the seductive and fiery darts of those who are our enemies, that we 
may hymn thee, O pure Maiden, throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
In a manner surpassing nature, O Virgin, thou hast given birth to God the Word, 
the Creator and Savior; therefore we hymn thee throughout all ages. 
The unapproachable Light, Who made His abode within thee, O Virgin, hath 
shown thee to be a radiant golden lamp throughout all ages. 
Canon I of the bodiless hosts 
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the mystery of the 
Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning bush: * praise ye and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Let us emulate the life of the angels and wing our thoughts to the heights, and with 
them let us immaterially chant unto the Lord, hymning and supremely exalting Him 
throughout all ages!  
The angels, heavenly members of the chorus which doth surround the throne of 
glory and ever dance about God, hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Trinitarian: The Trinity, which unceasingly maketh its ministers a flame of immate-
rial fire in the highest and doth show forth its angels as spirits, let us worship and 
glorify throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: Him before Whom myriads of angels and archangels stand in 
trepidation wast thou deemed worthy to bear in thine arms, O Theotokos, pray thou 
that those who glorify Him may be saved throughout all ages.  
Canon II of the bodiless hosts 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they had 
been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and Redeemer; * 
‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages’. 
Michael the archangel is chief among the angels; but with him Gabriel is also 
radiantly glorified as the initiate of the mystery of grace, the honored one who obtained 
the consent of the Virgin, the champion leader of the bodiless ones; and they both 
proclaim joy unto those who cry: O ye people, exalt Christ supremely throughout all 
ages!  
Ezekiel, beholding the ranks of angels in their divers forms, proclaimed, 
prophesying: 'Among them six-winged seraphim stood in intercession, and many-eyed 
cherubim surrounded them; and with them I saw most radiant archangels glorifying 
Christ throughout all ages'.  
How the dread coming of Thy second Judgment will be was foretold by Daniel in 
revelation: 'The thrones were set, and the Ancient One sat, and He let in the myriads of 
angels who stand with fear and cry out with incessant voices to the Trinity throughout 
all ages'.  
Theotokion: The Word, Who is consubstantial with the Father and the Spirit, of His 
own will manifested Himself from the Virgin is like unto us, not mingling one with the 
other of the two natures of His awesome union. For He showed Himself to be One 
and the Same in both, in two natures, and one hypostasis. And now we bow down 
before the image of His likeness.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
ODE IX  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
We are filled with joy and gladness at the thought of thee, overflowing with healing 
for those who approach thee and devoutly proclaim thee to be the Mother of God. 
With psalms we sing thy praises, O thou who art Full of grace, and never silent, we 
ceaselessly offer thee our praises; for thou art a fount of rejoicing for all. 
Fair is thy fruit, O Theotokos, for those who partake of it, it is incorruption, and for 
those who magnify thee with faith, it is life. 
Canon I of the bodiless hosts 
Irmos: Thou hast passed the limits of nature, * having conceived the Maker and 
the Lord, * and didst become a door of salvation * unto the world; * wherefore 
we unceasingly magnify thee, O Theotokos. 
O Christ, Who hast ineffably united those who are in heaven with those who are on 
earth, and made one Church of angels and mortals, Thee do we unceasingly magnify.  
O ye angels and archangels, thrones, virtues and dominions, principalities and 
powers, cherubim and seraphim: pray ye with the Theotokos on behalf of the world.  
O Michael and Gabriel, who are shown to be leaders of all, visit those who with love 
honor your most festive memory and faithfully cry aloud: Save us from all evil 
circumstances!  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O holy bride of God! Rejoice, thou that didst give birth unto 
the Light of the world for the faithful! Rejoice, rampart and shelter of us all! Do thou 
unceasingly entreat God on our behalf, for He is our Benefactor.  
Canon II of the bodiless hosts 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
 Ye have shown yourselves to be champions for the infirm, for those who sail the 
sea and those who are in need, O Michael and Gabriel, first among the bodiless hosts.  
O Gabriel, in that thou dost hold chorus with the divine powers and thrones, and art 
the champion leader of the angels and an initiate of the mysteries of God, pray thou to 
the Savior for us.  
In that ye are the protectors of the world and commanders of the hosts on high, 
entreat ye the Savior on our behalf.  
Theotokion: Together we glorify thee, O Theotokos, for thou dost save us from the 
passions and dost fulfill those of our supplications which are to our benefit.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
 
Exapostilarion of the holy angels:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”:  
O Michael, chief captain, from the Father of lights thou didst receive command of 
the fiery servants. Wherefore, thou dost have the radiant brilliance of His glory, 
standing before His most honored throne as first among the immaterial ranks.  
Glory ..., Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples ...”:  
O most glorious Michael, divine supreme commander, who standest before God, 
leader of the immaterial powers, archangels and angels, dominions, thrones and 
principalities: standing before the unbearable throne, protect, keep, preserve and save 
all who with faith honor thee as the intercessor for the world.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Thou art more honorable than the glorious cherubim, O all-hymned one, and more 
glorious beyond compare than the awesome seraphim, and more holy than all the holy 
angels, O most pure one; for thou didst ineffably give birth in the flesh to the Creator 
of all, O Theotokos. Him do thou entreat, that He grant remission of transgressions 
unto thy servants.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy angels, 3 in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
O Michael, chief commander, * with fear we hymn thee * as first captain of the 
heavenly ranks, * mighty intercessor, protector * and deliverer of men on earth; ** and 
we pray that thou deliver us from every deadly pestilence.  
As chief captain of the divine hosts of heaven * thou dost today summon the choirs 
of mankind * to hold one radiant festival with the angels, * that of their divine synaxis, 
* and with them to chant ** the thrice-holy hymn unto God.  
O Michael, divine intellect, * do thou keep and protect all throughout life * us that 
with faith flee beneath the shelter of thy divine wings; * and at the dreaded hour of our 
death, O archangel, * do thou stand forth ** as a most gracious helper for us all.  
And the composition of Ephraim of Karyes, in Tone IV:  
O supreme commanders, three-sunned rays made luminous by light divine, ye en-
lighten the immaterial legions; shown forth as light with splendid brightness in the 
highest, ye shine forth the fire of the unapproachable Godhead in the world. 
Wherefore, with lips of flame ye unceasingly chant the thrice-holy hymn: Holy, holy, 
holy art Thou, O our God! Glory be to Thee!  
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
Where thy grace doth overshadow, O archangel, the power of the devil is driven off, 
for the fallen Morning Star cannot bear to behold thy light. Wherefore, we beseech 
thee, by thy mediation quench thou his fiery darts which are hurled at us, delivering us 
from his temptations, O right praiseworthy supreme commander Michael.  
 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
We, the faithful bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, and we glorify thee as is meet, for 
thou art the impregnable city, the impassable rampart, the steadfast intercessor and 
refuge of our souls.  
Great Doxology. Troparia. Dismissal. First Hour 

--- PAGE 22 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the first canon of the holy 
angels, and 4 from ODE VI of the second canon of the angels.  
With strength, O Immortal One, hast Thou appointed the mighty ones who fulfill 
Thine all-holy will, ever standing before Thee in the highest. (Twice) 
O Christ, accept those who pray on our behalf, the commanders of the angels, 
initiates of the mystery of Thine incarnation and Thine honored Resurrection.  
Thou hast appointed angels as guardians for all mankind, in that Thou art 
compassionate; and Thou hast shown forth the ministers of the salvation of Thy 
favored ones.  
Taking flight in mind away from material corruption, let us with fear honor the 
immaterial ones who are bodiless like flames of fire and light, chanting hymns unto 
them with lips of clay.  
Calm the tempests of the passions, O archangels, and quell all revolts against the 
Faith, for ye are the holy and fiery chief commanders of the Trinity.  
O captains Michael and Gabriel, ye chief commanders and archangels of God, 
leaders of the bodiless ones, preserve us from all heresies by your protection.  
Theotokion: O Christ, being incorporeal in that Thou art God, Thou didst manifest 
Thyself incarnate from the womb of her who knew not a man, and, as man, thou wast a 
bearer of our flesh, Whose likeness we honor, O ye faithful.  
Troparion of the holy angels, in Tone IV:  
O supreme commanders of the heavenly hosts, * we entreat you unworthy though 
we be, * that by your prayers, you will encompass us * with the protection of the wings 
of your immaterial glory * preserving us who fall down before you and earnestly cry 
aloud: * deliver us from all misfortunes, ** for ye are the commanders of the hosts on 
high. 
Kontakion of the holy angels, in Tone II: 
Supreme Leaders of God's armies * and ministers of the divine glory, * princes of 
the bodiless Angels and guides of mankind, * ask ye for that which is beneficial for us, 
and for great mercy, ** as Supreme Leaders of the Bodiless Hosts. 
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a 
flame of fire.  
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been magnified 
exceedingly.  
THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE HEBREWS(2:2-10) 
Brethren: if the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and 
disobedience received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect 
so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was 

--- PAGE 23 ---
confirmed unto us by them that heard him; God also bearing them witness, both with 
signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to 
his own will? For unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the world to come, 
whereof we speak. But one in a certain place testified, saying, What is man, that thou art 
mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him? Thou madest him a little 
lower than the angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and didst set him over 
the works of thy hands: thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet. For in that 
he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him. But now 
we see not yet all things put under him. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower 
than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor; that he by the 
grace of God should taste death for every man. For it became him, for whom are all 
things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the 
captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him all ye His hosts.  
Verse: For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were 
created.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE(10:16-21)  
The Lord spake to His disciples: He that heareth you heareth me; and he that 
despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me. And 
the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us 
through thy name. And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. 
Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the 
power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding, in this 
rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names 
are written in heaven. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O 
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and 
prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so, Father; for so it seemed good in 
thy sight.  
 
Communion Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of 
fire.  
 
