--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 7th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE 33 MARTYRS IN MELITENE  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER LAZARUS THE 
WONDERWORKER, WHO STRUGGLED IN ASCETICISM ON MOUNT GALESIUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
As is meet, O right glorious ones, ye were truly shown to be * a divinely assembled 
regiment, * a sacred army, * a godly company, a holy nation, * a legion of martyrs 
inspired by God, * a comely gathering, * an unbreakable alliance, * inhabitants of the 
city on high. ** Wherefore as is fitting, ye are called blessed.  
Assembling together, * let us all honor Nicander and Hesychius, * Athanasius and 
Mamas, * the divine Barachius and Callinicus, * Theogenes and Nicon, * Longinus 
and Theodore, * Valerius and Xanthius, * Theodulus, Callimachus and Eugene, ** the 
godly Theodochus and Ostrychius.  
Together let us hymn with faith * the true witnesses: * the valiant Hieron, * the 
glorious Epiphanius, Maximian and Ducitius, * Claudian and Theophilus, * and the 
godly Gigantius, * Dorotheus and Theodotus, * Castrycius, Anicetas and Themelius, 
** as well as Eutychius.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”:  
Having set aside all the folly of the passions * and made thy flesh subject to thy 
spirit, * thou didst become a rule of virtue, * the confirmation of monastics, * a 
model for fasters, * the adornment of the venerable. * And now thou dost behold * 
the ineffable beauty of thy Creator, * ever nurtured by the Spirit on the beauties of 
heaven. * Wherefore, having assembled, * we celebrate thine honored and most 
festive memory ** in hymns, with sweet songs.  
Thou didst cut off * all the heavy burden of material things * and the greatly 
tumultuous turbulence of the flesh, * and, controlling thy breathing, O wise one, * 
thou didst remain unaffected by the passions, strong as a pillar, * through spiritual 
breastplates * and valorous mind. * And now thou hast truly received * the divine 
vision and splendor and hast taken thy place * before Him Whom thou didst desire, * 
delighting in His never-ending radiance, ** deified by thy posture.  
Loving the light, like Elijah * and John the luminary, * thou didst observe stillness 
in the mountains and arid deserts, * ever learning divine ascent * and excelling in the 
way of the virtues. * Wherefore, thou hast attained thine ultimate desire, O most wise 
one, * and, rejoicing, dost stand * before the thrice-radiant light of the Trinity; * and 
receiving divine splendor * directly therefrom, * thou prayest with boldness ** on 
behalf of our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
O venerable father, thou gavest neither sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine 
eyelids, until thou didst free thy soul and body from the passions and didst prepare 
thyself to be a dwelling-place of the Spirit; and Christ, coming with the Father, made 
His abode within thee. As thou art a favorite of the consubstantial Trinity, O great 
preacher Lazarus our father, pray thou on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing her Lamb hastening to the slaughter * the Ewe-
lamb eagerly followed Him crying aloud: * ‘Whence goest Thou, O my sweetest 
Child? * O most beloved Jesus, sinless Lord, rich in mercy, * O longsuffering Christ, 
why dost Thou so swiftly and so fearlessly proceed? * Speak to me Thy handmaiden, 
O my well-beloved Son: * pass not by me, Thy Mother, without a word, * O all-
compassionate God, ** who grantest the world great mercy.’ 
Aposticha from the Oktoechos. Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O venerable father, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; 
wherefore, thou hast found the reward for thy labors in the heavens, hast destroyed 
legions of demons, attained unto the ranks of the angels and blamelessly emulated 
their life. As thou hast boldness before Christ, entreat peace for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure Virgin Mother, * beholding the most iniquitous 
people * who unjustly nailed Thee to the Tree, ** was wounded within, as Symeon 
foretold.  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
With prayerful vigils and outpourings of tears thou didst water thy pillar, * and 
with sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst bring forth fruit a hundredfold, * 
and wast a shepherd, granting the petitions of all. ** O Lazarus our father, entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, and two canons for the saints.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is:  
“I offer this praise to the wise martyrs”, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Having joined the divine hosts of heaven, O right victorious martyrs, ask for the 
cleansing of all who praise your luminous memory.  
Desiring to tread the path of martyrdom with splendor, ye mightily endured all the 
threefold waves of torture, strengthened by the Holy Spirit.  
Ye were shown to be luminaries upon the earth, dispelling the darkness of 
polytheism, O divine spiritual athletes. Wherefore, ye have received the never-waning 
light.  
Theotokion: He Who createth all thing by His command and hath crowned the 
spiritual athletes who likewise trampled down the foe, became ineffably incarnate 
from thee O pure Mother.  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is: 
“I chant entreaty unto thee after God, O thrice-blessed one”, in Tone II: 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Come, ye faithful, and, rejoicing with faith and a godly spirit, let us praise the 
divine Lazarus, crying out to Him: O blessed one, deliver us from misfortunes by thy 
supplications.  
God caused thee to return again to thy native land, even though thou didst not 
desire to do so; wherefore, by thy supplications save me who ever pursue the 
passions.  
The radiant and divinely bestowed love which shone forth richly within thee, O 
God-bearer, caused thee to lay down thy life zealously for thy neighbor.  
Theotokion: From all wrath and tribulations do thou save us who bow down 
before thy holy image and confess thee with faith to be the Birthgiver of God, O all-
immaculate Theotokos.  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
With thy sacred precepts, O glorious and divinely blessed Hieron, thou didst train 
the sacred martyrs for the divine contest and most gloriously caused them to 
disregard the torments.  
Crushed by a tree, O holy ones, ye emulated the precious suffering of the 
supremely good Master and with the grace of the Almighty crushed the pernicious 
deceivers.  
Setting your hope upon the Lord of all, O martyrs who behold God, ye were in no 
wise moved from your great stand, but in a lawful manner accomplished the divine 
course with an upright character.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O pure Lady, Maiden of many names, who hast given birth 
unto the infinite Word Who became circumscribed in the flesh, Whom confessing the 
choir of the martyrs suffered most mightily.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Fortified by divine strength, O wise one, thou wast delivered from savage beasts. 
Wherefore, entreat Christ, that He deliver from noetic beasts those who hymn thee.  
Strengthened by the power of Christ, O venerable one, thou didst manfully endure 
the hunger, privation and oppressiveness of the desert in the hope of ineffable 
sweetness.  
Protected by divine grace, O all-blessed one, thou didst escape the assaults of the 
hostile spawn of Hagar, saved for the benefit of many.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth to the Master of all, O pure Virgin, in a manner 
ineffable and past all telling. Him do thou entreat, O all-hymned one, that He rescue 
those who hymn thee from the dominion of the passions.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
With gladness the Church of Christ * doth glorify thee in psalms * as a most 
wondrous luminary. * Wherefore, cease thou never to beseech Christ, ** that He 
grant forgiveness of transgressions unto all.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Having shown mighty courage, O wise ones, ye foiled the most malicious snares 
of the enemy, preaching Christ at the tribunal. Wherefore, when ye were beheaded, ye 
were crowned by the right hand of God, O thirty three blessed inhabitants of 
Melitene. O honorable martyrs, be ye mindful of us who honor you with faith.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”:  
Thine heart, O venerable one, possessed of divine intelligence, exchanged earthly 
things for things divine and lasting; and thou hast now joined chorus with the angels, 
delighting in immaterial light and rejoicing unceasingly. Wherefore, O venerable one, 
entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only most pure Virgin Mother, 
* who hast surpassed the angels in purity. * With the divine waters of thy 
supplications cleanse me, * who more than all others am dust and defiled * by carnal 
transgressions, O pure one, ** and grant me great mercy. 
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure Mother who hath not known wedlock, O Christ, * 
upon seeing Thee hanging dead upon the Cross, * said, weeping maternally: * How 
hath the iniquitous and ungrateful synagogue of the Jews repaid Thee, * which hath 
enjoyed Thy many and great wonders, ** O my Son?  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
With the rays of divine struggles, O spiritually rich martyrs, ye most gloriously 
enlighten all the ends of the universe, driving away the darkness of the invisible foe. 
Wherefore, with pious mind we celebrate your radiant and divine solemnity.  
Having completed the contest, and given your own blood for Him Who suffered 
and shed His divine blood willingly on the Cross for our salvation, O ye who are of 
one mind, ye have all been deemed worthy of equal honor. Wherefore, we call you 
blessed.  
Now let us praise the wise martyrs Theogenes and Mamas, Hieron, Claudian, 
Nicon and Nicander, Longinus and Hesychius, Barachius, the great Callinicus and the 
godly Xanthius, Theophilus and Valerius.  
Most wisely hastening to the struggle, O right glorious ones, ye found the divine 
grace of the Redeemer which accomplisheth all things, and right wisely endured all 
manner of tortures, chanting unto Christ with thanksgiving: Glory to Thy power, O 
Lover of mankind!  
Theotokion: The shadows of the law and the visions of the prophets proclaimed 
thee of old to be the Mother of the Redeemer; and, beholding thee, O all-immaculate 
one, we now chant unto thee together, O glory of passion-bearers and might of the 
holy martyrs.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
As thou didst avoid all transitory things, passionate attachments and love, O 
venerable one, having ever set all thy hope on God, all that thou didst acquire, the 
hands of the poor received.  
Turning aside the malice of the demons through the onslaughts of wild beasts, O 
venerable and blessed one, thou didst remain in no wise touched thereby, protected 
by the grace of God Who doth ever aid thee in all things.  
Seeing thy love and gratitude towards God, O venerable one, the most wicked one 
sought to weaken thy strength. Wherefore, he set dogs upon thee; but his wiles were 
shown to be in Vain.  
Theotokion: I hymn thee, O Lady Theotokos, and cry out to thee: Preserving me, 
sanctify me by thy supplication, and guide me who have fallen through many sins and 
am beset by the assaults of the demons, to salvation.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Let us praise the wise spiritual athletes who manfully completed the course, 
honoring Maximian and the godly Eugene, Theodore and Ducitius, Callimachus, 
Theodulus and Dorotheus.  
The valiant warriors who were voluntarily slain and crushed have inherited 
everlasting immortality, and join chorus now in the spaciousness of paradise, having 
received blessed hope.  
Having spurned the slumber of indifference, O all-praised ones, with godly 
vigilance ye raced each other during your contest, the course of the divine faith of 
martyrdom, and have now arrived at the refuge of heaven.  
Theotokion: O all-praised Lady who hast loosed the bonds of Hades by thy divine 
birthgiving: loose me who am bound with the bonds of transgressions, I pray thee, 
and set my feet upon the paths that lead to life.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
The evil one, hoping to cast down the steadfastness of thy soul and the firmness 
of thy resolve, O venerable one, transformed himself into a dog, and thus came to try 
thee.  
In great dearth of confusion the enemy departed, O blessed one, seeing thee in 
nowise affected, but moreover endured want with thanksgiving.  
Ever bearing the Cross in thy hands like a staff of power, O venerable one, thou 
didst grind down all the activity of the enemy’s wiles to dust.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: Save me from every assault of enemies visible and invisible, a all-
hymned Mother of God, thou hope of the despairing and intercessor of the faithful.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
In hymns let us bless the spiritual athletes Theodotus and Hilarion, the wise 
Gigantius and Athanasius, and the divine Eutychius and Epiphanius.  
With faith let the valiant martyrs of Christ be blessed: Hieron and Diodotus, the 
wise Castrycius and the godly Ostrychius, the great Themelius and Amonitus.  
Having drowned the invisible Pharaoh and all his army in the outpouring of your 
blood, O right victorious martyrs, ye reached the heavens adorning the Church of the 
firstborn.  
Theotokion: The weaponry of the enemy hath been rendered useless, O Birthgiver 
of God, from the moment Christ to Whom thou hast given birth, was pierced by the 
spear, edifying with blood and water those who have become wearied.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: From within the sea monster Jonah cried unto the Lord: * “Lead me up 
from the abyss of Hades, I pray Thee; * for with a voice of praise as to my 
Redeemer, * in the spirit of truth * I offer myself to Thee.”  
Desiring to show thy heart to be a temple of God, O venerable one, thou didst go 
about the churches of the saints, from whom thou didst abundantly receive the grace 
of the Holy Spirit as confirmation for many.  
Thy native land received thee back as a priceless treasure through the judgment of 
God, O divinely wise one. Wherefore, make me, who am a stranger to the homeland 
of Eden, to be an heir thereto, O venerable one.  
The church of the virgin-martyr Marina first received thee as a tenant, and therein 
thou didst shine forth like a never-waning star, shedding light upon those who sleep 
in the darkness of ignorance, O venerable one.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Virgin, entreat thy Son and Lord on behalf of thy 
servants who ever venerate the precious image of thy countenance with faith; for 
thou art able so to do.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “As first-fruits ...”:  
The radiant choir of martyrs, the luminous company, descending to us noetically, * 
hath illumined the Church today with wondrous rays. * Wherefore, celebrating their 
honored memory, we ask of Thee, O our Savior: ** through their supplications 
deliver us from misfortunes, that we may chant unto Thee: Alleluia!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: ‘O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.’ 
Seeing thy precious hand severed for the truth, O glorious Hieron, thou didst cry 
out hymns of thanksgiving unto Him Who seeth all things, chanting: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
With great sense wast thou the model for thy fellow sufferers, O glorious Hieron, 
and with them thou hast received a portion in the kingdom on high, chanting: O God 
of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
As valiant warriors of the eternal King, with the sword of your courage ye 
destroyed the legions of the deceiver, chanting: O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  
Theotokion: Since thou hast given birth to the Physician, O pure Virgin, heal thou 
the sufferings of my heart and deliver me from everlasting torment who cry out in 
hymns: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Of old the youths revealed themselves to be rhetors * with a love for 
supreme wisdom, * for from the depths of their God-pleasing souls, * they 
theologized with their lips as they sang: * O supremely divine God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst prepare an abundant feast, replete with thy goodly divine virtues; and 
nurturing all therewith, thou didst teach them to chant: O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Following the words of thy most wise teachings, and having with true zeal set 
aside the love of all transitory things, people chose to dwell with thee as something 
good, O all-blessed one.  
Having acquired thy manner of life from the wondrous Symeon, thou didst stand 
unsheltered upon thy pillar, adamant as stone, crying out in gladness: O most divine 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Save me from the snares of the enemy by thy mediation, O pure one, 
and to the ultimate love of thy good Son bind me who am ever driven away from 
Him by wicked pleasures.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Having died to the world, ye inherited the life to come and pour forth the grace of 
healing upon those who chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord; exalt Him 
supremely forever!  
Shown by the beams of your sufferings to be splendid luminaries, ye illumine the 
world, O martyrs and passion-bearers, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Cast into prison, O ye true divine preservers of the truth, your flesh scourged 
pitilessly with leather thongs, O blessed ones, ye in no wise strayed from the straight 
path. Wherefore, ye have received crowns of victory.  
Theotokion: As one holier than the angels, O pure one, thou didst receive the God 
of all Who resteth in the saints. Wherefore, all of us, the faithful, hymn and glorify 
thee throughout all ages.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Truly studying the struggles and feats of the fathers who fasted before thee, O 
father, thou didst strive to show thyself their successor; and not only did so, but even 
surpassed them.  
Thou didst fulfill the supplication wherewith thou didst entreat God of old, O 
thrice-blessed one, offering thy bread unto all and saying: O Lord of glory, Thine own 
of Thine own do we offer unto Thee throughout all ages!  
Directing those with thee toward the divine path by word and deed, O father, and 
being thyself directed thereto far more than they, thou didst perform miracles for 
them; for God increased the harvest through thy supplications.  
Theotokion: Let heaven rejoice! Let the earth and mortals be glad! For the Virgin 
Mary hath ineffably given birth unto the Creator of all, to Whom we chant: We su-
premely exalt Thee, O Christ, throughout the ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Strengthened by divine power, O all-wondrous Hieron, with strength of mind thou 
wast able to vanquish the greatly devious one, and lead to Christ an assembly of 
spiritual athletes by thy teachings, with whom we ever bless thee with faith.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Ye were shown to be an honorable army assembled in Christ, O ye of great 
renown, and opposers of the powers of the prince of this world. And having 
vanquished them with the sword of the divine faith, in gladness ye received crowns 
from the hand of the Author of life.  
Rise up, O Melitene, bringing to the Almighty a goodly assembly of honored 
martyrs, whose city is on high, since they have completed the sacred race! And with 
all cities ever bless them with faith.  
O Christ, Thou never-setting Sun: through the supplications of Thy glorious 
martyrs illumine with rays of splendor and sanctify those who celebrate their radiant 
and divine martyrdom, and, as Thou art God, grant us to share in the kingdom on 
high.  
Theotokion: I tremble before Thy coming judgment, O only King, and am afraid 
lest I be cast into suffering and torment. But cleanse me of all defilement of sin 
through the supplications of Thy most pure Mother, O Lover of mankind.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Woe is me! I have led a life of sloth and fear the dread judgment! Yet, O Lord 
Who lovest mankind, by the entreaty of Lazarus send me torrents of tears, that I may 
thereby wash away the filth of my transgressions.  
Possessed of a calm soul, O father, thou didst likewise have a suitably meek 
countenance, O wise one, wholly revealed to be consoling to all, watering men’s souls 
with the streams of thy words. Beseech Christ that He grant this tranquility also unto 
us.  
Desiring to reveal thy most clearly manifest and divine virtues plainly to all, O 
venerable father, God caused thee to approach the wild mountain, from whence thou 
didst illumine the whole world, readily emitting rays of life.  
Theotokion: Show forth thy Son, to Whom thou hast given birth without seed, as 
a merciful Judge when He shall seat Himself upon the holy throne, as it is written, to 
judge all mortals for the wicked things they committed during their life, O Maiden.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Protected by the sword of Thy precious Cross, O Word, Thy spiritual athletes 
mightily vanquished the adverse powers and put the tyrant to shame. They suffered 
for Thee, and reign together with Thee, O my Christ, King of all.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
 
Glory ..., Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”:  
Let us all praise with hymns the ever-memorable Lazarus, the God-bearer and 
emulator of the Master, who with the power of God destroyed the savagery of the 
demons.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Thee did Daniel describe beforehand as the unquarried mountain from whence 
the precious Stone was cut, which crushed the temples of the idols, O Mary, 
Birthgiver of God.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
With prayerful vigils and outpourings of tears thou didst water thy pillar, * and 
with sighs from the depths of thy soul thou didst bring forth fruit a hundredfold, * 
and wast a shepherd, granting the petitions of all. ** O Lazarus our father, entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
The radiant choir of martyrs, the luminous company, descending to us noetically, * 
hath illumined the Church today with wondrous rays. * Wherefore, celebrating their 
honored memory, we ask of Thee, O our Savior: ** through their supplications 
deliver us from misfortunes, that we may chant unto Thee: Alleluia!  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
With gladness the Church of Christ * doth glorify thee in psalms * as a most 
wondrous luminary. * Wherefore, cease thou never to beseech Christ, ** that He 
grant forgiveness of transgressions unto all.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
 
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, §213(5: 22-6: 2)  
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, 
faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are Christ’s 
have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also 
walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, 
envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, 
restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be 
tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, §10(4: 25-5: 12)  
At that time: there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, and 
from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond Jordan. And 
seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was set, his disciples 
came unto him: and he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, Blessed are the 
poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for 
they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed 
are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. 
Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for 
they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children 
of God. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is 
the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, 
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be 
exceedingly glad: for great is your reward in heaven.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall not 
be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
