--- PAGE 1 ---
ON THE SUNDAY FOLLOWING NOVEMBER 1st 
THE SYNAXIS OF ALL THE HOLY UNMERCENARY PHYSICIANS 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Resurrectional Stichera, in the Tone of the Week. 
Then 6 Stichera of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone IV: 
Come, ye faithful, and with hymns let us honor all the holy unmercenary 
physicians, * crying out to them with love: * Rejoice, O unmercenary physicians of 
the infirm! * Rejoice, ye who have acquired the inexhaustible grace of healings! * 
Rejoice, O ye who pray fervently for the salvation of our souls!  
Together let us now hymn all the valiant unmercenaries, * who bear a common 
title, * our divine guardians, who with the zeal of faith and love for God * gave 
themselves over steadfastly to the common good of all, * for whom they suffered 
much for Christ, * and who pray with boldness for the salvation of our souls.  
Let us glorify the honored boast of the Church, * the glorious unmercenaries, the 
invincible champions, * the faithful helpers of those who with faith flee to them amid 
all tribulations, * the ever-flowing rivers which pour forth streams of healings, * 
anticipating in all things the needs of all, * and praying for the salvation of our souls.  
As ye have the boldness before our most merciful Savior * to have mercy on all 
and save them from misfortunes, * deliver from sufferings and disease, * and from all 
grievous temptations, * those who hymn you with faith and love, * O all ye divinely 
blessed unmercenaries, * and pray ye also for the salvation of our souls.  
Having kept well the commandments of the Lord, * and utterly cut off from 
yourselves the sickness of avarice, * ye freely heal infirmities, O all-glorious Cosmas 
and Damian. * Wherefore, we bless you as is meet, O most honoured 
wonderworkers, * who pray for the salvation of our souls. 
O unmercenary healer Panteleimon, * the most merciful God, seeing thee rich in 
mercy and compassion, * gave thee rich grace to heal all the infirm. * Wherefore, treat 
thou the diseases of the souls and bodies * of those who call upon thee with faith, * 
and pray for the salvation of our souls.  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VI:  
Today we praise the blessed choir of the holy unmercenary physicians: * the 
Apostle and Evangelist Luke, the excellent healer of the infirm; * Antipas, 
Charalampius, and Blaise, the most honored hieromartyrs; * Spyridon and Modestus, 
the all-splendid luminaries of the Church; * the three pairs of divinely wise saints 
Cosmas and Damian, who shared the same names and the same ways; * Cyrus and 
the glorious John; * the godly Panteleimon and Hermolaus; Diomedes and Sampson; 
* together with Mocius, Photius, and Anicetas, * Artemius, Thalalæus, and Tryphon. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., The Dogmatic Theotokion, in the Tone of the Week. 
The Three Lessons: 
READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (ISAIAH 43: 9-14) 
Thus saith the Lord: Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be 
assembled: Who among them can declare this, and show us former things? Let them 
bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified; or let them hear, and say, It is 
truth. ‘Ye are My witnesses,’ saith the Lord, ‘and My servants whom I have chosen: 
that ye may know and believe Me, and understand that I am He; before Me there was 
no other God formed, neither shall be after Me. I, even I, am the Lord; and beside 
Me there is no savior. I have declared, and have saved, and I have showed, when 
there was no strange god among you: therefore, ye are My witnesses, saith the Lord, 
that I am God. Yea, before the day was I am He; and there is none that can deliver 
out of My hand; I will work, and who shall prevent it?’ Thus saith the Lord, your 
Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. 
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (WISDOM 3:1-9) 
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. Those who put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect. 
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (WISDOM 4:7-15) 
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the grey hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was loved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his 
soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in their minds, 
that His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His 
chosen. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
On the Aposticha, the Resurrectional Stichera from the Oktoechos;  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Today the radiant and luminous memorial * of all the unmercenaries of Christ 
hath shone forth, * brilliantly enlightening the whole world with rays of miracles. * 
Come, therefore, and let us celebrate with faith! * Come, let us all hasten with fervor 
to the relics of the saints, * that from them we may receive speedy healing in 
abundance! * For without fee they impart gifts of healing unto all * through the 
activity of the Holy Spirit 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the 
primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O most 
pure one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Lady, ** the 
intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 
At the Blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Twice) 
Troparion of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone VIII: 
O holy unmercenary physicians and wonder-workers, visit our infirmities. ** 
Freely have ye received, freely give unto us. (Once) 

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Resurrection (Twice):  
Glory ..., Troparion of the holy unmercinaries in Tone VIII: 
O holy unmercenary physicians and wonder-workers, visit our infirmities. ** 
Freely have ye received, freely give unto us.  
Both now ..., The Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
The Sessional Hymns of the Resurrection in the Tone of the week. 
Then the Polyeleos, and this Magnification: We magnify, * we magnify you, * O 
holy passion-bearers, martyrs, and healers, * and we honor your precious sufferings, * 
which ye endured for Christ.  
The Evlogitaria of the Resurrection. 
The Hypakoi of the Resurrection, in the Tone of the week.  
Then the Sessional Hymns of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone II: 
While joining chorus in the habitations on high, ye do not forsake those below, O 
divinely blessed unmercenary physicians; for ye visit with mercy those who call upon 
you, delivering them from a great multitude of evils, in that ye are the guardians of 
our life.  
 O ye saints, how can we fittingly praise your love for God and neighbor, whereby 
ye do good to all who stand in need of your help? Wherefore, cease ye never to help 
us who ask your aid.  
Glory ..., O saviors of the faithful and dispersers of evils, ye freely grant healings 
to the sick, O right wondrous ones, visit us also, freeing from infirmities and the 
passions us who hymn you with love.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion: With the holy unmercenary physicians, O Ever-virgin, 
pray to the Creator and God of all Who was born of thee, that He grant goodly order 
to our lives, that we may be delivered from torments and may be vouchsafed the 
portion of the elect through thine intercession.  
Hymns of Ascent, and the Prokeimenon in the Tone of the week. 
The appointed Gospel Reading.  
Then: “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” and Psalm 50. 
The usual Resurrectional Troparia following Psalm 50. 
Then “Save O God Thy people ...,” 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
The Canons: One for the resurrection in the Tone of the week, with four 
Troparia, including the Irmos; one for the Theotokos in the Tone of the week, with 
two Troparia; and the following Canon for the holy unmercenary physicians, with 8 
Troparia: 
ODE I  
Canons of the Resurrection & the Theotokos, 
Canon of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Refrain: Holy unmercenary healers, pray to God for us 
O radiant servants of the Lord, pray for me who with faith beg to be granted the 
discourse of wisdom, that, rejoicing, I may hymn your honored festival.  
Honoring the memory of the unmercenary physicians today, with a pure heart and 
unsullied conscience let us hymn them, that through their intercession we may receive 
the grace of healing.  
The earth gave rise to you, O divine unmercenaries, and heaven holdeth your 
souls, O glorious ones; for, having lived a heavenly life on earth, ye now rejoice on 
high together.  
Having mastered the skill of treating men's souls more than their bodies, O Luke, 
thou wast shown to be in all ways most good and inspired by the wisdom of God, 
wherewith thou treatest those who call upon thee.  
O most blessed and divinely wise Apostle Luke, heal the passions of soul and 
body of those who hymn thee, excising the putrefaction of sin with the surgery of the 
mysteries of God.  
The church wherein thy long-suffering body lieth is healing for the sick, O 
hieromartyr Antipas, and it emitteth the divine radiance of the Spirit.  
Glory ..., The hallowed shrine of thy sacred relics poureth forth the myrrh of 
healings, dispelling the fetid passions, O Antipas, and filling with sweet fragrance 
those who glorify thy memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: O Christ, we bring before Thee the Ever-virgin, who 
gave birth to Thee in the flesh, and the assembly of the unmercenary physicians, that 
they may entreat Thy might. Through their supplications grant peace to our life.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her dormition. 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE III 
Canons of the Resurrection & the Theotokos, 
Canon of the holy unmercinaries: 
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Like luminaries in the divine firmament of the Church, ye illumine the faithful 
with the light of miracles, which do ye never cease to perform, O glorious ones, 
healing men's infirmities.  
Having finished the same race, ye were vouchsafed the same gifts, and have 
received equal honors in heaven, O wonder-working unmercenaries. 
Bound to God and neighbor by love, by grace ye destroy all the malice of the 
demons; wherefore, we celebrate your festival, O right wondrous ones.  
In that the divine fire burneth within you, O blessed of God, extinguish the flame 
of our passions, warming our minds with faith.  
We now hymn the three most honored pairs of unmercenaries Cosmas and 
Damian, whose works were the same, as were their names.  
Radiant of life, steadfast of faith and equal in zeal, they shone forth from Rome, 
Asia, and Arabia. Wherefore, let them be honored together by us.  
Glory ..., Come, be ye healed of your infirmities, O ye sick; for the three pairs, rich 
in the grace of the Trinity, grant healings unto those who hymn God with faith. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: O Theotokos, who gavest birth to the Healer of souls 
and bodies, grant us healing, pouring forth the oil of thy loving-kindness, unto our 
health and salvation. 
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Kontakion of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone II 
Having received the grace of healings, * ye extend health to those in need, O all-
glorious physicians and wonderworkers. * By your visitation cast down the audacity 
of the enemy, ** healing the world through miracles. 
Ikos: The discourse of the wise physicians passeth all understanding and wisdom, 
and they give knowledge unto all; for, having received the grace of the Most High, 
they invisibly grant healing unto all. Wherefore, it hath been given to me to recount 
and hymn their grace, in that they are God-bearing favourites and servants of Christ, 
who bestow a multitude of miracles; for they deliver all from sickness, healing the 
world by miracles.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Sessional hymns of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone VIII: 
All-adorned by the Spirit like lilies, like roses, ye emit sweet fragrance upon all; 
wherefore, we flee unto you, O God-bearing unmercenaries. Entreat Christ God, that 
He grant remission of transgressions unto those who with love celebrate your holy 
memory.  
Glory ..., Having received blessed hope, ye are fittingly called blessed by all, as 
fulfillers of the divine wishes of our God; and ye have been shown to be healers of 
incurable infirmities, O unmercenaries of great renown. Wherefore, heal ye our 
passions and drive away the clouds of despondency from those who call upon you 
with faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: Come, let us magnify the Queen of all with our voices, 
and chanting, let us cry aloud: O most hymned Virgin, cause of joy, save those who 
honor thee, and protect us from all manner of temptations, ailments, and tribulations; 
for as the Mother of God thou hast the boldness to pray for us. Wherefore, we 
beseech thee: Entreat thy Son and God, that He grant forgiveness to thy servants.  
ODE IV 
Canons of the Resurrection & the Theotokos, 
Canon of the holy unmercinaries: 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord.  
Lo! the glorious and most radiant memorial of the divinely brilliant physicians 
hath shone forth, gladdening the hearts of the Christian people who have recourse to 
their healing relics.  
Exceeding good is it to remember today the all-praised greatmartyr Panteleimon 
and his glorious instructor Hermolaus, as among the foremost unmercenaries.  
With mouth and heart let us all hymn Hermolaus and Panteleimon, the athletes of 
Christ, crying: Rejoice, O our healers, ye intercessors and helpers of this community!  
Through the sacred entreaties of Hermolaus and Panteleimon, the namesake of 
mercy, take not Thy mercy away from us, O most merciful Lord, and, having pity as 
is Thy wont, deliver us from evils.  
O Panteleimon, thou wast shown to be splendid in thy manner of life and yet 
more splendid in thy struggles, enriched with knowledge from on high, which thy 
works proclaim; and thou takest pity upon all who call upon thee for help.  
Thou takest away every ailment from those who flee to thy protection, O healer. 
And now, visit those who pray to thee with faith, and deliver them from multifarious 
infirmities.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., O Panteleimon, thou adornment of the honored unmercenaries, 
ornament of the holy martyrs and physician of the infirm: Be thou a mediator for us 
before the all-holy Trinity.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: Thy grace and the surpassing wealth of Thy love for 
mankind fill Thy most good Mother and the all-honored unmercenaries to 
overflowing, as they were a cup.  
Katavasia: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
ODE V 
Canons of the Resurrection & the Theotokos, 
Canon of the holy unmercinaries: 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Let us hymn the divine love of Cyrus and John and the martyric death they 
suffered for Christ; for having manfully contended through their glorious struggle, 
they have been shown to be the boast of the martyrs.  
Two luminaries, Cyrus and John, shine forth the effulgence of miracles from a 
single radiant source, pouring forth the grace of incorruption upon the infirm. Let us 
therefore call them blessed.  
O Cyrus and John who art most rich, ye warriors of Christ and physicians of the 
infirm: having received from the most compassionate God the ability to work 
miracles, heal those who hymn you.  
With hymns do I praise Mocius, Photius, and Anicetas, who are in the choir of the 
God-bearing unmercenaries, the speedy helpers of those who call upon them amid 
misfortunes and tribulations.  
Possessing thee as a lustrous pearl, precious in thy wounding, O most blessed 
Mocius, physician who exactest no fee, the honored Church is adorned.  
Ye were shown to be great beacons illumining all creation with rays of healing and 
divine struggles, O Photius and Anicetas, ye athletes of Christ.  
Glory ..., Ye heal the passions of the faithful, portraying the blessed Passion in 
your sufferings; and ye banish ailments and drive away evil spirits, O glorious Photius 
and Anicetas.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: O almighty Lady, transform the weakness and 
impotence of our souls and bodies into strength and health, that we may vigilantly 
carry out the commandments of thy Son and God.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Katavasia: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin 
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, 
* and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn 
thee. 
ODE VI 
Canons of the Resurrection & the Theotokos, 
Canon of the holy unmercinaries: 
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Celebrating your most honored festival, O all-praised imitators of Christ and most 
fervent mediators, with faith we ask help of you.  
Submitting to the divine command, O divinely wise ones, ye desired to take 
nothing in fee. Freely did ye receive: freely give those things which conduce to life 
and salvation.  
Today let us all honor with honorable praises the venerable Sampson and 
Diomedes of the choir of the unmercenaries, setting them forth as advocates before 
God, the King of all.  
With thine all-glorious physicianship, which thou didst acquire through pangs, O 
father, cease not to visit us, we pray, easing the ailments and labors of our souls with 
thy compassion.  
Invested with divine power, O martyr Diomedes, thou dost cause illnesses to 
cease, dost banish infirmities and drivest evil spirits away, in that thou art most 
excellent among unmercenary physicians.  
The grace of the Spirit adorned thee with rich gifts; for by thy supplications, O 
glorious Artemius, every sickness ceaseth among those who have recourse unto thee.  
Glory ..., O greatmartyr Artemius, imitator of the Savior and favorite of the 
Trinity, from corruption, passions, temptations, and tribulations rescue us who call 
upon thee with faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: O all-pure Virgin Lady, deliver us from all wrath, 
famine, and pestilence, and free us from everlasting torment through the intercession 
of Artemius.  
Katavasia: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O 
ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
The Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection in the Tone of the Week. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE VII 
Canons of the Resurrection & the Theotokos, 
Canon of the holy unmercinaries: 
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise’ * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons’ * by 
the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
How shall we praise you, O all-famed ones who surpass our understanding and 
ability to recount, and who amaze us exceedingly with miracles, for which we cry 
aloud: O Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
O divinely wise ones, ye in no way loved vanity or the pleasures of life, but 
considered all of them to be as dung, for ye possessed Christ, to Whom ye cried 
aloud: O Lord God, blessed art Thou!  
How can we fail to hymn the seal and boast of the glorious choir of the 
unmercenaries, the honoured and right wise Thalalæus and Tryphon, who work an 
unceasing multitude of miracles?  
The drops of thy blood were shown to be healing for the faithful, O Thalalæus, 
washing infirmities away and quenching cruel fevers through the grace of Christ, the 
Bestower of crowns.  
While herding geese in the fields, thou didst receive from God the grace of 
healings, to cure the weaknesses and infirmities of men, O greatmartyr Tryphon, thou 
physician who requiredst no fee.  
Thy wounds put forth the sweet fragrance of myrrh, O martyr Tryphon, thy 
blood poureth forth healings, and the remains of thy body sanctify the souls of those 
who touch them.  
Glory ..., Deliver Thy servants from bodily illness and spiritual weakness, O Thou 
Who art God in three Hypostases, and preserve us unharmed by all of the 
temptations of this life. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: With the honorable unmercenaries thou everywhere 
pourest forth streams of healing upon the sick, O Virgin; for the Lord of mercy, Who 
became incarnate of thee, hath shown thee to be a wellspring of loving-kindness. 
Katavasia: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII 
Canons of the Resurrection & the Theotokos, 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Canon of the holy unmercinaries: 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Holy art Thou, O Almighty One, Who glorifiest Thy saints! For for their sake 
Thou deliverest the world from misfortunes and dost enlighten those who hymn and 
exalt Thee supremely forever.  
Abiding in the habitations of the Most High, O ever most memorable ones, ye 
never cease to show mercy to those on earth, and ye do good unto those who hymn 
and exalt the Lord supremely forever.  
Thy union with God, accomplished by thy corrections, O blessed Blaise, hath 
shown thee to be a benefactor of both reason-endowed and irrational creatures; 
wherefore, thou hast received gifts of healings.  
As a venerable hierarch, O Blaise, thou bearest the wounds of the sufferings of 
Christ Who gave thee the grace to heal all sicknesses; wherefore, come to our help 
with thy goodly gifts.  
Having illumined thy mind with dispassion and adorned it with humility, O 
Spyridon, thou wast enriched with the gifts of the Spirit, to drive away evil spirits and 
loose the infirmities of those who honor thee with faith.  
The river of the gifts which abide in thee watereth every heart, O venerable 
Spyridon; it giveth health unto all, and restoreth all to the glory of God Who hath 
glorified thee.  
We bless the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, the Lord ..., Merciful art Thou, 
O indivisible Trinity, for in that Thou art most compassionate, Thou hast mercy upon 
all. Wherefore, we who are weighed down by sins flee unto Thee, crying: Cleanse 
Thou Thy servants! 
Both now ..., Theotokion: With the unmercenaries, O Mistress, pray for us who 
have set our hope on thee, that we may be delivered from future condemnation and 
may be vouchsafed to enter the kingdom of heaven. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Then we chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (Magnificat). 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE IX 
Canons of the Resurrection & the Theotokos, 
Canon of the holy unmercinaries: 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Celebrating the memory of our common helpers, we earnestly cry out to thee: 
From all harm, tribulation, and grievous illnesses rescue those who hymn you!  
Let us bless Charalampius, the wonderworker among hierarchs and generous 
helper among passionbearers, the physician of the infirm, and dispeller of pestilential 
plagues.  
Thou hast been shown to be a great defender of the faithful and a deliverer from 
misfortunes, O divinely wise Charalampius; wherefore, from all wrath and pestilence 
free those who glorify thee.  
When thy relics are honored and kissed, ailments of body and soul cease, O 
Charalampius; for Christ hath given them the ability to heal and to drive away 
grievous sufferings.  
Today let us praise Modestus, the lamp of the Church which hath been set on the 
lampstand of Sion, who shineth forth with rays of loving-kindness and healeth the 
diseases of men and cattle.  
Thou wast long the shepherd of Jerusalem, and hadst compassion for both 
reason-endowed and irrational creatures; and thou art now a citizen of the city on 
high, where do thou remember those who commemorate thee.  
Glory ..., O ye unmercenaries who imitated Christ, accept this our meagre 
hymnody, and ask of the Trinity forgiveness for us who are guilty of many sins. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: O good Savior, through the entreaties of Thine all-
hymned Mother and of all the all-praised unmercenaries, send Thy mercy and help 
down from heaven upon us who call upon Thee. 
Katavasia: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Exapostilarion of the resurrection gospel for the day; then: 
Glory ..., Ye have received from God the grace of healing, to cure ailments and 
heal all who have recourse to your divine temple with faith, O blessed unmercenaries; 
wherefore, together we bless your honored memory as is meet.  
Both now ..., Theotokion of the resurrection gospel. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
On the Praises, 8 Stichera: 4 Stichera of the resurrection from the Oktoechos, and 4 
of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone I: 
Today hath the feast of all the holy unmercenaries shone forth! * The choir of the 
angels holdeth festival, and we mortals join chorus; * for the ever-memorable ones 
pray for those who honor their holy memory with love.  
As the rain-laden clouds of the Supreme Being, * ye water the whole earth with 
manifold miracles of grace, O glorious ones, * compelling it to produce hymns of 
praise unto God.  
Verse: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous; * He 
hath wrought all His desires in them. 
Receiving from Christ the skill to heal sufferings of soul and body, O 
wonderworkers, * ye supernaturally heal all with medical cures which are not of man,* 
but are of divine origin, O unmercenaries.  
Verse: Behold, what is so good or so joyous * as for brethren to dwell together 
in unity? 
O right wondrous Panteleimon, thou adornment of the unmercenaries, * 
ornament of the martyrs and helper of thy monastery, * be thou the healer of our 
sicknesses and a faithful advocate for our souls.  
Glory ..., The Eothinon of the resurrection gospel. 
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II: “Most blessed art Thou ...” 
After the Great Doxology, the Resurrection Troparion, the two remaining Litanies 
and Resurrectional Dismissal; First Hour. 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the unmercenaries: 
Like luminaries in the divine firmament of the Church, ye illumine the faithful 
with the light of miracles, which do ye never cease to perform, O glorious ones, 
healing men's infirmities.  
Having finished the same race, ye were vouchsafed the same gifts, and have 
received equal honors in heaven, O wonder-working unmercenaries. 
Bound to God and neighbor by love, by grace ye destroy all the malice of the 
demons; wherefore, we celebrate your festival, O right wondrous ones.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, who gavest birth to the Healer of souls and bodies, 
grant us healing, pouring forth the oil of thy loving-kindness, unto our health and 
salvation. 
Troparion of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone VIII: 
O holy unmercenary physicians and wonder-workers, visit our infirmities. ** 
Freely have ye received, freely give unto us. 
Kontakion of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone II:  
Having received the grace of healings, * ye extend health to those in need, O all-
glorious physicians and wonderworkers. * By your visitation cast down the audacity 
of the enemy, ** healing the world through miracles. 
 
The resurrection Prokeimenon and verse, in the Tone of the week. 
Then: Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the 
Lord been wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them. 
 
THE EPISTLE READING FOR THE SUNDAY. 
 
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §221 (EPH. 2:14 - 22)  
Brethren: Christ is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down 
the middle wall of partition between us, having abolished in His flesh the enmity, 
even the law of commandments contained in ordinances, that He might make in 
Himself one new man out of the two, so making peace, and that He might reconcile 
both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby. He came 
and preached peace to you who were afar off and to those who were nigh; for 
through Him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father. Now therefore, ye 
are strangers and foreigners no more, but fellow citizens with the saints, and of the 

--- PAGE 15 ---
household of God. Ye are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, 
Jesus Christ Himself being the chief cornerstone, in whom all the building, fitly 
framed together, groweth unto a holy temple in the Lord, in Whom ye also are built 
together for a habitation of God through the Spirit. 
Alleluia, and verse, in the Tone of the week.  
Then: alleluia of the holy unmercinaries, in Tone II: Behold, what is so good or 
so joyous as for brethren to dwell together in unity?  
 
THE GOSPEL READING FOR THE SUNDAY. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §34,(MT. 10: 1,5-8)  
At that time, when Jesus had called unto Him His twelve disciples, He gave them 
power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and 
all manner of disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying: 
“Go not into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: 
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying: 
‘The kingdom of heaven is at hand.’ Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, 
cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.”  
 
Communion Verse: Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the 
highest.  
Second Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet 
for the upright.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
