--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 17th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, GREGORY THE 
WONDERWORKER, BISHOP OF NEO-CAESAREA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call thee ...”: 
What shall we call thee, O Gregory? * Master, for thou didst subject the passions 
to thy mind! * Husbandman, for thou didst reap the fruit of wisdom! * One who hath 
been deemed worthy of divine vision, * and hath been catechized with heavenly 
theology; * a most sacred performer of the mysteries * and most wondrous worker of 
miracles. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
What shall I call thee now, O Gregory? * Mighty destroyer of godless impiety, * 
one that setteth the laws of piety, wise teacher, * and bestower of invincible peace, * 
unvanquished overthrower of armies, * thou who ever abidest in the mountains * and 
lookest down upon those who are in the cities. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved. 
(Twice)  
What now shall I proclaim thee, O venerable one? * Emulator of the apostles, * as 
a worker of miracles, * who didst restrain the river by the invocation of Christ * and 
dried up the lake which was the cause of contention between brethren, * who 
dispersed the synagogue opposed to God, * and increased and enlightened Christian 
assemblies. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
What now shall I proclaim thee, O venerable one? * Guide of those who are astray 
* and physician of the ailing, * bestower of an abundance of necessities upon those 
who ask, * most mighty persecutor of demons, * one who urged the struggle of 
martyrdom, * and was prophetically illumined with graces, O right glorious one. ** 
Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Having all-wisely entered the depths of knowledge, O hierarch of Christ, thou 
didst acquire the vision of the Trinity; foreseeing unwaveringly in the Spirit Christ our 
God, thou dost pour forth upon us an abyss of miracles, having made the watery 
nature of the sea solid and changed the pagan priest's dark delusion into belief, thou 
didst persuade the persecutors to believe truly and show thyself to them to be a pillar 
of the virtues of piety; and through thy miracles wast called a prophet. Wherefore, we 
beseech thee, cease thou never to entreat the Savior on our behalf, that our souls be 
saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth birth to 
Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son How is it 
that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
The wakefulness of God was given thee, O wise one, as it had been given to 
Daniel; for, as a dream was revealed to him, so was the mystery of the Faith disclosed 
to thee. Wherefore, O venerable father, pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee hanging upon the Cross * the all-pure one 
weeping, cried aloud with a mother‟s grief: * „O my Son and my God, O my sweetest 
Child, ** how dost Thou endure this shameful suffering?‟ 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
By vigilance in prayer and continuance in the working of miracles, * thou didst 
acquire the name of thy worthy deeds. * Yet pray thou to Christ God, O father 
Gregory, ** that He enlighten our souls, lest we sleep unto death.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and that of the saint, with 6 Troparia, the acrostic 
whereof is: “I shall weave praise for Gregory the Wonderworker,” the composition of 
Theophanes, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
O father Gregory, do thou now splendidly show forth the divine activity of thy 
wonders in me, delivering me from the abyss of my transgressions and enlightening 
me with thy radiance, that I may hymn thee as is meet, O blessed one.  
As one who is skillful, sensible and wise, thou didst prefer nobility of soul to the 
passions of the flesh, O blessed one, industriously assembling the dogmas of wisdom 
whereby the soul that draweth nigh to God is nourished, O Gregory.  
When thou hadst acquired chastity as a sister, as a good companion, O Gregory, 
the wicked serpent, beholding thee, raised up hatred against thee. But thou didst put 
him to shame, O father, by thy longsuffering, healing the woman who was held fast in 
the clutches of passion.  
Residing in a strange land, O venerable one, in thy virtue thou wast manifest to all 
as honorable, pious and God-loving, having received the gift of working wonders 
from God, whereby thou hast been known, O divinely eloquent one, shining forth in 
the world like the sun.  
Theotokion: Thou wast put forth as a shoot from a royal root, O pure one, and, in 
a manner surpassing comprehension and thought, thou didst give birth from thy pure 
blood unto Christ the King, the incarnate Word of God, Who is of two natures, yet a 
single hypostasis.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Having cleansed thy mind of the turbulence of the passions, and being full of the 
love of wisdom and vision, thou wast shown to be magnificent, an abode of wisdom, 
enriched with the gift of prophecy, O Gregory.  
Being conversant in the divinely inspired Scriptures, O all-blessed one, and having 
clearly chosen a different way of life, thou didst establish within thyself the single 
image of virtue, O divinely wise Gregory.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
O divinely revealed one, having obtained the mystery of theology through divine 
initiation, enlighten us, that we may honor the consubstantial Trinity, one in essence, 
uncreated and equally everlasting.  
Instructed by God, in that thou didst seek Him with love, thou didst have the pure 
Theotokos Mary and the son of thunder as instructors in the mysteries, guiding thee 
to the light of the Trinity, O divinely eloquent one.  
Theotokion: O pure Maiden, we all know thee to be the staff which budded forth 
Christ, the Flower of incorruption, and the golden censer who held in thine arms the 
Burning Coal of the divine Essence, O divinely blessed one.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine faith ...”:  
Thou wast a new Moses in thy works, receiving the tablets of faith on the 
mountain of mystical divine revelation, setting down as law for the people the piety of 
the mystery of the Trinity, O Gregory. Wherefore, all we, the faithful, honor thy 
memory, asking for great mercy through thee. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only most pure Virgin Mother * 
who surpassed the angels in purity. * By the divine waters of thy supplications * 
cleanse me who, more than all others, * have become dust, defiled by carnal 
transgressions; ** and grant me great mercy, O pure one.  
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Having ploughed the good earth, O divinely wise father, and sown the seed of the 
Word, thou dost ever now evangelically increase thy yield an hundredfold, O 
Gregory, by thy teachings bringing to God those who chant: Glory to Thy power, O 
Lover of mankind!  
Thy life, shining forth like lightning, O father, hath dispelled the falsehood of the 
demons; for their darkness could not withstand the light of thy virtues. Wherefore, 
the minister of spiritually pernicious deception, moved like the stone he beheld, was 
enlightened.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thou wast deemed worthy to behold the darkness of the most divine Light, O 
father, and, having received the divinely written law like Moses, thou didst obtain 
precision in theology. Hence, thou hast been shown to be a law-giver of the Church 
of Christ, O divinely wise Gregory.  
Having turned away from the foolish talk of the rhetors and being enlightened by 
the word of grace, O father, thou didst truly receive the apostles' power over the 
demons, for the prince of darkness fled before thy brilliant splendor.  
Theotokion: From of old the ark prefigured thee, O all-immaculate one, who 
received within thy womb the divinely written Law, ineffably conceiving the life-
creating Word, Who doth richly nourish the souls of those who cry aloud: Glory to 
Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Having loosened hardened hearts with the husbandry of thy words, thou didst cast 
upon them the divine seed, O hierarch, bringing forth an abundant harvest, the 
salvation of the faithful, unto the Redeemer, O divinely eloquent one.  
Phaedimus, the servant of God, aflame with zeal, piously trusting in God, Who 
knoweth all things, and in thine honorable life, O divinely eloquent father Gregory, 
ordained thee even though thou hadst not come to him.  
With the streams of thy precepts thou didst quench idolatrous immolations, and 
established the faithful through thy teachings, O all-wise one, having, like Samuel, 
ascended the mountain through visions, and being also like an oak in thy 
steadfastness.  
O divinely wise and holy hierarch, by thy prayers deliver me from evil and grievous 
circumstances, and rend asunder the handwriting of my transgressions, O father, for 
thou art a priest who hast received from God the power to loose transgressions.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou wast adorned with the most pure beauties of thy 
virginity, covering the misshapen shame of the first Eve, having given birth to Christ, 
Who bestoweth upon those who honor thee the garment of immortality.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
The lake which was the cause of contention between two brethren didst thou dry 
up in a miraculous fashion; and thou didst cause the rushing of the river to cease, O 
all-wise one, and when thou didst plant thy staff, it took root and grew at thy divine 
command, O Gregory.  
Godly zeal consumed thee, O spiritually rich hierarch, for unable to endure the 
sight of an insult to God, O divinely eloquent one, thou didst destroy the vain-
minded one by thy prayers.  
The wretched and impious Jew, who wished to destroy thee, himself died, showing 
thee forth as a fulfiller of the dogmas of God, Who doth glorify thee, O divinely wise 
Gregory.  
Theotokion: The Spirit, Who worketh all things, came down upon thee, O all-
immaculate one, and the Word of God made His abode within thee, ineffably 
becoming flesh, yet remaining unchanged.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Receiving the power to work many miracles, * thou didst terrify the demons with 
awesome signs, * and dispelled the diseases of men, O all-wise Gregory. * And thou 
wast called the wonderworker, ** receiving this title from thy works.  
Ikos: Where shall I, wretched as I am, begin to weave praises, beholding so many 
and most wondrous things? If I begin with the life of the venerable one, I will not in 
any way be able to proceed; for his divine life surpasseth comprehension. And if I 
begin with his miracles, I shall be ashamed to try to proceed any further, for they are 
more numerous than the sands of the sea. For this cause he is called the wonder-
worker, receiving this title because of his works.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God's condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The boast of the fathers and the pride of the holy instructors, the luminary of the 
Church and immovable pillar of piety hast thou been revealed to be, O Gregory, who 
dost cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Shining forth in miracles, thou didst enlighten the whole world, O divinely wise 
Gregory; wherefore, having assembled together, we bless thee, nurtured by thy words 
and chanting: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
O divinely wise one, thou hast poured forth healing upon all the infirm; for most 
abundant and wonderworking grace was poured forth through thy mouth, whereby 
thou didst cry: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: Now all things are filled with divine light through thee, O most pure 
one; for thou hast been revealed to be the door through which God hath communed 
with the world, enlightening those who cry with faith: O God of our fathers, Blessed 
art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Enriched by thee with the radiance of the consubstantial and honored Trinity and 
celebrating now thy festival, O Gregory, we ask that we may be illumined with 
wonderworking grace, crying aloud to the Master: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; 
ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Receiving the radiance of the sovereign Godhead like a newly revealed mirror, O 
spiritually rich hierarch, thou hast illumined the world with rays of light, beaming 
down Orthodoxy upon those who melodiously chant: Ye children bless; ye priests 
hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Protected by God, O all-wise one, thou wast preserved in hiding on the mountain 
for those who honor God, as a source of piety, like another Moses the law-giver; and 
thou didst teach them to hymn the Creator and Redeemer, singing: Ye children bless; 
ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Thou wast the abode of the unwaning Light, O most pure one, 
shining with the beauties of virginity and illumining all who from the depths of their 
souls confess thee to be the true Theotokos and who chant: Ye children bless; ye 
priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Shining with the light of thy most exemplary life, thou dost now stand before the 
great Light, crowned as a victor with divinely wrought miracles, O divinely wise 
wonderworker, venerable hierarch, father Gregory, thou beacon of the Church and 
adornment of the Orthodox.  
In thy supplications do thou now ask that the royal elect and sanctified priesthood 
be guided aright, O wonderworker, and that those who now faithfully celebrate thy 
memory receive the Kingdom of heaven and be deemed worthy of divine gladness.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Having put down the attacks of the demons and subjected the reasoning of thy 
flesh, O wonderworker, as a venerable and guileless hierarch, arrayed in the garment 
of righteousness, thou dost stand before the throne of the King of all with boldness, 
O all-blessed one.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother of God, thou art revealed as she who, in a manner 
transcending nature, gaveth birth in the flesh to the good Word, Whom the Father 
poured forth from His heart before all ages, in that He is good. Him do we now 
know as more exalted than all beings, even though He hath been clothed in a body.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Thou didst shine forth in miracles, O wonderworker Gregory, delivering the pagan 
priest from corruption and demonic deception by moving a stone at thy command; 
and, having dried up a lake, thou didst restrain a river. Wherefore, we all praise thee 
together, O thrice-blessed one.  
Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Rejoice, thou boast of the faithful, confirmation of the venerable! Rejoice, glory of 
the righteous! Rejoice, thou light of those who are in darkness! Rejoice, most holy 
temple! Rejoice, paradise of God! Rejoice, loosing of the curse, O blessed Mary!  
After the Aposticha from the Oktoechos, this Sticheron to the saint, in Tone IV:  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Having received the election of the priesthood from God and been vested in a 
divine robe from on high, thou didst show forth those who before were children of 
unbelief to be children and heirs of the light; for the grace of the wisdom of God was 
poured forth in thy mouth, O Gregory, performer of most glorious deeds. 
Wherefore, now, on the day of thy commemoration, entreat Christ God on behalf of 
our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Filled with awe by the hierarch renowned for his wonders, inanimate things were 
altered; for a lake which was the cause of dissension between two brethren dried up, 
and a staff grew, restraining a river; a stone moved at thy command, leading the 
unbelieving to knowledge of God. For his sake, O God, grant our souls great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all? * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 4 Troparia from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of the 
canon of the holy hierarch.  
Having cleansed thy mind of the turbulence of the passions, and being full of the 
love of wisdom and vision, thou wast shown to be magnificent, an abode of wisdom, 
enriched with the gift of prophecy, O Gregory.  
Being conversant in the divinely inspired Scriptures, O all-blessed one, and having 
clearly chosen a different way of life, thou didst establish within thyself the single 
image of virtue, O divinely wise Gregory.  
Instructed by God, in that thou didst seek Him with love, thou didst have the pure 
Theotokos Mary and the son of thunder as instructors in the mysteries, guiding thee 
to the light of the Trinity, O divinely eloquent one.  
Theotokion: O pure Maiden, we all know thee to be the staff which budded forth 
Christ, the Flower of incorruption, and the golden censer who held in thine arms the 
Burning Coal of the divine Essence, O divinely blessed one.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
By vigilance in prayer and continuance in the working of miracles, * thou didst 
acquire the name of thy worthy deeds. * Yet pray thou to Christ God, O father 
Gregory, ** that He enlighten our souls, lest we sleep unto death.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II: 
Receiving the power to work many miracles, * thou didst terrify the demons with 
awesome signs, * and dispelled the diseases of men, O all-wise Gregory. * And thou 
wast called the wonderworker, ** receiving this title from thy works. 
  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
 
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS(12:7-11) 
Brethren; the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. For 
to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge 
by the same Spirit; to another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing 
by the same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to 
another discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another the inter-
pretation of tongues: but all these worketh that one and selfsame Spirit, dividing to 
every man severally as he will.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: For the Lord hath elected Zion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation 
for Himself.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW(10:1, 5-8) 
At that time; Jesus called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave them power against 
unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of 
disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying: Go not into the 
way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not, but go rather to 
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying: The kingdom of 
heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: 
freely ye have received, freely give.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
