--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS JOHN, PATRIARCH OF 
ALEXANDRIA, THE ALMSGIVER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER NILUS  
AT VESPERS.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
“Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Scattering abundantly, thou didst distribute * thy bread to those who were in need 
thereof, O wondrous John, * emulating in mercy * the exceedingly merciful Master, O 
venerable one, * wherefore, thy memory * truly abideth forever, O holy one. * By thy 
supplications do thou save * those who celebrate it with faith ** from temptations 
and tribulations, O spiritually rich hierarch.  
Foreseeing thy purity, * the uprightness of thy mind and thy godly demeanor, * He 
Who seeth things that are hidden * elevated thee to a most magnificent throne, * 
anointing and perfecting thee with chrism, O wise one, * and manifestly appointing 
thee the pilot of His flock * which thou didst guide to the heaven * of divine desire, 
** O divinely eloquent John.  
All the requests * of thy heart, O right wondrous one, * did the Lord grant; * for 
thou didst observe all the laws of salvation. * For God and neighbor * didst thou 
unendingly love, O divinely blessed one, * as if thy very self; * and thou didst satisfy 
those who were in need. ** Wherefore, we honor thee today, O John.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Me!.: “What shall we call you ...”: 
What now shall we call thee, O holy one? * A river issuing forth from the noetic 
Eden, * a torrent of gifts bestowed by God, * a flood of the grace of teachings, * a 
cup of wisdom and knowledge, * a most mighty intercessor, a most active teacher. ** 
Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
What shall we name thee, O venerable one? * Cultivator of the gardens of 
immortality, O blessed one, * husbandman of the noetic paradise of the faithful, * 
most skilled in the laws given by God, * one who knowest the divinely inspired 
dogmas, * speaker of nature most good, and instructor most content. ** Pray thou 
that our souls be saved.  
What now shall I call thee, O wondrous one? * One who laid down the rules of 
marriage, * governor of chastity, instructor of monastics, guide of virginity, * one who 
rightly balanced both, * as having by experience passed through both. * Many were 
thy goodly deeds and great thy fasting for God. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone II, the composition of Anatolius: 
John, the emulator of Christ, the great pastor and beacon of the Alexandrians, the 
wellspring of mercy, hath increased his right sympathetic compassions for those who 
are in need. Come ye, let us who are poor in spirit drink our fill, emulating his 
serenity; for having with a proper compassionate demeanor shown hospitality to the 
wandering Christ through the poor, like Abraham of old he was deemed worthy of 
blessedness, and prayeth with boldness that our souls find mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Tree of the Cross. O Jesus, she 
who kneweth not wedlock said weeping: “O sweet Child, why hast Thou abandoned 
me who alone gave birth to Thee, O unapproachable Light of the beginningless 
Father? Hasten Thou, and glorify Thyself, that those who glorify Thy divine 
sufferings may receive divine glory!” 
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
We honor thee, the instructor of a multitude of monks, O Nilus our father; for by 
thy steps have we truly known how to walk aright. Blessed art thou who, laboring for 
Christ, denounced the power of the enemy, O converser with angels, who sharest the 
lot of the venerable and the righteous. With them entreat the Lord, that our souls find 
mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thy martyrs ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee O Lord Jesus, * nailed upon the cross and 
voluntarily accepting the passion, * the Virgin Mother cried aloud: * Woe is me, O my 
sweet Child! * how dost Thou wrongfully endure such wounds? * O compassionate 
Physician and healer of the infirmities of mankind, * Thou hast redeemed all from 
corruption ** by Thy tender compassion. 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
In patience thou didst acquire thy reward, O venerable father, * who endured in 
prayers unceasingly, loved the poor and saw to their needs. ** Entreat Christ God, O 
blessed almsgiver John, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable one, in the same tone: 
With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, * and with sighs 
from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, * 
becoming a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. ** O Nilos our 
father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, and two canons of the saints  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy hierarch, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified! 
Enlightened with sympathy of mind and illumined with the love of Christ, shining 
with rays of almsgiving O father, thou didst become a most pure habitation of the 
one merciful God. Wherefore, we call thee blessed.  
Looking ever to those things which ever abide throughout the ages, O most sacred 
father, with wise intent thou didst most splendidly exchange corruptible things for 
those that are incorruptible; and now dwelling in the heavens, thou dost cry aloud 
with the incorporeal choirs: Let us chant unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been 
glorified!  
With thy godly intervention thou didst take pity on many, O venerable one, having 
been endowed with merciful thought, thou didst become a bestower of alms, for the 
consolation of many souls and the consideration of the poor, O all-wise, divinely 
blessed and most sacred John.  
Theotokion: O blessed, pure and all-hymned one, who alone hast given birth to 
the incarnate God, the ever-flowing Wellspring, pouring forth healings upon us, the 
faithful, who hope in thee: Beseech Him Whom thou didst bear, that He grant the 
world great mercy.  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is:  
“Nilus watereth me with noetic abundance,”; 
The composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Richly irrigating my budding thought with thy mystic waters, O blessed one, grant 
that by thy supplications it may bring forth hymns to thee like grain.  
The streams of thy words, manifestly issuing forth as from Eden, O Nilus most 
noetically rich, irrigate all the ever-flowing face of the Church.  
The river of thy dogmas and words, O divinely eloquent one, flooding, doth water 
the hearts of the pious, drowning the assemblies of the wicked.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: The destroyer and enemy vomited forth soul-destroying venom into 
the ears of Eve; but thou, O Mother of God, having given birth unto Christ, hast 
healed the harm he wrought.  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
The right sympathetic grace of the Merciful One appeared to thee, O right 
wondrous one, like a maiden of divine comeliness, wearing a wreath of olive sprigs 
and leading thee to divine mercy.  
Thou hast been seated on a sacred throne as a godly judge, O glorious father John, 
in that thou didst live like an angel, offering up sacred sacrifices of peace to the All-
Compassionate One.  
Emulating the great tender compassion of our merciful Lord Who beggared 
Himself in the flesh in His loving-kindness, O father, thou didst tend to the poor, 
gathering together those who wandered and the homeless, thus fulfilling the 
commands of God.  
Theotokion: Having made thine abode within the Virgin bodily, O Lord, Thou 
didst reveal Thyself to mankind as it was fitting for Thee to be seen; and Thou didst 
show her to be the true Theotokos, the help of the faithful, O only Lover of 
mankind.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Thy thought bore the gifts of the Spirit, O father, driving away thoughts of 
wickedness,  
O oil most fragrant, sacred minister, thou hast breathed upon us thy prayers, in 
that thou didst live by active vision.  
Heavenly teachings hast thou poured forth as from a wellspring, O all-wise one, 
enriching the pupils of the Church.  
Theotokion: Mortify the wisdom of our flesh, O most pure one, pouring forth a 
wellspring of immortality upon mankind.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”: 
Cutting down the underbrush of the uprising of the passions of the body * by thy 
vigilant prayer as though with a scythe, * thou dost thereby have boldness before the 
Lord, * do thou free me from every misfortune, that I may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, 
O universal father!  
Ikos: Who among mortals can recount the suffering of thy manner of life, the 
countless labors, the many efforts which thou didst undertake on earth like one of the 
incorporeal ones? Yet I cry aloud: Rejoice, river of divine graces; Rejoice, pipe of the 
teachings of Christ! Rejoice, cup of wisdom and knowledge; Rejoice, cultivation of 
the plantations of immortality! Rejoice, most active dogma of divinely inspired words; 
Rejoice, most skilled interpreter of the God-given law! Rejoice, husbandman of the 
noetic garden of paradise; Rejoice, great treasury of virginity! Rejoice, beautiful harp 
of the Spirit; Rejoice, sword which cuttest at the root of the passions! Rejoice, summit 
of righteous ones; Rejoice, intercessor for the faithful born of earth! Rejoice, O 
universal father!  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Possessed of a merciful character, thou wast revealed to be good of heart and 
generous to the poor and needy, O divinely inspired John. Wherefore, with a title 
befitting thine activity, O blessed one, more than all other saints Christ the Bestower 
of good gifts enriched thee exceedingly. To Him, O divinely wise and noetically rich 
hierarch, do thou pray, that He grant remission of sins unto those who celebrate thy 
holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded ...”: 
Having adorned thy mind with heavenly visions, thou didst pour forth rivers of 
theology, O God-bearing Nilus, watering the hearts of those who with faith draw 
forth the clear and pure drink of thy teachings and honor thy radiant and precious 
memory, O adornment of the venerable and boast of the fathers.  
Theotokion: O thou who hast given birth to the immutable God, * by thy maternal 
supplications * make steadfast my heart which is ever-changing due to sin, * 
slothfulness and the attacks of the deceiver; * that in thanksgiving I also may glorify 
thee O good one. * O all-immaculate Mary, Birthgiver of God, * have mercy on the 
flock ** which thou hast acquired.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Stavrotheotokion: Christ took flesh from thy pure blood * and was born from 
thee, O pure one, * in a manner beyond understanding; * upon seeing Him hung on 
the Cross between two malefactors, * thy soul was filled with anguish, * and with a 
mother’s lamentation thou didst cry aloud: * ‘Woe is me, my Child! What is this 
divine and ineffable condescension, * whereby Thou hast restored to life Thy 
creature? ** I sing the praises of Thy compassionate goodness.’ 
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Thou wast shown to be a pure habitation of the Holy Trinity, O venerable one, a 
treasury of the temple of God and the first-fruits of hierarchs.  
The tenderly compassionate Lord, noting thy great mercy, sanctified thy soul, O 
most sacred father John.  
Thou wast a most steadfast performer of the commandments of the Most 
Compassionate One, and hast been filled with His good gifts, dwelling in the 
habitations of the holy.  
Theotokion: As Thou art sinless, O God, grant us cleansing from our ignorant 
deeds, and grant peace to Thy world, through the prayers of her who gave Thee birth 
to Thee.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Raise me up from the captivity of the passions, O most wise one, offering thy 
supplications to God as the price of my deliverance. 
Having tested thyself with fasting, O all-blessed one; thou didst cleanse thyself to 
fathom the dogmas of the wisdom of Christ in a sacred manner.  
Every puffed up thought didst thou humble, O father, destroying the memory 
thereof by the abundance of thy wisdom.  
Theotokion: The Word Who is equally everlasting with the Father, and Who as 
God was first incorporeal, became incarnate from thy pure blood in the latter times, 
O most honored one.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Guide me out of the night of ignorance * with the light of Thine 
understanding, O Lord, * for I am lost on the path that ensnares the soul, * 
and direct me to the way of Thy commandments. 
  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Emulating Him Who in His mercy died a voluntary death, O wise father, thou 
didst crucify thyself to the world and the passions, and hast thereby been deemed 
worthy of celestial life, O right glorious one.  
Being meek, compassionate and peaceable, thou wast deemed worthy of 
blessedness, as the inexhaustible bread of the hungry, the bestower of benefactions 
upon the poor, and the raiment of the naked.  
Made beautiful by divine communing, like an angel thou didst serve God 
blamelessly as a hierarch, illumining the faithful with thy sacred teachings.  
Theotokion: We hymn the most pure Theotokos who without seed bore the God 
of all in her womb and gave birth to Him in the flesh for our sake, as the salvation of 
our souls.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Chastely desiring divine purity, O most wise, one, thou didst forsake all the 
passionate attachments of life.  
Taught by the divine Unity, O thou who wast revealed by God, thou didst 
noetically attain unto contemplations higher than mere knowledge.  
We know thee, O God-bearer, to be the cloud which doth inundate all ignorance 
with the showers of true knowledge.  
Theotokion: Discovering thee like a lily shining amid the thorns, the Bridegroom 
loved thee, O Virgin Mother.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Exercising thyself in supplication and fasting and entreating God in vigils, thou 
wast deemed worthy of divine revelations and visions, O divinely wise and spiritually 
rich hierarch, taught by a purity which passeth understanding and comprehension, O 
wise one.  
Thou didst live on earth as an angel with flesh, O father, joyously offering to the 
Creator the un-bloody sacrifices of peace with faith and contrite heart and spirit, O 
blessed John.  
Thy life, which shone forth more brightly than the sun, hath emitted beams of 
tender compassion upon those in need, dispelling the dark cloud of poverty, warming 
those held fast in the cold of evils, O spiritually rich and divinely inspired one.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: Cease not to pray for us, O most holy Virgin Theotokos, for thou art 
the confirmation of the faithful; we are strengthened by hope in thee and love for 
thee, and we unceasingly glorify Him Who was incarnate of thee.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Adorned with the gift of wisdom and rendered comely by the splendor of thy life, 
thou didst become a divinely sacred minister, mediating between the Creator and 
creation, as a most radiant and eminent teacher, O father.  
Having drawn nigh to the mount of the virtues and been covered with the divine 
darkness, O father, thou didst receive from God the divinely inscribed tablets of the 
dogmas, and been shown to be a second Moses, a law-giver of grace, O spiritually 
rich father.  
Having mystically of thine own will consecrated thyself as a voluntary sacrificial 
victim, O Nilus, adorned with visions and spiritual activities, thou standest before the 
Creator do thou remember us who with faith keep thy memory.  
Theotokion: Beholding the depth of thy dread mysteries in the manifestations of 
figures, the prophets proclaimed beforehand that God would make His abode within 
thy womb, O all-immaculate one; and we, beholding the fulfillment of their 
prophecies, glorify thee.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Thou didst distribute thy wealth to the destitute, * and hast now received heavenly 
riches, * O John most wise. * Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, ** we all honor 
thee, O namesake of almsgiving.  
Ikos: Trusting in the mercy of God, O John, enriched by Him with compassions 
and gifts, thou wast revealed to be merciful like Him, having compassion upon all. 
Wherefore, taking pity on my poverty, grant me the riches of thy supplication, and fill 
thou my starving heart with godly words, O divinely wise one, as of old thou didst 
feed the hungry, O namesake of almsgiving.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages'.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
With deeds didst thou proclaim the words of the Savior, and as one merciful and 
pure of Spirit, O God-bearing father John, thou hast been joined to the choir of the 
blessed.  
The taste of most sweet honey was transformed into tried gold for thee; for the 
Creator, noting thy rich willingness, gave thee rich rewards.  
Illumined by the unwaning light of the Trinity, O favorite of the Trinity, thou dost 
now enlighten those who honor thee and chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, 
throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Thee, O Theotokos, the joy of the apostles and glory of athletes, do 
we faithfully entreat: Of everlasting joy deem us worthy who unceasingly hymn thee.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: 'O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.' 
Watered by heavenly showers, O father, thou wast revealed to be fertile, bringing 
forth for the Master most comely fruits, who cry out with faith: O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Opening the flood-gates of dogmas, O all-blessed one, thy tongue doth mightily 
deluge the delusion of heresy, teaching the faithful to chant: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst lead an angelic way of life on earth in thy body, O father; and 
delighting now in the divine visions of heavenly sights, thou dost chant: O God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Thou didst reveal Thyself to be incarnate from the Virgin's womb for 
our salvation. Wherefore, knowing Thy Mother to be the Theotokos, we cry out with 
thanksgiving: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Revealing thee as a radiant star in the firmament of the Church, O father, through 
thee Christ enlighteneth those who sing with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Thou didst show thyself to be merciful, meek, right compassionate, guileless, the 
wealth of the poor, and the adornment and vesture of the naked, O father; and 
because of thine almsgiving and tender compassion thou hast been called merciful 
more than all the saints who have shone forth in loving-kindness.  
In a sacred manner didst thou adorn the throne of Mark, especially with godly 
deeds, O father; and because of thine almsgiving and tender compassion thou hast 
been called merciful more than all the saints who have shone forth in loving-kindness.  
Theotokion: The daughter of fallen Adam wast thou revealed to be, O Virgin, and 
the Mother of God Who hath restored my nature. Let us hymn Him, all ye works of 
the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The instruments of music sounded out in harmony, * and countless 
multitudes worshipped the image in Dura; * but the three Children, refusing 
to bow in obeisance, * hymn and glorify the Lord throughout all ages. 
Having received perfected virtues and loved Him Who is first among the good, 
enlightened with the brilliance thereof thou dost now cry aloud: Hymn the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Enriched by the art of knowledge, thou didst attain unto active glory, sending rays 
of grace upon those who cry out: Hymn the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages!  
Fleeing the tumults of the world, thou didst reach the haven of quietude and didst 
slay the assaults of the passions, crying out: Hymn the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Knowing well the Word of God Who was born of thee, O Virgin, we 
hymn thee most piously, chanting with faith: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout the ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Lo, after thy repose, O father, two of the holy fathers set thee in their midst, 
rendering thee most sacred honor in the tomb.  
Like the dawn, like the day hath thy splendid repose shone forth, O father John, 
enlightening those who bless thee with faith.  
Thou didst join the choirs of hierarchs, prophets, apostles and martyrs, O father; 
with them remember those who praise thee.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
The shrine where thy sacred and holy relics lie, O father John, is a wellspring of 
miracles for those who have recourse unto thee.  
Theotokion: O right beauteous Virgin, who gayest birth to the good God and 
Lord, do good to my soul which is afflicted with sin.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
The destroyer, seeing thee breaking the bonds of earthly attachment and drawing 
nigh to God, O father, raised threefold waves of barbarians against thee, thinking to 
weaken thy might; but by divine providence thou didst set at naught his machinations, 
O all-blessed one.  
Shining with the divers rich rays of teachings, thou didst illumine the souls of 
those who reverently have recourse to thee with faith; for, touching to thy lips the 
cup of pure wisdom, O all-wise Nilus, thou didst drink deeply and present it to those 
who love thee.  
Ardently didst thou mystically sanctify thyself as an unblemished sacrifice to the 
Creator, O father, loving Him with sincerity, and standing now before His throne, O 
all-blessed Nilus, do thou earnestly pray that those who celebrate thy memory with 
faith receive thy splendor.  
Theotokion: Thou didst set aright the fall of a woman, O Virgin, having given 
birth to the Word Who hath set aright those who are cast down, in that He is good 
and mighty in power, for He became incarnate through thee in His surpassing loving-
kindness, and hath saved the world by His passion-slaying sufferings.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Emulating the mercy of the God of loving compassion, O John, thou didst 
distribute riches to the poor; wherefore, thou hast received inexhaustible riches in the 
heavens. Hence, we now entreat thee: Pray thou unceasingly on behalf of those who 
praise thee!  
Glory ..., Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars ...”:  
Aspiring to the life of the angels, thou didst withdraw thyself into the desert; and 
having subdued the passions of the flesh, thou wast revealed to be an equal of the 
angels, O our God-bearing father.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Thou wast the cause of the good things given by God to the world, O Theotokos. 
Do thou now render the compassionate God merciful, for the salvation of all.  
On the Aposticha: Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O venerable father, report of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth; 
wherefore, thou hast found the reward of thy labors in the heavens, having destroyed 
legions of demons, and attained unto the ranks of the angels, whose life thou didst 
blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, ask peace for our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth birth to 
Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son How is it 
that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the holy hierarch.  
The right sympathetic grace of the Merciful One appeared to thee, O right 
wondrous one, like a maiden of divine comeliness, wearing a wreath of olive sprigs 
and leading thee to divine mercy.  
Thou hast been seated on a sacred throne as a godly judge, O glorious father John, 
in that thou didst live like an angel, offering up sacred sacrifices of peace to the All-
Compassionate One.  
Emulating the great tender compassion of our merciful Lord Who beggared 
Himself in the flesh in His loving-kindness, O father, thou didst tend to the poor, 
gathering together those who wandered and the homeless, thus fulfilling the 
commands of God.  
Theotokion: Having made thine abode within the Virgin bodily, O Lord, Thou 
didst reveal Thyself to mankind as it was fitting for Thee to be seen; and Thou didst 
show her to be the true Theotokos, the help of the faithful, O only Lover of 
mankind.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
In patience thou didst acquire thy reward, O venerable father, * who endured in 
prayers unceasingly, loved the poor and saw to their needs. ** Entreat Christ God, O 
blessed almsgiver John, that our souls be saved.  
Troparion of the venerable father, in Tone VIII: 
With the streams of thy tears thou didst irrigate the barren desert, * and with sighs 
from the depths of thy soul thou didst render thy labors fruitful an hundredfold, * 
becoming a beacon for the whole world, resplendent with miracles. ** O Nilos our 
father, entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable father, in Tone VIII:  
Cutting down the underbrush of the uprising of the passions of the body * by thy 
vigilant prayer as though with a scythe, * thou dost thereby have boldness before the 
Lord, * do thou free me from every misfortune, that I may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, 
O universal father!  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Thou didst distribute thy wealth to the destitute, * and hast now received heavenly 
riches, * O John most wise. * Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, ** we all honor 
thee, O namesake of almsgiving.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, §311(HEB 5: 4-10) 
Brethren: No man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as 
was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not Himself to be made a high priest; but He that 
said unto Him, Thou art My Son, today have I begotten Thee. As He saith also in 
another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. Who in the 
days of His flesh, when He had offered up prayers and supplications with strong 
crying and tears unto Him that was able to save Him from death, and was heard in 
that He feared; though He were a Son, yet learned He obedience by the things He 
suffered; and being made perfect, He became the author of eternal salvation unto all 
them that obey Him; called of God a high priest after the order of Melchizedek.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his 
tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, §24(LK 6:17-23) 
At that time: Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and 
Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that were 
vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to 
touch him: forth ere went virtue out of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his 
eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. 
Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: 
for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall 
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as 
evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, 
your reward is great in heaven:  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
