--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 10th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLES ERASTUS, OLYMPUS, RODION, 
AND THOSE WITH THEM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
O ye sacred preachers, * who like winged eagles * most splendidly traversed * the 
fullness of the world: * leading those who were pursued by the evil-doer * to the 
inviolate Faith, * Wherefore, pray ye that our souls be granted ** peace and great 
mercy.  
With sacred voices let us honor * Tertius and Sosipater, * Olympus and Rodion, * 
and with them Erastus, the initiate of the mysteries, * and the divine Quartus, * who 
glorify Christ our God * and beseech Him to grant our souls ** peace and great 
mercy.  
Ye have led the gentiles unto Christ God, O blessed one, * delivered by the blood 
* of Him Who was well pleased * to be born on earth * and Who willingly endured 
the Cross and death, * O all-wise ones. Him do ye now entreat, * that He grant our 
souls ** peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O all-hymned Lady, * the hope and confirmation of the faithful, * our refuge and 
help, we beseech thee: * from every misfortune preserve thy servants * who with faith 
worship thine Offspring. * Him do thou entreat, * that He grant unto our souls ** 
peace and great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: The Sovereign Lady, the unblemished ewe-lamb, * beholding 
her Lamb upon the Cross, * bereft of form and comeliness, * lamenting, said: “Woe 
is me! * Whither hath Thy comeliness gone, O most Sweet One? * Where is Thy 
splendor? Where is the brilliant grace * of Thine image, ** O my Son most beloved?”  
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostles * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins ** 
unto our souls. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Octoechos, and that of the holy apostles, with 4 Troparia, the 
acrostic whereof is: “I earnestly hymn the divinely eloquent disciples” The 
composition of St. Joseph the Hymnographer, in Tone I:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it shattered 
the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the deep.  
In that ye are divine disciples of our God Who, in His loving kindness, became 
incarnate, beseech Him to grant forgiveness of sins unto those who keep your 
memory, O blessed ones.  
O blessed ones, ye have been revealed to be splendid mirrors of God, reflecting 
His benefactions upon all the faithful, graciously bestowing rays of salvation, O 
apostles, ye beholders of God.  
Having drawn forth a wellspring of radiance, Erastus and Tertius, Olympus, 
Rodion and Sosipater, together with Quartus, have shone forth enlightenment upon 
all, wherefore we piously bless them.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, by thy birth giving thou hast renewed the human race, for 
thou hast given birth to the Word of the Father Who clothed Himself in mortal flesh 
and shown us the ways of immortality.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
Bearing the word as a noetic torch, O apostles, obedient to God ye traversed all of 
creation, dispelling the gloom thereof and through grace revealing as sons of light 
those who had been enslaved to the night of unbelief.  
The saving proclamation of your words hath prophetically gone forth into all the 
world, and the radiant manifestations of your deeds have gone about all the earth 
enlightening souls, O divinely eloquent apostles of the Lord.  
Making His abode in your hearts, O wise ones, the all-holy Spirit made you great 
beholders of God; going everywhere about the world, ye destroyed the temples of 
idols by grace, and raising up churches to God.  
Theotokion: O Mary, Bride of God, having come to know the only-begotten 
Word of the Father Who was begotten without mother and born of thee without 
father, we confess thee to be the Mother of God who hast given birth without pain 
and inexpressibly remained Virgin.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ..., 
Today hath dawned the honored festival of the apostles * which doth manifestly 
bestow the remission of sins ** upon all who keep their memory.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostles, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb ...”: 
Together let us honor the memory of Erastus and Olympus, Sosipater and Tertius, 
Rodion and Quartus, chanting to them: O divine preachers and servants of the Word, 
by your prayers deliver us from eternal torments.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
O pure Virgin Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, thou sole intercessor and 
protection of the faithful: from tribulations, sorrows and cruel circumstances deliver 
all who place their trust in thee, O Maiden, and save our souls by thy divine 
supplications.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain overshadowed 
by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy One of Israel * 
would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and restoration. 
Being of old the confirmation of those who were foundationless, by your divinely 
bestowed teachings ye overthrew the manifold strongholds of the enemy and gave 
them over to desolation, O ye apostles of the Savior who beheld God.  
O great preachers, divine apostles, ye have thoroughly preached the mighty works 
of Christ, and have radiantly greatly enlightened the most degraded of mortals, 
accomplishing this through mighty works of grace.  
Let the divine Olympus be praised with hymnody, and with him let Rodion be 
piously magnified, for they completed the course of martyrdom with Peter, the 
proclaimer of God, in Rome, their heads being severed.  
Theotokion: In thee, O all-immaculate one, was a newly-wrought wonder, greater 
than all wonders, manifestly shown forth; for in the flesh thou didst give birth unto 
God Who in an uncommingled union united Himself to the earthly in His tender 
compassion, O Bride of God.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE V  
Irmos: O Hou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O 
Christ, * and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * enlighten with 
the light of thine understanding * the hearts of those who with right worship 
hymn Thee.  
The Wisdom of the Father, Who brought everything into being, sent you into the 
world as teachers, O glorious ones, to make all wise in the wisdom of the Spirit by the 
revelation of truth.  
Casting the hook of the Word, O all-wise ones, by grace ye drew voiceless fish 
from the depths of ignorance and brought them, believing, unto the Lord.  
Let us praise Olympus, and the great Rodion, and Tertius, and Sosipater, together 
with Erastus and the divine Quartus: the preachers of Christ and defenders of all the 
pious.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, Bride of God, at the pronouncement of a word thou 
didst conceive the Word and, in a manner surpassing comprehension and all telling, 
gave birth unto Him as a man. Wherefore, with divinely inspired words we ever bless 
thee.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to deliver 
us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save Thy people 
O our God, * for Thou art the strength and restoration of the weak. 
O all-honored ones, rolling like stones upon the earth ye impelled towards piety 
those who with wicked intent had worshiped inanimate stones, O most blessed and 
God-beholding initiates of the mysteries of the Word.  
Preaching the uncommingled and indivisible Unity in three Hypostases, ye 
uprooted the delusion of polytheism from the earth, O ye true apostles of Christ, 
leading those who were cruelly deceived unto the light of divine knowledge.  
O most wise apostles, with the most comely knowledge ye set at naught the 
foolishness of the foolish, rendering them steadfast in belief in the One God, the 
King of all, Who adorneth all creation with the outpourings of divine light.  
Theotokion: We glorify thee, O Lady, who hast been revealed to be another 
heaven yet more exalted than the first, shining forth upon us the Sun of righteousness 
and dispelling the deep darkness of unbelief.  
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Having illumined your minds with divine light, * ye wisely destroyed the wiles of 
the orators; * and having fished for all the gentiles, O glorious apostles, * ye brought 
them to the Master, ** teaching them to glorify the divine Trinity.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Ikos: As disciples of the Master of all, O ye who behold God, from the abyss of 
transgressions draw forth with the net of your prayers my lowly soul which hath been 
ensnared in the nets of the demons' wiles; that, passing well through the remaining 
time of my life, I may hymn you with love and glorify your blameless life which ye 
brought to an end on earth, having enlightened those who were grievously darkened, 
teaching them to glorify the divine Trinity.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; * 
for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so hath He 
wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou praised and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
In his epistle the Apostle Paul proclaimed thee to be a sacred chamberlain of the 
Church of Christ in Jerusalem, O Erastus. With them we honor thee, chanting unto 
Christ: O praised and supremely glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Proved by the enduring of trials and tribulations and persecutions, and adorned 
with the wounds of Christ, O most noetically rich Erastus, thou didst cry aloud: O 
praised God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou wast shown to be a proclaimer of the new law, O Quartus, leading the 
estranged away from the old iniquity and bringing to renewal of life those who cry 
aloud: O praised God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O Maiden, thou didst give flesh to the consubstantial Word of the 
Father, Who hath appeared in the flesh to those who are on earth, and having given 
birth to Him as a man, the praised and supremely glorious God of our fathers hath 
saved mankind.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone more 
brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed: Bless 
the Lord all ye works of the Lord, * hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Revealed to be indestructible pillars of the Church of Christ, ye destroyed all the 
ramparts of impiety, founding like stones upon the Rock of faith, the faithful who cry 
aloud: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Ye have been shown to be law-givers inscribing the law of the Spirit in the hearts 
of the faithful, O all-blessed ones, and enlightened thereby they sing: Hymn the Lord, 
all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
O blessed Olympus, having adorned thyself, thou didst meet thine end on the 
same day as the great Peter, manifestly dying by the sword with Rodion at the 
command of Nero, the iniquitous emperor.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: O pure one, of old the jar which contained the manna prefigured 
thee; for thou didst bear in thy womb Christ, our Sweetness, and thou hast given 
birth in the flesh unto Him Who delivereth from all the bitterness of wicked 
transgressions those who supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy pure 
birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * quench the 
raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may unceasingly 
magnify Thee. 
Having equally completed the course and been equally enriched by the Word and 
Master, ye have been deemed worthy of equal gifts of the Spirit and have received 
equal honors, O apostles of the Lord, enlighteners of our hearts.  
Like the stars of Heaven ye have illumined all the earth with divine signs, dispelling 
the deep darkness of unbelief and showing forth as children of the day those who of 
old were enslaved by the wiles of the adversary.  
Ye destroyed a legion of the evil-minded who of old escorted whole nations into 
the abyss; and ye led a multitude of the saved unto God, O most elect apostles of 
Christ who have joined the ranks of the incorporeal hosts.  
Having passed on to those things that are above the world, the great Olympus and 
Sosipater, Tertius and Rodion, Quartus and the most sacred Erastus now entreat the 
Redeemer on behalf of the world.  
Theotokion: Spare Thy people, O Lord, delivering us from barbarian assault, from 
sins, temptations, and eternal torments, through the prayers of the most holy Virgin 
who gave birth to Thee, and of Thy glorious apostles.  
Exapostilarion of the holy apostles:  
Spec. Mel.: “Heaven with stars ...”: 
In hymns we all faithfully glorify the apostles, the radiant habitations of the Holy 
Spirit, the all-luminous rays of the unwaning Day, the brilliant flashes of lightning.  
Theotokion: Thee do all we sinners have as our helper, O most holy Virgin; by thy 
maternal suplications render thy Son well-disposed unto us.  
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT LITURGY 
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostles * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins ** 
unto our souls. 
ODE III, Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone IV: 
Today hath dawned the honored festival of the apostles * which doth manifestly 
bestow the remission of sins ** upon all who keep their memory.  
ODE VI, Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone II: 
Having illumined your minds with divine light, * ye wisely destroyed the wiles of 
the orators; * and having fished for all the gentiles, O glorious apostles, * ye brought 
them to the Master, ** teaching them to glorify the divine Trinity.  
