--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 14th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS GREGORY PALAMAS, 
ARCHBISHOP OF THESSALONICA, THE WONDERWORKER  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy hierarch: 3 in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.:· “O venerable father ...”:  
O venerable father, sacred Gregory, thou didst spring forth as a branch from a 
God -loving and splendid root, and wast seen to be like a tree planted well by streams 
of divine waters, which of old poured forth the fruits of immortality, amazing every 
ear with thy divine activity, discourse and character, an orator among orators, most 
wise in the knowledge of God, entreating Christ, ever thirsting for Christ, ascending 
from divine glory to glory and from power to truly incorrupt power.  
O venerable father, right wondrous Gregory, having forsaken those things that are 
transitory and drag one down, and loving those things which are incorrupt and 
heavenly, thou didst leave behind fleeting riches, O wise one, holding poverty to be 
lasting wealth; and having purified the eyes of thy soul with abstinence, tears and 
much weeping, thou wast shown to be a splendid vessel of the Spirit, wholly full of 
His grace. Ask thou that He grant that effulgence and that glory to those who 
worship the one God, the almighty Trinity.  
O venerable father, most sacred Gregory, having sharpened the sword of thy 
discourse with the Spirit, thou didst become as fire for the ranks of those who waged 
war upon God, felling and burning down their blasphemies like lightning falling from 
on high, but guiding all the faithful to the divine radiance of the threefold Sun, 
enlightened by Whom thou wast shown to be a secondary luminary co-enthroned and 
numbered with the preeminent theologians, with whom thou art praised and with 
whom thou abidest. And now pray that unity, peace and great mercy be granted to 
the Church.  
And 3 Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Assembling together, * with songs we hymn thee as is meet: * the inextinguishable 
lamp, * the never-waning effulgence * which saveth those who sail the seas, * the 
calm and tranquil haven of grace; * and we pray: from noetic tempests deliver the 
Church * by thy supplications, ** for thou didst manfully contend on its behalf.  
O Gregory, thou spiritual breath of the voice of the Word, * unquenchable and 
fiery tongue of theology, * who by grace hath splendidly consumed * the vile 
assembly of the heretics: * we pray that we who hymn thee * in Orthodox manner * 
may by thine entreaties * be delivered from the imposition ** of the enemies' 
commands.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
O father Gregory, Christ hath placed thee * as a radiant lamp for the Church, * as 
one who first shone forth in labors and inner stillness, * and with the Spirit thundered 
forth * readily understandable and profound writings, * and by thy supplications, * 
discourses and the power of miracles * hast illumined the whole world, ** making 
firm those who were not steadfast.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
Having adorned thy discourse with wisdom and blameless virtue, O most wise 
Gregory, in both thou wast wholly beautiful, noetically adorning and gladdening the 
people with thy God proclaiming words, extending to them the one Godhead of the 
Trinity; wherefore, having trampled alien heresy underfoot with Thine exceedingly 
glorious teachings, thou didst raise up the might of the Faith in the end. Standing 
before Christ with His immaterial ministers, ask thou peace and great mercy for our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Prophet David, the ancestor of God, * spoke of thee in psalmody unto Him Who 
hath accomplished great things in thee. * For God was well pleased without father to 
become a man from thee, * the Queen who standeth at His right hand, * and He - the 
source of life - showed thee to be His mother, * that He might renew His own image, 
corrupted by the passions. * Having found the lost sheep wandering on the mountain 
* He hath laid it upon his shoulders, * that He may bring it to his Father; * and in 
accordance with His own will * unite it to the heavenly Powers * and thus, O 
Theotokos, save the world, ** Christ, Who is richly and abundantly merciful. 
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence, 
for it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 

--- PAGE 3 ---
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation, At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON.  
When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is 
immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the 
Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. 
For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that 
ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of 
God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master 
of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is 
a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image 
of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more 
beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with 
the light, she is found pre-eminent. She hath delivered from pain them that please 
her, and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended 
them from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know 
that godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall 
judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, 
reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his 

--- PAGE 4 ---
holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our 
strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing 
to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and 
denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have 
the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a 
reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like 
other men's, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery, 
and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. 
Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine 
him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his 
forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall 
he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wicked-
ness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither 
bethought they that Thou alone art God, who hast the power of life and death, savest 
in time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and 
merciful, givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.  
On the Aposticha, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Rejoice, O father, thou beacon of Orthodoxy, radiant sun of the Church, boast of 
monastics and standard of the Church, excellent teacher of goodly works, holy 
hierarch Gregory, abode of wisdom and understanding, instrument of the Spirit for 
those near and far away, inspired composer of hymnody, mouth of the Lord, who led 
the worthy away from unworthiness! Entreat Christ, that He send down upon our 
souls peace and great mercy.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Rejoice, O Gregory, thou exalted intelligence, beholder of mysteries, vessel of the 
Spirit bestowed upon us, radiant lamp, splendor of divine effulgence, mighty and 
honorable abode of love, who art truly meek, simple and guileless, revelation and 
manifestation of the Scriptures, sea of divine understandings, unfathomable abyss of 
the teaching of the Word of God! Entreat Christ, that He send down upon our souls 
peace and great mercy.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  
Rejoice, O holy hierarch Gregory, thou abyss of theology, steadfast rule of 
Orthodoxy for exalting the one exalted essence of the Trinity in a single will and 
activity, the simple, omnipotent and uncreated Godhead, thou who by the timeless 
grace of the Spirit didst put to shame those who reject deification, O mouth of 
theologians, glory of the divine fathers who art numbered among them, beacon of the 
Church, who by thy supplications dost grant us great mercy!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
Having set thy life aright in godly manner, O divinely revealed Gregory, thou didst 
adorn thine activity with vision; for having loved wisdom with divine desire, thou 
wast enriched with grace by the mouth of the Spirit, exuding the sweetness of thy 
words like honey from-the honeycomb, and ever gladdening the Church of Christ 
with divine understanding. Wherefore, dwelling in the heavens with the holy 
hierarchs, pray thou unceasingly for us who celebrate thy memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to thee with 
faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of our souls! 
At the blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O wonderworker Gregory, instructor in Orthodoxy, * adornment of holy 
hierarchs, invincible champion of theologians, * great boast of Thessalonica, and 
preacher of grace: ** entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved. (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same tone: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
The dismissal. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O wonderworker Gregory, instructor in Orthodoxy, * adornment of holy 
hierarchs, invincible champion of theologians, * great boast of Thessalonica, and 
preacher of grace: ** entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Let us hymn the great Gregory, the godly hierarch of Christ, the pillar of fire and 
cloud of light who in the Spirit goeth before the new Israel by day and leadeth them 
to the noetic land of peace, to the city of the firstborn in Christ.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
All the fullness of the Godhead dwelt within thee, O pure Lady, and, as Paul hath 
said, deified all the nature of corruptible mankind. Thou wast the beginning of such 
grace, and art the saving guidance of those who honor thee with faith and love.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, Sessional hymn, in the same melody:  
Having cleansed thy spirit well with torrents of thy tears, thou didst noetically 
receive divine grace, O right wondrous one. And in a manner transcending nature was 
deemed worthy to participate in the divinity of the Word Whom thou didst preach as 
one and uncreated, O divinely wise Gregory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O most splendid vessel of the noetic Light, dispel the darkness of my heart and 
ease the most burdensome yoke of the passions, I pray, guiding me to the paths of 
repentance, and vouchsafing me the light which is to come, O all-blessed Lady.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Gregory, 
and we rumor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God on our 
behalf.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Forsaking transitory things - the royal court, thy friends and kinsmen, O most wise 
father Gregory, thou didst acquire those things which are abiding and constant, O 
blessed one; and brought all thy household and kin to the Master of all as an 
honorable whole burnt offering; and guided thus thou didst dedicate thy soul, mind 
and body to God. O Gregory, earnestly pray to Him with vision and activity, that He 
grant remission of offenses unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Having put on thy flesh, in that He is good, O Lady, the Master deified the 
servant's guise which He had assumed, and, uniting Himself to its substance and 
filling all of its nature with the Spirit, He made the assemblies of the saints by grace. 
Wherefore, we cry out to thee, accepting thee, who wast filled with the Spirit, as the 
first cause of ineffable works, and we hymn thee with all our soul: Rejoice, O 
beginning of our salvation! Rejoice, O release from offenses for those who with faith 
worship thine Offspring!  
Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, § 35(JN. 9: 39-10: 9) 
 The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: Verily, verily, I say unto you: He that 
entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own 
sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And 
a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of 
strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things 
they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, verily, 
I say unto you: I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before Me are thieves 
and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by Me if any man enter 
in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.”  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
With hymns of praise let us honor the preacher of true piety, the most radiant star 
of the Church, the splendid luminary of Thessalonica, the disciple of the Light and 
friend of Christ, who soweth the divine word of piety in the hearts of all the faithful, 
who granteth salvation unto all and prayeth earnestly unto the Lord, that our souls 
find mercy.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and 
that of the holy hierarch, the composition of Patriarch Philotheus, in Tone I:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it shattered 
the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the deep.  
Having set thy mouth and mind on the Wellspring of gifts and spiritual wisdom, O 
most glorious one, thou wast revealed to be an abyss of grace. Grant thou a drop 
thereof unto me who hymn thee, O father.  
Thou wast beyond nature a rule and law for monastic life, the divine mouth of 
theologians, holy hierarchs and teachers; wherefore, assembling together, we weave 
hymnody for thee.  
Thou wast revealed to be another Jeremiah, from his mother's womb, known to 
be wholly inclined toward the Creator, wholly sanctified, O God-bearer; wherefore, 
thy mouth received the words of God.  
Standing before the throne of God with the angels, O God-seer Gregory, thou 
dost now manifestly receive the unapproachable radiance. Pray that we may be 
released from the darkness of sin, we beseech thee.  
Theotokion: Desiring to behold the Light Who shone forth from thy womb, O 
Birthgiver of God, Gregory set thee before the Creator as his advocate, and through 
thee hath received the grace he desired.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
Thou didst consider worldly wisdom to be foolishness, O most wise one, and didst 
love the foolishness of the Cross; and taking it upon thy shoulder, thou didst show, as 
Paul said, that by foolishness the wisdom of this world is overcome.  
Fleeing men, O father, with all thy soul thou didst love poverty, humility, want and 
un-acquisitiveness; wherefore, thou wast driven into the wilderness, and ever, in the 
fragrance of thy peace, thou didst cry out unto Christ: I hasten after Thee!  
With all manner of ascetic feats and weeping thou didst mortify the old, 
corruptible man, O most wise one, cleansing thyself thoroughly with fountains of 
tears; and by thy manner of life receiving again thine ancient beauty in Christ, and 
clothing thyself in the new man.  
O ye multitudes of monks, together with those standing here today, all ye priests 
and benefactors, with beauteous voices and divine words let us praise Gregory, our 
common teacher, who hath adorned us with his works and discourses.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: Having through the intercession of the Mother of God beheld the 
radiance of the Spirit which thou desired, thou art now thereby more brilliantly 
illumined. Pray thou that the darkness of the passions within us may be replaced with 
the light of grace.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
By abstinence, weeping and prayer, by spiritual activity, poverty and thorough 
washing with tears, thou didst purify thy heart, O Gregory; and, wholly caught up, 
thou wast united to Christ in spirit. Wherefore, like Paul, having heard ineffable 
things and become a chosen vessel, thou didst bear the name of Christ, and didst 
exaltedly preach the one, simple and uncreated Godhead, to Whom do thou never 
cease to pray, that thy flock may be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O compassionate Word of God, Who in the beginning brought the things of 
nature into being out of non-existence, and Who by Thy hand honored with thine 
image mankind who corrupted it through the deception of the serpent, but Thou 
didst set it aright by Thy precious Cross, and by assuming the flesh sanctifying all 
nature by Thy Holy Spirit. O Master Christ our God, through the supplications of 
Thy Mother, grant remission of offenses unto those who with faith worship Thy 
might.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain overshadowed 
by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy One of Israel * 
would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and restoration. 
Having wounded the moonless night and darkness of the passions with the staff 
of prayer, as Moses did to Egypt, thou didst hasten supra-naturally to divine vision, 
and became for us a law-giver.  
Having ascended the divine heights of the virtues, as the friends and disciples of 
Christ on Tabor, O father Gregory, thou didst behold Him revealing His natural and 
divine glory; and, deified, thou wast shown to be like another sun. 
 O God-seer Gregory, having become an initiate of the mysteries of the Godhead 
and a partaker of ineffable things, thou dost articulate the mystery of theology, 
declaring God to be One and uncreated in power and nature, and composed of three 
Hypostases.  
Theotokion: With sacred discourses thou didst hymn her who gave birth to the 
ineffable Word of God and with splendor proclaimed the mystery of the incarnation. 
And the Church doth now beg her to preserve it un-beset by storms.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE V  
Irmos: O Hou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O 
Christ, * and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * enlighten with 
the light of thine understanding * the hearts of those who with right worship 
hymn Thee.  
The great Mind, the ineffable Abyss of wisdom, found thee, O God-bearer, to be 
an abode of intelligence friendly toward Him; and He hath given thee to the Church 
as an instrument of understanding and wisdom.  
Shining thee forth as a brilliant ray first on Athos, O Gregory, God bestowed thee 
upon the splendid city, sanctifying and paternally setting thee forth through the divine 
activity of His light.  
Having found thee to be a divine gift from God and an inexhaustible treasure, the 
mighty capital of Thessaly calleth its neighbors to partake of thy words and miracles, 
O blessed one.  
O ye who desire Gregory's struggle and his words of grace, offering hymnody now 
unto him let us beseech him through whose prayer the Creator and Master is moved 
to mercy for all.  
Theotokion: He Who enlightened the vast expanse of the earth with the radiance 
of the sun hath been revealed to be a never-setting Sun amid the darkness, O Virgin. 
Him do thou entreat, that He deliver us from the darkness of evil and sin, O Lady.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
O Gregory, thy deified life hath truly been seen by the faithful as a rule of virtue, 
thy discourse and precepts as a guide to piety, whereby they judge their own 
fruitfulness or barrenness, proclaiming the one almighty and uncreated God.  
Thou hast been shown to us as great, O Gregory, piously preaching the one 
Godhead in three Hypostases but a single Essence and power, in all ways simple and 
uncreated; and thou didst mightily put to shame all who foolishly say that the 
Godhead is created.  
Thou dost denounce the thought of the mindless Acindynus, as thou didst that of 
Barlaam before; for, enamored of the myths of the ancient Greeks, they made the 
Godhead into a creature, and like the Jews dishonored the dignity of the Son of God.  
Having produced rules of precepts and brilliant discourses, whereby thou didst 
open the minds of the honored theologians to the Spirit, O Gregory, by thy 
supplications preserve the Church of Christ unshaken, and deliver it from all heresy.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be more exalted than the throne of the 
cherubim and all the celestial hosts, and every rank of heaven, O Lady, for thou wast 
the ineffable throne of the divine Being of God. In that He is thy Son, move Him to 
have mercy on me who hymn thee with faith.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”:  
O divinely eloquent Gregory, together we hymn thee, * the sacred and divine 
instrument of wisdom, the brilliant trumpet of theology. * And as a mind standing 
before the primal Mind, O father, guide thou our mind unto Him, ** that we may cry: 
Rejoice, O preacher of grace!  
Ikos: Thou didst appear on earth as an angel, proclaiming the divine tidings of 
ineffable things unto corruptible men; for, living with the mind and body of a man 
but with the voice of the incorporeal beings, O divinely eloquent one, thou didst 
amaze and cause them to cry out to thee such things as these: Rejoice, thou for whose 
sake the Light was proclaimed; Rejoice, thou for whose sake the darkness was 
dispelled! Rejoice, herald of the uncreated Godhead; Rejoice, thou who truly 
denounced the foolish teaching that the Essence of God is created! Rejoice, 
surpassing height who spake of the Essence of God; Rejoice, depth which the eyes 
cannot easily plumb, who told of spiritual activity! Rejoice, for thy words concerning 
the glory of God were good; Rejoice, for thou didst reject the reasoning of the 
wicked! Rejoice, luminary who hast shown us the Sun; Rejoice, vessel and receptacle 
of the divine Food! Rejoice, thou through whom the truth shineth forth; Rejoice, 
thou by whom delusion hath been cast into darkness! Rejoice, O preacher of grace!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; * 
for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so hath He 
wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou praised and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Those held captive by deception are unable to gaze directly upon the bright 
lightning of thy precepts and divine and awesome words, for these are like the voice 
of thunder, O father, and like blind men the mindless ones, wandering about, now 
sense them to be walls, as it is written.  
Night is void of light for the disobedient; but now the one Light hath dawned, the 
kingdom of the glory of God, which the Lover of mankind revealed on Tabor to the 
initiates of His mysteries, O Gregory. And having partaken sufficiently thereof, thou 
dost now join in fellowship with those who have pleased God.  
Having put to shame those who impiously blaspheme against grace, divine inner 
stillness and prayer, and who vilely mock ineffable deification, thou didst drive them 
far from the divine fold, which thou dost ever preserve by thine entreaties.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: Come thou now unto our aid, O Lady, our common salvation, 
accepting the supplications of Gregory, lulling to sleep the passions of our souls and 
bodies, and speedily releasing us from general tumult and corruption.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone more 
brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed: Bless 
the Lord all ye works of the Lord, * hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
O father, thou hast been shown to be wholly radiant, sweet, upright, and meek, 
pouring forth for those who approach thee with faith the sweet and divine beverage 
of thy discourses, which gladdeneth the hearts of all the pious, giving drink to the 
senses of the souls of the infirm.  
Finding thy mind and tongue to be truly noble, and thine instruction, words and 
heart purified, the Wisdom of God made His abode within thee, O father, which 
having became united, revealed thee to be wondrous to all the world.  
The might of piety showed forth the Hebrew children as unharmed in the furnace, 
O most wise one; and emulating them, thou didst restrain the flame of impiety in the 
midst of the furnace of temptations, valiantly hymning the Master and utterly 
consuming those who persecuted thee.  
Thou didst drown the noetic Pharaoh in the torrents of thy tears and engulfed the 
whole noetic army of Egypt; ascending the mountain of dispassion, and driving from 
there the hordes of the enemy by the power of the Spirit, as did Moses the great.  
Theotokion: The splendid preacher of grace, the theologian of the Spirit given 
through thee to the world, O pure Theotokos, celebrating now with discourses, as a 
faithful servant assembleth all choirs to chant hymns and songs unto thee, glorifying 
thy memory.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy pure 
birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * quench the 
raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may unceasingly 
magnify Thee. 
Standing before the throne of the beginningless and three-Sunned Godhead, and 
filled to sufficiency through spiritual activity with the grace which thou didst hymn, as 
a fellow laborer be thou mindful of thy friends, who now commemorate thee.  
Thou didst find the reward for thine efforts, O father - the beginingless kingdom 
of God - which thou didst piously preach on earth; and thou didst receive the three-
stranded wreath of divine confession, priesthood and inner stillness.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Thou hast been revealed to be the boast of monastics, a godly theologian and a 
renowned standard for the priesthood; wherefore, divine grace hath bestowed 
miracles upon thee, confirming thy words.  
Having departed O most glorious one, thou hast left behind the laws of praise and 
the struggle of thy discourses, both while living on earth and after departing the body, 
yet do thou most especially accept this meager hymnody, and by thy supplications 
grant the petitions of those who desire thee.  
Theotokion: Thine honored servant Gregory was the tongue of theology, for the 
word of thy dread Offspring, the Deity Who appeared for our sake and took flesh 
from thee, was well-pleased to make His abode in him. 
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples ...”: 
Rejoice, glory of the fathers, voice of theologians, tabernacle of inward stillness, 
dwelling-place of wisdom, greatest of teachers, deep ocean of the Word. Rejoice, thou 
who hast practiced virtues of the active life and ascended to the heights of 
contemplation; Rejoice, healer of man’s sickness. Rejoice, shrine of the Spirit; Rejoice, 
father who though dead art still alive.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Lady, Queen of all and above all, higher than all the heavenly hosts, stretch 
out thy regal hand and preserve the world; bless the priests that liturgize in thine 
honor and forgive those monastics who entreat thy prayers. Grant peace to all people 
who dwell in thy courts. Strengthen those in war during the time of battle. Protect 
this thy holy city. Deem us worthy to see the heavenly Kingdom and the gates of 
Paradise, when at the Second Coming the Judge shall sit on His dread throne to judge 
all the earth, O Queen of the angels.  
On the Aposticha, 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the heavenly hosts ...”:  
In the world thou hast lived a life of blessedness, * and now in heaven thou dost 
rejoice in the assembly of the blessed; * because thou wast meek, thou dwellest in the 
land * that the meek inherit, O Bishop Gregory. * God has made thee rich in the 
grace of working miracles, ** which thou dost bestow on those who honor thee. 
(Twice) 
O blessed saint, thou hast planted the dogmas of Orthodoxy * and cut down the 
thorns of heresy. * With thy words thou hast watered the seed of the Faith, * making 
it grow, * and as an active husbandman thou hast brought to God ** ears of wheat 
increased an hundredfold. 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
The glory of thy blameless life, O blessed saint, * amazed both angels and 
mankind. * With steadfast purpose thou hast labored in the ascetic life, * and shown 
thyself to be a worthy hierarch * and minister of God, ** and His true friend.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Having adorned thy discourse with wisdom and blameless virtue, O most wise 
Gregory, in both thou wast wholly beautiful, noetically adorning and gladdening the 
people with thy God proclaiming words, extending to them the(doctrine of the) one 
Godhead of the Trinity; where· fore, having trampled alien heresy underfoot with 
Thine exceedingly glorious teachings, thou didst raise up the might of the Faith in the 
end. Standing before Christ with His immaterial ministers, ask thou peace and great 
mercy for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The Son and Word of God, begotten of the Father before the ages without a 
mother, hast thou borne in these later days, incarnate of thy pure blood, without the 
aid of a man. Him do thou entreat O Birthgiver of God, that we be granted the 
remission of sins before the end.  
Great Doxology, Troparion, Litanies, and the Dismissal. First Hour 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the holy hierarch.  
Thou didst consider worldly wisdom to be foolishness, O most wise one, and didst 
love the foolishness of the Cross; and taking it upon thy shoulder, thou didst show, as 
Paul said, that by foolishness the wisdom of this world is overcome.  
Fleeing men, O father, with all thy soul thou didst love poverty, humility, want and 
un-acquisitiveness; wherefore, thou wast driven into the wilderness, and ever, in the 
fragrance of thy peace, thou didst cry out unto Christ: I hasten after Thee!  
With all manner of ascetic feats and weeping thou didst mortify the old, 
corruptible man, O most wise one, cleansing thyself thoroughly with fountains of 
tears; and by thy manner of life receiving again thine ancient beauty in Christ, and 
clothing thyself in the new man.  
O ye multitudes of monks, together with those standing here today, all ye priests 
and benefactors, with beauteous voices and divine words let us praise Gregory, our 
common teacher, who hath adorned us with his works and discourses.  
O Gregory, thy deified life hath truly been seen by the faithful as a rule of virtue, 
thy discourse and precepts as a guide to piety, whereby they judge their own 
fruitfulness or barrenness, proclaiming the one almighty and uncreated God.  
Thou hast been shown to us as great, O Gregory, piously preaching the one 
Godhead in three Hypostases but a single Essence and power, in all ways simple and 
uncreated; and thou didst mightily put to shame all who foolishly say that the 
Godhead is created.  
Thou dost denounce the thought of the mindless Acindynus, as thou didst that of 
Barlaam before; for, enamored of the myths of the ancient Greeks, they made the 
Godhead into a creature, and like the Jews dishonored the dignity of the Son of God.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be more exalted than the throne of the 
cherubim and all the celestial hosts, and every rank of heaven, O Lady, for thou wast 
the ineffable throne of the divine Being of God. In that He is thy Son, move Him to 
have mercy on me who hymn thee with faith.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O wonderworker Gregory, instructor in Orthodoxy, * adornment of holy 
hierarchs, invincible champion of theologians, * great boast of Thessalonica, and 
preacher of grace: ** entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
O divinely eloquent Gregory, together we hymn thee, * the sacred and divine 
instrument of wisdom, the brilliant trumpet of theology. * And as a mind standing 
before the primal Mind, O father, guide thou our mind unto Him, ** that we may cry: 
Rejoice, O preacher of grace!  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 
THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS §151(12: 7-11)  
Brethren: The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. 
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of 
knowledge by the same Spirit; to another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts 
of healing by the same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another 
prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to 
another the interpretation of tongues: but all these worketh that one and selfsame 
Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his 
tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN §36(10:9-16) 
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: I am the door: by me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 
know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
