--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 11th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS MINAS, VICTOR,  
VINCENT AND STEPHANIDA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Torn by iron claws, * beaten with a scourge of cords, * thy body scorched with 
fire, * thou didst not deny the saving name of Christ, * nor wast thou vanquished in 
mind, * nor didst thou sacrifice to graven images, * but wast a willing wholeburnt 
offering, * a pure and perfect sacrifice to thy Master, ** O martyr Minas.  
Thine eyes put out, * hung upon a tree, * burned all over by candles, * scourged 
with thongs by the cruelty of the judge, * thy head cut off by the sword, * thou didst 
rejoice, O glorious Victor, * passion-bearer of the Savior, * vanquishing legions of the 
enemy ** by the activity of the Holy Spirit.  
The Lord hath crowned thee with a diadem of grace, * O much suffering 
Stephanida, * for willingly didst thou give thyself over to torments * with spiritual 
valor; * bound between two palm trees, * thou wast torn asunder, * and like a 
sparrow, took flight to God, * leaving thy flesh in the hands of thy tormenters, ** O 
right glorious martyr.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Again the yearly commemoration of the beacons of the world hath dawned upon 
us: Minas, Victor, and Vincent, who enlighten the hearts of the faithful by their 
struggles for Christ and His Cross. Wherefore, in hymns let us honor Christ our God, 
Who hath crowned them with glory and honor.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure Virgin Mother, * beholding the most iniquitous 
people * who unjustly nailed Thee to the Tree, ** was wounded within, as Symeon 
foretold.  
On the Aposticha: the Sticheron to the martyrs, in Tone II: 
Stichos: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
Come, ye who love the martyrs, let us honor the thrice-radiant chorus of martyrs: 
Minas, Victor, and Vincent, for they paid with blood and purchased life eternal. 
Wherefore, they spoke out against the author of evil saying: We shall not prefer 
corruptible things to incorruptible; we shall not do battle for an earthly and mortal 
king; but we shall fight for the living King Who ever crieth unto the faithful saying: 
He that believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the Third Day ...” 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gave birth to 
Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery which I see, O my Son? * How is it 
that Thou diest, * suspended in the flesh upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Canon of the holy martyrs Minas and company, the composition of John the 
Damascene, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: The people of Israel passed dry-shod across the watery deep of the Red 
Sea * and beholding the riders and captains of the enemy * swallowed by the 
waters, they cried out for joy: * ‘Let us chant unto our God, for He hath been 
glorified.’ 
O ye sacred people, gloriously passing now, not over the Red Abyss but the sea of 
the struggles of Minas the sufferer, with glorious Moses and Miriam, the wise woman 
and prophetess, let us sing unto our God, for He hath been glorified!  
O Minas, champion of piety, thou wast well pleased to stand as a warrior of Christ 
before the fierce destroyer and the wicked tormenter who breathed the anger of 
threats and the heat of wrath. And thou wast His beacon, crying aloud: Let us sing 
unto our God, for He hath been glorified. 
Thou, O Christ, didst foretell: When lifted up, I will draw those born of earth; and 
this didst Thou indeed do, summoning from the ends of the world the ranks of 
martyrs and the people who cry out in joy: Let us sing unto our God, for He hath 
been glorified!  
Theotokion: The rod of Aaron which budded prefigured thee, O Virgin, the root 
which sprang forth from Jesse, shining forth upon the world God incarnate, the 
imperishable bloom. Him do thou ever entreat on behalf of us who have recourse to 
thee, O Theotokos.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
The tormenter, stung by thy most wise words, mercilessly wounded thee with 
rawhide thongs, thinking thereby to bow thee down, O invincible martyr.  
Directing the eyes of thy mind to the Lord, thou didst endure unbearable 
oppression with a most courageous spirit, O right glorious one.  
Fearing not the exceeding painful torment, but breathing with divine zeal, thou 
didst depart for the struggles, crying out: unsought and uninvited, I have come!  
Theotokion: He Who was incarnate of Thee and Who accepted voluntary death 
hath led up from the gates of Hades me who have been slain by the evil tasting of the 
tree.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the wisdom ...”:  
Egypt, which before had been held fast by the cruel darkness of ignorance, shone 
forth with thee, O divinely wise martyr Minas, as a beacon to all the world, who by 
the rays of thy divine struggles mightily dispersed the night of ungodliness. 
Wherefore, radiantly celebrating thy radiant and honored day, we earnestly cry out to 
thee: O adornment of sufferers, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins 
unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III.  
Spec. Mel. “The Divine Faith ...” 
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only all-pure Virgin Mother * 
who surpassed the angels in purity. * By the divine waters of thy supplications * 
cleanse me who, more than all others, * have become dust, defiled by carnal 
transgressions; ** and grant me great mercy, O pure one.  
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
By the shedding of thy blood the ember of polytheism hath been extinguished, and 
the legion of demons drowned, and the Church of Christ, which praises thee, hath 
been watered thereby, O most blessed passion-bearer Minas.  
O martyr, by being lifted up upon the tree thou dost portray the passion on the 
Cross of Him Who slew the cruel serpent; enduring lacerations which won for thee 
that delight which is in the Heavens, O most valorous one.  
Thou didst undergo a trial of pain surpassing nature, O sufferer, and divine love, 
strengthening thy nature, caused thee to become unaware, urging thee to reach out 
for wounds, rejoicing.  
Theotokion: Ineffably didst thou give birth unto God incarnate, Who fashioned 
for Himself a home of thy blood, and in a godly manner is known in two essences 
and wills, O thou who knewest not wedlock.  
ODE V  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father's divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Luminous with the bright rays of thy witness, having overshadowed dark 
godlessness, O most wise one, thou hast enlightened the faithful who hymn thee with 
fullness, O all-praised one.  
Every contrivance of the foe hath been vanquished through thy mighty endurance, 
for neither hunger, nor wounds, nor immolation, nor subjection to iron hooks 
clouded thy resolve.  
Surrounded by faith as the sun is by its rays, thou didst make thine abode in the 
desert, enlightening all the cities, and preaching Christ, the Son of God, Who came in 
the flesh, O glorious one.  
Theotokion: The Redeemer, born of thee in a manner surpassing nature, hath 
renewed me who am subject to corruption, freeing me from the ancient curse, O pure 
Mother of God. Him do thou entreat, that He save me.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 
Burned by fire, thy wounds rubbed raw with haircloth, thou didst remain without 
pain, for divine grace, being present, strengthened thee, O Minas.  
Thou dost stand condemned before the tribunal of the tyrants, denouncing their 
falsehood, O ever memorable one, and giving thyself to the faithful as a pillar of 
piety.  
With the sweat of thy struggles thou didst dry up the delusion of idolatry, and didst 
fashion of thyself a temple of the honored Trinity, O right wondrous passion-bearer 
Minas.  
Theotokion: Heal thou the incurable passions of my soul with the balm of thy 
goodness, O all-immaculate one, who didst give birth to Christ, the good Savior, for 
those who are yet in the world.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
O Passion-bearer Minas, * Christ our God, the imperishable Crown of martyrs, * 
took thee from a transient army, * and showed thee forth ** as a partaker of 
incorruptible and heavenly things.  
Ikos: The memory of the martyrs is a cause of great gladness for us, for it showeth 
forth courage amid suffering and victory over the enemy in the radiant and joyful 
confession through grace. Come ye, therefore, all ye who love this festival, and let us 
be glad therein, keeping the memory of the passion-bearer Minas as the most 
enduring time of gladness, and of receiving the gift of being loosed from our 
passions, for Christ God is the Bestower of the imperishable Crowns of martyrdom.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
With wounds didst thou strip off sin's garment of skin, and robe thyself in a 
vesture which groweth not old and which with grace, thou didst appear wearing O 
blessed one.  
By the burning zeal of thine honorable and mighty struggles wicked and thorny 
godlessness hath been utterly consumed, O martyr, and the leaping flame of 
ignorance hath been extinguished by the streams of thy blood, O all-blessed one.  
Possessed of abundant gifts, thou dost pour forth miracles upon those who 
celebrate thine honored festival, O right wondrous Minas; and thou dost aid those 
who sing: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Blessed is the Fruit of thy blessed womb, Whom the hosts of Heaven 
and the assemblies of those born of earth bless, for He that hath delivered us from 
the ancient curse, O blessed one.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
O Minas, thou wast revealed to be a crown-bearer; having set at naught the 
enemies of the Cross of thy Lord, thou didst put them to shame and cry aloud, O all-
blessed one: All ye works of the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages!  
God hath wrought wonders in thy memory, pouring forth healings through thy 
relics, both spiritual and bodily, upon those who cry aloud: All ye works of the Lord, 
praise and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Thou didst offer God thy service; and having bowed thy head to the ground, wast 
beheaded by the sword, O martyr, crying aloud: All ye works of the Lord, praise and 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Today the Holy Church is adorned with your blood, as with purple and fine linen, 
O Minas, Victor and Vincent, who cry aloud: All ye works of the Lord, praise and 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: The womb of her who bore the Savior hath remained virginal, for 
without seed He was conceived of the Holy Spirit, the uncircumscribable God the 
Word, co-unoriginate with the Father, became wrapped in flesh. Him do all ye works 
praise and supremely exalt as Lord throughout the ages!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
 
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Thou didst love no less than thou wast beloved, O passion-bearer, laying down thy 
beloved life for Christ Who loved thee and Who glorified thy witness with Himself, 
O ever memorable one.  
The three inseparable martyrs appeared, like a lamp-stand aflame with the three-
sunned light, Minas, Victor, and Vincent, illumining the faithful and dispersing the 
gloom of the demons.  
Accept, as that which is thy due, our praise of thee which proceedeth from a 
readiness surpassing our words; and from thy treasuries bestow upon us numberless 
gifts.  
Theotokion: Of old all the prophets rightly praised thee, the Mother of the King 
and Master; and now, the apostles and martyrs magnify thee, glorifying thee with us.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs:  
Spec. Mel.: “Heaven, with stars ...”: 
The stars adorn the heavens, O Jesus; and Minas, Victor, Vincent and Stephanida 
adorn the Church. For their sake grant Orthodox Christians victory over their 
adversaries.  
Theotokion: All we, the faithful, now send thee as our mediatress to Him Who was 
born of thee, and also the many that were crucified for Him. Wherefore, cease not, O 
Virgin, to intercede for us.  
On the Aposticha, the Sticheron of the holy Martyr, in Tone II:  
Stichos: The righteous cried, * and the Lord heard them.  
Come, ye faithful, let us honor Minas, the glorious passion-bearer of Christ, 
mighty in battle, who struggled well in piety, and set at naught the dominion of 
emperors and tyrants. Wherefore, as he hath boldness before Christ God, he prayeth 
unceasingly that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Stavrotheotokion: O Lord, when the sun beheld Thee, * who art the Sun of 
righteousness, * hanging upon the tree of the cross, it hid its rays, * transforming light 
into darkness, * and the moon did likewise, * while Thy Mother the all-mmaculate 
Virgin, ** was sorely wounded in the depths of her soul. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
 In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
 O Passion-bearer Minas, * Christ our God, the imperishable Crown of martyrs, * 
took thee from a transient army, * and showed thee forth ** as a partaker of 
incorruptible and heavenly things.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, he is at my right hand, that I might not 
be shaken. 
 
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS,(6:10-17) 
Brethren: be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; And your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; Above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God: 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulation.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, but the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW(10:32-33,37-38,19:27-30) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: Whosoever therefore shall confess me before 
men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever 
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven. 
He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that 

--- PAGE 9 ---
loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. And he that taketh not his 
cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me. Then answered Peter and said 
unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have 
therefore? And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have 
followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his 
glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And 
every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or 
wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall 
inherit everlasting life. But many that are first shall be last; and the last shall be first. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
