--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 13th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, JOHN CHRYSOSTOM, 
ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
In abstinence thou didst emulate well * thy namesake the Baptist, O father, * and 
didst imitate the great Elijah in purity and fasting. * Wounded by the zeal of both, O 
Chrysostom, * as a pastor of the Church of Christ ** thou didst speak boldly even 
against the imperial majesty. (Twice)  
The sound of thy dogmas, * passing throughout all the world, as it is written, * 
hath illumined the world with the divine inspiration of the Word; * and thou hast 
thrown open to us the door of repentance, * embodying the Gospel of Christ ** in 
thy care for the poor.  
The pure and undefiled light of thy soul * shineth upon the world * with sun-like 
beams of the dogmas of piety, * O wise father John Chrysostom, * dispelling the 
darkness ** and illumining the universe with piety.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
Thou wast a divinely inspired instrument through which the Holy Spirit hath 
sounded forth unto us; for with a magnificent voice the sound of thy doctrines hath 
passed throughout the ends of the earth. And as an emulator of the apostles, O 
venerable one, thou didst attain unto their choir as thou desired. Pray thou to the 
Lord, O all-blessed one, that He grant peace to the world and that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Deliver us from our needs, * O Mother of Christ God, * thou who hast given birth 
to the Creator of all, * that we all may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou who alone 
art the intercessor for our souls!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Thou wast shown to be * a golden trumpet, O John, * splendidly sounding forth * 
the mighty works of God ** to the ends of the earth.  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of my heart shall be 
of understanding.  
Thou didst receive the law * from the Lord * like Moses, O Chrysostom, * 
illumining and making wise the world ** with thy divine doctrines.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
O Chrysostom, * thou wast truly * a preacher of the kingdom of God, * crying 
out: Repent! ** and drowning despondency.  
Glory ..., in the same melody: 
O Chrysostom our father, * thou hast taught us to believe * in the single governing 
principle * of the adored Trinity, ** the Father, the Word and the Spirit.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
O Virgin Theotokos, * with John Chrysostom * entreat God the Word, * Who was 
born of thee, ** that He save our souls.  
After “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our Father.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Grace shining forth from thy mouth like a beacon hath illumined the universe, * 
and disclosed to the world treasures of uncovetousness, * and shown us the heights 
of humility; * but while instructing by Thy words, O Father John Chrysostom, ** 
intercede with the Word, Christ our God, to save our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
With songs let us hymn * the golden trumpet, * the divinely inspired instrument, * 
the unfathomable abyss of dogmas, * the confirmation of the Church, * the celestial 
mind, * the golden cup and depth of wisdom, * which poureth forth rivers of 
honeyed doctrines ** and watereth creation. (Thrice)  
As is meet, let us honor * John Chrysostom, * the never-setting star * who 
illumineth the whole world * with rays of doctrines, * the preacher of repentance, * 
the golden sponge * which removeth the vile wetness of ignorance ** and moisteneth 
hearts which have wasted away through sins. (Thrice)  
In hymns let Chrysostom be magnified: * the earthly angel and heavenly man, * 
the sweet-voiced and melodious swallow, * the treasury of the virtues, * the unbroken 
stone, * the paragon of the faithful, * the model of martyrs, * the peer of the holy 
angels, ** the equal of the apostles. (Twice)  
 Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O venerable, thrice-blessed and most holy father, thou good shepherd and disciple 
of Christ, the Chief Shepherd, who laid down thy life for thy sheep: Do thou now, by 
thy supplications, O most praiseworthy John Chrysostom, ask that we be granted 
great mercy.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the righteous man calleth forth praises, and the blessing of the 
Lord is upon his head. Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that 
getteth understanding. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of 
silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies; and all 
the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her. Length of days is in her 
right hand; and in her left hand riches and honor. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, 
and all her paths are peace. Out of her mouth truth proceedeth, and law and mercy 
she carrieth on her tongue. Hear me, then, O children, for I will speak of excellent 

--- PAGE 4 ---
things; and happy is the man that will keep unto my ways, for my paths are the paths 
of life, and the desire is fashioned of the Lord. Wherefore, I entreat you and put forth 
my voice before the sons of men, for I with wisdom set up everything; I have called 
forth counsel, understanding and knowledge. Counsel is mine and sound wisdom, 
mine is understanding and strength is mine. I love them that love me, and those that 
seek me shall find grace. Understand, then, O ye simple, the cunning, and ye 
uninstructed direct your hearts unto it. Hearken unto me again, for I will speak of 
honorable things, and the opening of my mouth shall be right things, for my mouth 
shall speak truth and wickedness is an abomination to my lips. All the words of my 
mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing froward or perverse in them. They are all 
plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge. For I will 
teach you the truth, so that your hope may be in the Lord and ye may be filled with 
the Spirit.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom, and the lips of wise men know 
grace. The mouths of the wise do meditate wisdom, but righteousness shall deliver 
them from death. At the death of a just man his hope perisheth not; for a righteous 
son is born for life, and in his good works he taketh hold of the fruit of right-
eousness. The righteous always have light, and from the Lord they acquire grace and 
glory. The tongue of the wise knoweth what is good, and wisdom resteth in their 
heart. The Lord loveth holy hearts, and all the blameless are acceptable to Him in the 
way. The wisdom of the Lord enlighteneth the countenance of the understanding; for 
she overtaketh them that desire her, and is readily seen by them that desire her. 
Whoso seeketh her early shall have no great travail; and whoso watcheth her shall 
quickly be without care. For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of her, she 
manifesteth herself favorably unto them in her ways. Vice shall never prevail against 
wisdom. For the sake thereof I became a lover of her beauty, and sought her out 
from my youth; I desired to make her my spouse, for the Master of all loved her: For 
she is privy to the mysteries of the knowledge of God and a seeker of His works. Her 
labors are virtues, she teacheth chastity and prudence, justice and fortitude, which are 
such things as men can have nothing more profitable in their life. If a man desire 
much experience, she knoweth things of old, and conjectureth aright what is to come; 
she knoweth the subtleties of speeches and can expound dark sentences; she 
foreseeth signs and wonders, and the events of seasons and times. Unto all she is a 
counselor of good things, for there is immortality in her, and glory in the 
communication of her words. Wherefore, I conversed with the Lord and besought 
Him, and with my whole heart I said: O God of my fathers and Lord of mercy, Who 
hast made all things by Thy word and ordained man by Thy wisdom, that he should 
have dominion over the creatures which Thou hast made, and that he may order the 

--- PAGE 5 ---
world in holiness and righteousness: Give me wisdom which sitteth by Thy throne, 
and reject me not from among Thy children, for I am Thy servant and the son of Thy 
handmaid. Send her out of Thy heaven, from Thy holy habitation and the throne of 
Thy glory, that being present with me she may teach me what is well-pleasing in Thy 
sight. She shall guide me to understanding and preserve me in her glory. For the 
thoughts of mortal men are all miserable, and their devices are but uncertain.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
When the righteous is praised, the people will rejoice; for his memory is 
immortality, because it is known with God, and with men; for his soul pleased the 
Lord. Love wisdom, therefore, O men, and live; desire her, and ye shall be instructed. 
For the beginning of her is love and the observation of the law. Honor wisdom, that 
ye may reign for evermore. I will tell you, and will not hide from you the mysteries of 
God, for he it is who is the instructor of wisdom, the director of the wise, the master 
of all understanding and activity. And wisdom teacheth all understanding; for in her is 
a spirit understanding and holy, the brightness of the everlasting light, and the image 
of the goodness of God. She maketh friends of God, and prophets; she is more 
beautiful than the sun, and above all the constellations of the stars; compared with the 
light, she is found pre-eminent. She hath delivered from pain them that please her, 
and guided them in right paths, given them knowledge of holy things, defended them 
from their enemies, and given them a mighty struggle, that they might all know that 
godliness is stronger than all; vice shall never prevail against wisdom, neither shall 
judgment pass away without convicting the evil. For they said to themselves, 
reasoning unrighteously: Let us oppress the righteous man, let us not spare his 
holiness, neither need we be ashamed of the ancient gray hairs of the aged, for our 
strength shall be a law unto us; let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is displeasing 
to us, opposeth our doings, upbraideth us with our offending the law, and 
denounceth to our infamy the transgressions of our training. He professeth to have 
the knowledge of God, and calleth himself the child of the Lord. He is become a 
reproof to our thoughts, and is grievous even for us to behold; for his life is not like 
other men's, his ways are of another fashion. We are accounted by him as a mockery, 
and he avoideth our ways as filth, and pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed. 
Let us see if his words be true; let us test what things happen to him. Let us examine 
him with mockery and torture, that we may know his meekness and prove his 
forbearance. Let us condemn him with a shameful death, for by his own words shall 
he be visited. Such things did they imagine, and were deceived; for their own wicked-
ness blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they knew them not; neither 
bethought they that Thou alone art God, who hast the power of life and death, savest 
in time of tribulation, and deliverest from all evil; who art compassionate and 
merciful, givest grace to Thy saints and opposest the prideful with Thine own arm.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera: 
The composition of Anatolius, in Tone I: O luminary John, mouth of golden 
luster, ornament of divinely wrought virtues, receptacle of mystic writings: thou wast 
the most pure and incorrupt treasury of the all-holy Spirit, from whence thou hast 
brought gladness to the whole Church by thy salvific discourse; wherefore, having 
found boldness before God, amid the enjoyment of heavenly delight, pray thou for 
us, O most holy father.  
Grace was poured forth through thy lips, O venerable father John Chrysostom, for 
which cause God anointed thee a high priest for His people, to shepherd His flock in 
holiness and righteousness. Wherefore, girded about with the armor of the Mighty 
One, thou didst cut down the blasphemies of heresy. And now, cease thou never to 
pray, that peace be granted to the world, and that our souls be saved.  
The composition of the Studite, in Tone II: Praising thee with love, the great high 
priest and pastor, innocent and venerable, the preacher of repentance, the golden 
mouth of grace, we pray: grant us thy supplications, O father, unto the salvation of 
our souls.  
The composition of George of Nicomedia, in Tone II: Having been adorned with 
thy golden words as with golden ornaments, O John Chrysostom, the Church crieth 
out to thee: “I have drunk my fill of thy flowing golden waters, adorned with thy 
drink of golden honey mingled with gold; for I am brought from works to vision 
because of thy teachings, and am united to Christ, the noetic Bridegroom, reigning 
with Him.” Wherefore, assembling to honor thy memory, we also cry aloud: Cease 
thou never to pray to the Lord for us, that our souls be saved.  
Thou didst receive the most elevated philosophy, O hierarch, and didst transcend 
the world, living above visible things; and in godly manner didst show thyself to be an 
undefiled reflection of God. And ever united with the Light, thou didst receive the 
Light and a most clearly blessed end. Pray thou, O Chrysostom, on behalf of our 
souls.  
In Tone IV: Thou didst manifestly water the earth with words of golden luster, 
possessed of a body and soul flowing with gold, O all-blessed one; and having by thy 
discourses on thy dogmas rendered all things golden, O maker of gold, and written 
books of golden letters, thou didst fly up to the heavens. Wherefore, we cry out to 
thee: O river and mouth of gold, entreat Christ God, that He save our souls.  
Glory ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone II:  
It was fitting for the queen of cities to have John as its hierarch, as a certain royal 
adornment and a golden trumpet instructing all the ends of the earth with the dogmas 
of salvation, and moving all to zeal in chanting divinely splendid hymns. To him do 
we now cry aloud: O thou of golden discourse and golden mouth, entreat Christ God, 
that He save our souls.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
Thee have we obtained as a rampart, * O most pure Theotokos, * a favorably calm 
harbor and confirmation. * Wherefore, we who are tempest-tossed in this life beseech 
thee: ** do thou guide us and save us!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Rejoice, divinely inspired instrument of the Church, beauteous and of golden 
luster, O tongue which lovingly describes to us images of repentance; mind of golden 
sheen, golden-mouthed swallow, dove who with golden wings shineth like gold, 
chanting hymns amid the verdure of the virtues, golden stream pouring forth waters 
and serving as the surety of God's love for mankind! Entreat Christ God, that He 
send down upon our souls great mercy.  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of my heart shall be 
of understanding.  
Rejoice, father of orphans, swift help of the oppressed, provision for the poor, 
food for the starving, correction of the sinful, right pleasing and most honorable 
physician of men's souls, high fame of theology, explication of the writings of the 
Spirit, most active law, most just rule, uttermost wisdom of vision and activity! 
Entreat Christ, that He send down great mercy upon our souls.  
Verse: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom * and his tongue shall 
speak of judgment.  
“Rejoice!” the Church crieth out to thee, its bridegroom, O Chrysostom who hath 
shone forth throughout all the world with thy virtues and pearl-like discourses whose 
luster exceedes that of the sun, O thou who art far more wise than the wise and more 
exalted than all orators, champion of true dogmas, denouncer of falsehood, teacher of 
repentance! Rejoice, depth of most serene knowledge, who, like the great Paul, 
inherited the mind of Christ! Him do thou entreat, that He grant our souls great 
mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Thou didst show thyself to be a trumpet of golden voice, O Chrysostom of golden 
words, making the hearts of the faithful golden by thy golden teachings; for, as the 
prophet said, the sound of thy corrections hath gone forth, O venerable father, and 
enlightened the ends of the whole world.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
all-pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the primal 
curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O most pure 
one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Lady, ** the 
intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 

--- PAGE 8 ---
After the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Grace shining forth from thy mouth like a beacon hath illumined the universe, * 
and disclosed to the world treasures of uncovetousness, * and shown us the heights 
of humility; * but while instructing by Thy words, O Father John Chrysostom, ** 
intercede with the Word, Christ our God, to save our souls. (Twice)  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same tone: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Grace shining forth from thy mouth like a beacon hath illumined the universe, * 
and disclosed to the world treasures of uncovetousness, * and shown us the heights 
of humility; * but while instructing by Thy words, O Father John Chrysostom, ** 
intercede with the Word, Christ our God, to save our souls. (Twice) 
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of angels ...”: 
Thou hast shone forth in splendor upon mortals like a golden star, O all-blessed 
John Chrysostom, illumining the ends of the earth with the beams of thy discourses. 
Wherefore, celebrating thy most holy memory today, we ask for the remission of all 
our sins. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
O pure Virgin Theotokos who knewest not wedlock, thou sole intercessor and 
protection of the faithful: from tribulations, sorrows and cruel circumstances deliver 
all who place their trust in thee, O Maiden, and save our souls by thy divine 
supplications.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
O ye faithful, as is meet let us honor Chrysostom, the meadow of discourses on 
the divinely inspired Scriptures, who guideth us to repentance, and who endured 
manifold trials, in that we have been taught by him; for he prayeth to the Lord, that 
our souls be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Awesome is the miracle of thy conceiving, and the ineffable image of birth giving 
known in thee, O pure Ever-virgin, filleth my mind with awe and amazeth my 
thoughts. Thy glory hath spread over all, O Theotokos, unto the salvation of our 
souls.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch, father 
John Chrysostom, and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ 
our God on our behalf.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Selected Psalm Verse:  
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
By thy divine words, O blessed Chrysostom, thou wast truly manifest as a spiritual 
treasury of the world, and shining forth upon the ends of the earth, thou hast 
bestowed the riches of salvation upon all, guiding the people to repentance. 
Wherefore, having completed the course of thy life, thou standest before the throne 
of the Most High, O ever-memorable John Chrysostom. Entreat Christ God, that He 
grant remission of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Let us hymn the heavenly gate and ark, * the most holy mountain, the cloud of 
light, the heavenly ladder, * the spiritual Paradise, the redemption of Eve, * the great 
treasure of the world; * because salvation for the world and forgiveness of ancient 
offences were wrought in her. * Therefore we cry unto her: * Intercede with thine 
own Son and God to grant forgiveness of offences ** to those who devoutly worship 
thine all-holy Offspring. 
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, §35,(10: 1-9)  
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that 
entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, 
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of 
strangers. This parable spake Jesus unto them; but they understood not what things 
they were which he spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are thieves 
and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door, by me if any man enter 
in, he shall be saved, and go in and out, and find pasture.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
Grace was poured forth through thy lips, O venerable father, and thou wast a 
pastor of the Church of Christ, teaching the reason-endowed sheep to believe in the 
consubstantial Trinity in one Godhead.  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraklisis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos, and the canon of the hierarch, with 8 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “I 
hymn thee, the golden mouth of the Spirit,” by Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
As a most fervent preacher of repentance, O father Chrysostom, pray to God that 
I may be able to repent with all my heart, and beg thou that, through thy suffering, 
the wounds of mine ancient transgressions may be healed.  
Receiving all the effulgence of the Holy Spirit, O venerable father, thou wast 
revealed to be a most radiant pillar going before the Church and guiding it, and a 
luminous cloud overshadowing the councils of the Orthodox, O all-blessed one.  
A teacher ordained by Christ, with golden tongue and a divinely wise mind thou 
didst abundantly pour forth divine doctrines; for thou wast revealed to be a river of 
God full of the waters of the Spirit, O divinely revealed Chrysostom.  
Theotokion: All-adorned with divers forms of grace, O divinely joyous and blessed 
one, thou hast given birth to the Word of the Father Who, in His great compassion, 
and in a manner past understanding and all telling, assumed flesh; and thou didst 
remain an undefiled Virgin.  
Katavasia: I will open my mouth ... 
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Enriched by the mind of Christ, by thy pure life thou didst become an aid, the 
explication and enabling of the salvation of all, O divinely inspired Chrysostom, 
pouring forth salvific teachings.  
Made rich by the immaterial treasures of the Spirit, thou didst draw forth an ever--
flowing stream of doctrines from the wellsprings of salvation, O venerable father, 
watering all of the Churches therewith.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
With the most wise tilling of thy discourses thou didst clear the stony fields of 
men's souls, O wise and God-pleasing Chrysostom, rendering them fertile, and 
watering them with heavenly showers.  
Theotokion: There was no blemish or defilement within thee, O Virgin, and thou 
wast revealed to be a habitation transcending the beauties of heaven; for in thee all 
the holiness of the virtues abided, O all-immaculate one.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
In a godly manner thou didst draw forth a wealth of knowledge of the ineffable 
wisdom, gathering in the waters of Orthodoxy for all, which divinely gladden the 
hearts of the faithful and drown, as is meet, the thoughts of infidels. Wherefore, 
through the sweat of piety, thou didst show thyself to be an invincible champion of 
the Trinity, O John Chrysostom. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins 
unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., in the same melody:  
Having come to know the wisdom which is from on high and the grace of words 
from God, thou didst shine forth upon all like gold in the crucible, preaching the 
Holy Trinity in Unity, and shooting down the delusion of avarice with the arrows of 
thy words. Wherefore, having zealously reproved the empress, thou didst put to 
shame the alien thinking of Arius, O John Chrysostom. Entreat Christ God, that He 
grant remission of sins unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Pondering the flames and burning of Gehenna, and the weeping and lamentation 
therein, the exceedingly accursed and most bitter separation, as well as the inheritance 
of the saints and their joyous assembly, O my soul, restrain thyself and give utterance 
to sighs; strive to erase the record of thy many debts with tears of compunction, hav-
ing the pure Mother of God as thine unashamed companion. For, it is for her sake 
that remission of sins hast been granted to those, who in an Orthodox manner, 
glorify her as the Theotokos.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Christ Who, in that He is good, exerciseth forethought for all in His providence, 
hath given thee to us, O all-blessed John Chrysostom, as another peer of the apostles, 
a proclaimer of the heavenly liturgy, and a divine expounder of celestial mysteries.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Let us honor the golden John Chrysostom of golden eloquence, who hath 
rendered all things golden through the golden luster of his teachings, and hath 
illumined the world with his tongue, which shineth brighter than gold, is full of light 
and poureth forth divine grace.  
Thou wast wholly the habitation of God; thou wast shown to be wholly the 
instrument of the Spirit, sounding forth a divinely inspired hymn of every virtue and 
the cause of salvation, and revealing the beauty of the kingdom of heaven, O all-
blessed John Chrysostom.  
Thou didst proclaim the compassion of God, setting forth examples of 
repentance, and most excellently instructing us how to avoid evils, O most blessed, 
most perfect and most honored father Chrysostom, pouring forth excellent teachings 
on good works.  
Theotokion: After God, we have acquired thee as our intercessor; for thou wast 
the Mother of God, the Creator and Fashioner, Who took upon Himself our guise, 
saving it from corruption and death, and glorifying it with divine glory, O all-
immaculate one.    
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
We all know thee to be the most radiant beacon of the Church, saving the souls of 
all, rescuing them from the jaws of death, and guiding them to everlasting life, O 
ever-hymned father.  
Protected by the armor of piety and with great courage of soul, thou dost rend 
asunder the hordes of the heretics, O thrice-blessed and most sacred one; and, 
rejoicing, thou dost most radiantly unite the choirs of the Orthodox in the bond of 
the Spirit.  
Thy cheeks, full of divine scents like phials of perfume, gladden the whole world 
with noetic fragrance through the distilled mystagogy of thine understandings and the 
beauty of thy words, O all-wise one.  
Theotokion: Conceiving God, thou hast given birth to the Lord, Creator and 
Fashioner, O pure one. All mankind blesses thee, and the intelligent ranks of the 
bodiless ones glorify thee as the Mother of God.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
As a rich bestower of discourse, thou hast enriched the whole world with spiritual 
wisdom; for rich grace poured forth through thy lips from on high, O hierarch.  
Thy sound hath gone forth into all the earth like lightning, O Chrysostom, and the 
power of thy words hath sounded in all the ends of the world like a blaring trumpet.  
Clad in a robe of the virtues woven from on high, O all-blessed one, and arrayed 
in the beauty of thy discourses, thou wast revealed to be the glorious confirmation of 
the truth.  
Theotokion: The Lover of mankind, Who beareth all things by His omnipotent 
power arrayed Himself in the weak flesh He received from thee, O all-immaculate 
Virgin, for the benefit of mankind.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “He Who fulfilled His providence concerning us ...”: 
From the heavens hast thou received grace, * and by thy lips thou dost teach all to 
worship the One God in Trinity, * O John Chrysostom, all blessed righteous one. ** 
Rightly do we acclaim thee, for thou art a teacher revealing things divine.  
Ikos: I bend my knee before the Creator of all, I stretch forth my hands to the pre-
eternal Word, seeking the gift of discourse, that I may hymn the saint whom He 
Himself hath magnified; for through His prophet He Who liveth forever doth say: I 
glorify those who glorify me with faith. He Who in ancient times raised up Samuel 
hath now glorified a hierarch; for, having invested well the talant with which he was 
entrusted, he hath brought it to the King, for which cause the Transcendent One hath 
exalted him. I beg that the Word impart unto me his grace, unworthy as I am, that I 
may be able to hymn him with piety. For he is the teacher of the ends of the world, 
revealing things divine.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God's condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Probing the depths of the abyss of goodness and compassion, thou didst show 
thyself to be the surety of salvation for those who fervently repent and cry aloud to 
the Lord with all their soul: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thou settest aright every thought by thy teachings, O Chrysostom, and healest 
spiritual infirmities, as one most compassionate; and thou chantest in gladness to 
those who run well the race: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
As elect, venerable, guileless, a priest of the Most High, splendidly arrayed in 
righteousness, O spiritually rich hierarch, thou hast been exalted, crying out with 
gladness: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: O most pure one, thou didst conceive Him Who is God and Lord 
over all, Whose good pleasure it was to save the human race from corruption and 
death. Hymning Him as is meet, we cry: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Using thy discourses with knowledge, O Chrysostom, we learn what is precious in 
theology; we bear as fruit the profit of good things and escape the harm of evil. For 
thou hast been the common cause of our salvation, crying aloud: Supremely exalt 
Christ throughout the ages!  
As thou hast most compassionate boldness, with thy merciful and sympathetic 
love pray to the Master on our behalf, O father Chrysostom; for we, the faithful, set 
thee before the Savior as our mediator and intercessor, as one who prayeth fervently 
for us, O divinely wise and all-blessed hierarch John.  
Thou didst reprove the youthful opposition, headstrong thought and injustice of 
the rulers, O venerable one, interceding fervently for the oppressed; and in thy loving 
conduct thou wast a father for orphans, widows and the poor, crying: Supremely exalt 
Christ throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: O Virgin, the divinely eloquent prophets foretold thy supra-natural 
and wondrous birthgiving by means of bodily forms, divers indistinct images, and 
significant symbolic phenomena; wherefore, in gladness we piously hymn thee, 
supremely exalting Christ throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Truly delighting in the life for which thou didst struggle as far as thou wast able, O 
divinely eloquent father, and having excelled on earth by thine angelic life and 
acquired the tongue of Christ and a mouth of tranquility, pray thou that those who 
truly bless thee with faith may be saved.  
Thy words are the words of life, O thrice-blessed one, bringing life everlasting; for 
Christ hath shown thee to be a flowing wellspring, a river pouring forth torrents of 
divine teachings, a true stream of sweetness and brook of remission, and a radiant 
preacher of repentance.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Thou hast been shown to be a most splendid mediator between God and mortals, 
O most radiant one; for thou wast revealed to be a divinely luminous lamp of grace 
and divine understanding and a teacher of almsgiving. Wherefore, O Chrysostom, 
with heartfelt love we now magnify thee as is meet.  
Theotokion: O pure and exceedingly glorious Birthgiver of God, save those who 
hymn thee with love, mercifully silencing the tumult of temptations; for, having given 
birth unto God, thou doest all things whatsoever thou dost desire, and dost accom-
plish unhindered what thou dost will, O Virgin. Wherefore, we all magnify thee.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
With thy discourses of golden luster the Church of Christ is rendered manifestly 
splendid, O father Chrysostom. And the souls of the faithful are gladdened, honoring 
thy most holy memory; for thou hast been shown to all as a teacher of repentance 
and guide to salvation.  
Glory ..., Another Exapostilarion:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Made steadfast by him, let us all praise the all-wise John, the trumpet-voiced 
preacher of repentance, the treasure of the poor, the golden and right eloquent mouth 
of the Church, the expounder of the Scriptures.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O all-immaculate Virgin, my Sovereign Lady, with the glorious Chrysostom entreat 
thy Son, that those who hymn thee may be delivered from all dangers and receive 
everlasting good things. For thou canst do whatsoever thou desirest, O all-holy one.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Thou wast a most precious vessel of the divine Spirit, * and a most sacred pastor, 
an angel on earth, * a pillar of the Church * and a foundation of the dogmas, * a 
surety for sinners * and the divine consolation of the penitent, * who takest thought 
for the poor and dost comfort the orphaned, * O John Chrysostom, ** intercessor 
for our souls.  
Thou wast a sun of great brilliance * illumining the whole world with thy 
discourses, O most radiant star * shining forth rays of light, * which ever guide to the 
most tranquil haven * those who are tempest-tossed * upon the sea of the world * by 
the grace of salvation, * O golden-worded Chrysostom, ** intercessor for our souls.  
Thou wast truly * an earthly angel and a heavenly man, * a melodious nightingale, 
* a river full of noetic waters, * a cloud pouring forth showers * of understanding, * 
abundantly watering us all, a teacher of salvation * and an aid in repentance, ** O 
John Chrysostom.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Driven unjustly from thy flock, * O venerable father, thou didst partake of 
tribulations * and bitter imprisonment, * wherein thou wast deemed worthy of a 
blessed end; * and, vanquishing the most crafty one, * as a valiant spiritual athlete, * 
thou wast crowned by Christ * with a diadem of victory, O John Chrysostom, ** 
intercessor for our souls.  
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII:  
Having adorned the Church of God with golden words and divinely eloquent 
teachings, thou didst lay up therein the spiritual riches of thy divinely imparted 
discourses. Wherefore, weaving a wreath for thee with hymns, as with never-fading 
flowers, the Church offereth it to thy sacred memory, O divinely wise John, golden of 
both soul and tongue. Yet as thou hast boldness, O venerable one, pray thou on 
behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplication of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  
Great Doxology, Troparia, Litanies, Dismissal. First Hour 

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY    
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the canon 
of the holy hierarch.  
Enriched by the mind of Christ, by thy pure life thou didst become an aid, the 
explication and enabling of the salvation of all, O divinely inspired Chrysostom, 
pouring forth salvific teachings. (Twice) 
Made rich by the immaterial treasures of the Spirit, thou didst draw forth an ever--
flowing stream of doctrines from the wellsprings of salvation, O venerable father, 
watering all of the Churches therewith.  
With the most wise tilling of thy discourses thou didst clear the stony fields of 
men's souls, O wise and God-pleasing Chrysostom, rendering them fertile, and 
watering them with heavenly showers.  
As a rich bestower of discourse, thou hast enriched the whole world with spiritual 
wisdom; for rich grace poured forth through thy lips from on high, O hierarch.  
Thy sound hath gone forth into all the earth like lightning, O Chrysostom, and the 
power of thy words hath sounded in all the ends of the world like a blaring trumpet.  
Clad in a robe of the virtues woven from on high, O all-blessed one, and arrayed 
in the beauty of thy discourses, thou wast revealed to be the glorious confirmation of 
the truth.  
Theotokion: The Lover of mankind, Who beareth all things by His omnipotent 
power arrayed Himself in the weak flesh He received from thee, O all-immaculate 
Virgin, for the benefit of mankind.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Grace shining forth from thy mouth like a beacon hath illumined the universe, * 
and disclosed to the world treasures of uncovetousness, * and shown us the heights 
of humility; * but while instructing by Thy words, O Father John Chrysostom, ** 
intercede with the Word, Christ our God, to save our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VI: 
From the heavens hast thou received grace, * and by thy lips thou dost teach all to 
worship the One God in Trinity, * O John Chrysostom, all blessed righteous one. ** 
Rightly do we acclaim thee, for thou art a teacher revealing things divine.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, §318(7: 26-8: 2) 
Brethren; such a high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; who needeth not daily, as those high 
priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: for this he 
did once, when he offered up himself. For the law maketh men high priests which 
have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, 
who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the 
sum: We have such a high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the 
Majesty in the heavens; a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which 
the Lord pitched, and not man.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his 
tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN, §36(10: 9-16) 
The Lord said to the Jews that came to Him: I am the door: by me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 
know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
