--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 18th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYRS PLATO & ROMANUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the martyr Plato, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Full of valiant wisdom, * with a most courageous resolve thou didst endure * the 
severing of thy limbs * and the dismemberment of thy body, * unbearable fire, * 
starvation and death, * in expectation of the glory which ageth not, * which lieth 
eternally before thee, ** and foreseeing everlasting blessedness.  
Having transcended every sense * and directed thy mind * toward life on high, * 
with divinely wise thought * and great wisdom of soul * thou didst spurn the baseness 
and lowliness * of visible things. * Wherefore, lacerated and burned with fire for 
Christ, O martyr, ** thou didst endure valiantly.  
Every assault of the enemy * and the onslaughts of the persecutors * didst thou set 
at naught by grace; * and wast crowned with the wreath of victory, * O spiritually rich 
martyr, * being deemed worthy of incorruptible gladness * and ineffable and divine 
radiance. * And as thou art now in the midst thereof, ** ask remission of sins for 
those who praise thee as is meet.  
And 3 Stichera of the martyr Romanus, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Consumed by fasting, * hardened by ascetic endeavor, * and tormented with 
manifold tortures, * thou didst become a two-edged sword, * cutting down hordes of 
demons, O Romanus, * thou adornment of spiritual athletes, * divine boast, * 
precious ornament of the Church ** of those who died shedding their own blood, O 
all-praised one.  
Lacerated and rent asunder, * imprisoned in a dungeon, * thy tongue cut of, O 
glorious spiritual athlete, * thy jaw broken, * receiving a blessed end through violent 
suffocation, * thou wast shown to be * unshakable and steadfast * through the 
activity of the divine Spirit, O Romanus; ** wherefore, we praise thee with faith.  
A child speaketh eloquently * and amazeth the mindless: * he is adorned with 
honorable opposition * and is illumined by his death; * he is enriched by the goodly 
fame of the holy spiritual athletes, * whose zeal he acquired. * O right wise Romanus, 
* pray thou with them, ** that remission of debts be sent down upon us all.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Awesome and most glorious are the victories of Thy martyr, O Lord! For, 
emulating the boldness of the fishermen, by his words and deeds he rent asunder the 
mythology and historical blasphemy of Plato with the nets of theology; and when his 
skin was flayed and his head severed, he choked the enemy with the outpouring of his 
blood. O all-blessed wonderworker Plato, thou adornment of the martyrs, who 
preached the great name of Christ with boldness, ask that great mercy be given our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth birth to 
Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son How is it 
that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, and two canons of the holy martyrs.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy martyr Plato, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the expanse of thy 
praises, O Plato”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Traversing the most pure expanse of the eternal kingdom, O glorious one, from all 
tribulation and the dangers of imprisonment save those who hymn thee, leading to 
the path to heaven those who walk without turning back.  
Protected by the armor of piety, and having shown thyself to be an unshakable 
pillar, O Plato, thou didst endure all the savagery of wounds and accepted the pangs 
of imprisonment, exalted by divine grace.  
Showing forth the mettle of youth, in thy suffering thou didst cast off mortal and 
corruptible coarseness, O all-wise one, and, arrayed in the garment of incorruption, 
thou standest, rejoicing, before the Master.  
Theotokion: In a manner surpassing understanding thou hast given birth to the 
incarnate and only-begotten Word, Who is co-beginningless and everlasting with the 
Father, O blessed and most pure Theotokos. Wherefore, reasoning correctly, we 
proclaim and honorably glorify thee.  
Canon of the holy martyr Romanus, the acrostic whereof is: “With spiritual athletes' 
wreaths I crown thee, O Romanus”, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Shining brightly with the never-waning radiance of the Trinity, and enlightened 
with the choirs of spiritual athletes, O Romanus, send down enlightenment upon me, 
and drive away the darkness of the passions by thy supplications, which are 
acceptable to God.  
Unmoved by the raging waves of the sea of idolatry, in that thou wast set firmly 
upon Christ the rock, thou didst destroy the threefold billows of most seditious 
ungodliness with the calm of the divine Spirit.  
The Church of Christ, which aboundeth in every good thing, O Romanus, didst 
thou preserve untouched by the wolves, like a right-glorious and right-fruitful 
meadow, making it steadfast by thy teaching.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: Truly, human nature hath found mercy through thee, O all-
immaculate one; for the Creator, having become incarnate from thee in a manner past 
all telling and understanding, was led to death for us, delivering us from Hades.  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy martyr Plato  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Manifestly aflame with the zeal of piety, and enlightened by the divine fire of the 
Faith, O all-blessed one, with endurance thou didst enter into the cruel flame like a 
spark of incorruption.  
Having supra-naturally vanquished the servants of the demons, and borne with 
patience the pain of mighty tortures, O blessed and divinely wise Plato, thou wast 
shown to be a dweller with the angels and a crown-bearer.  
Having struggled for Christ on earth, O all-blessed one, receiving from Him 
heavenly gifts and crowns which abide forever, thou dwellest in the pure land of 
paradise.  
Theotokion: O Mother of God, thou art the portal of the Light, adorned with the 
rays of the light of the Spirit; for through thee descended unto us the Word Who 
illumineth with divine light all who hymn thee.  
Canon of the holy martyr Romanus  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Having slain the spiritual beast with the sling of thy words, O Romanus, thou didst 
preserve the flock of Christ uncorrupted by the evil of idolatry.  
Rendered mighty by the armor of the Cross, thou didst turn back the assaults of 
the enemy and denounced their impotence, O wise and right blessed Romanus.  
When thy cheek was lacerated for Christ, O glorious, blessed and ever-memorable 
Romanus, thou didst cast down the enemy, breaking their jaws.  
Theotokion: Clothed in the flesh He received from thee, He Who alone is God by 
nature, the Word of the Father, Who is one in essence with the Spirit, hath deified 
mortals, O Mother of God.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr Plato, in Tone VIII.: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Exalted in the breadth of thy struggles, O wise martyr, thou didst destroy the 
snares of the enemy, discomfiting them, O all-glorious one; and having run well the 
divine course, thou didst reach the expanse of heaven, rejoicing. Wherefore, the 
Church, resplendent today in an abundance of piety, doth celebrate thy memorial, O 
blessed one, and crieth out to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of 
sins unto those who with love honor thy holy memory.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr Romanus, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”:  
Having trampled underfoot the wicked one by fasting, thou wast glorified by 
suffering, O martyr of Christ, having endured manfully with a perfected mind. 
Wherefore, thou hast been numbered among the choirs of martyrs and reached the 
everlasting kingdom. Joining chorus therein, be thou mindful of us who celebrate thy 
holy memory with faith.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O Theotokos, fleeing to thy divine protection after God, * I humbly fall down and 
beseech thee: * Have mercy, O most pure one, * for my sins have submerged my 
being, * and trembling O Lady, I fear the torments to come, * O pure one, entreat thy 
Son, ** that I may be delivered from them.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy martyr Plato  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Wholly transformed by the love of thy Creator, thou didst not feel the pain of thy 
body, having shed the skin garments of thy flesh from passions and mortality, and 
clothed thyself in the robe of chastity and salvation.  
Thou wast revealed to be a true priest of God, offering thyself unto Christ the 
Redeemer Who was slain for all, as an unblemished lamb and a perfect sacrifice, O 
martyr; for, having set thy soul afire with love for the Master, thou didst pay no heed 
to thy burning flesh.  
Emulating the three youths who were in Babylon, thou didst not fear the all-
devouring fire, but mightily and youthfully endured the unbearable flame thereof. 
Wherefore, the Bestower of dew hath rightly taken thee with them into the chamber 
of glory.  
Theotokion: In that thou art the royal root, thou hast given birth for us unto the 
Word of God Who reigneth over all, Who became flesh, yet remained unchanged. 
Wherefore, O all-holy Virgin, with truth and authority we glorify thee, the Theotokos. 
  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the holy martyr Romanus  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
With ineffable beauty thou didst ascend the tree, mounting it like a stairway, O 
blessed one, and attained unto the everlasting choir, O right glorious martyr 
Romanus.  
Having shed thy mortal garments amid thy tortures, O blessed one, thou didst 
array thyself splendidly in a garment of light, O all-glorious martyr Romanus.  
Made wise by the inspiration of the Comforter, the tongue of the boy proclaimed 
Thee to be the Lord of glory, the Creator of all and God Who art able to save, O 
Lover of mankind.  
Theotokion: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O Virgin, whereby all peoples of 
the world have been delivered from the curse of death; and blessed by thee, we hymn 
thee as the mediatress of Life.  
ODE V 
Canon of the holy martyr Plato  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Thou gavest neither slumber to thine eyelids, nor sleep to thine eyes, O martyr, 
until, beheaded by the sword, thou didst sleep the sleep of the blessed like those who 
love God, O blessed one.  
Suffering, thou didst struggle as in another's body, O all-blessed one; thou didst 
suffer, viewing thy pangs as though another was experiencing them. For, set afire with 
divine zeal, thou didst not fear the future torments, O glorious one.  
Thou hast discovered riches which cannot be taken away, and unfading glory, 
joining chorus with the angels in the mansions of heaven, partaking of incorruptible 
immortality, O most eminent one.  
Theotokion: By thy supplications grant remission of sins to thy servants, delivering 
them from temptations, misfortunes and sorrows, and from enslavement to 
blasphemous heretics, O all-praised Virgin Theotokos.  
Canon of the holy martyr Romanus  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
With the martyric streams of thy blood thou didst engulf the sea of ungodliness; 
and thou hast poured forth rivers of healing, O Romanus.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
O Romanus, thou didst offer to the Master as a choice gift, an unblemished 
sacrifice, the slain boy Varulus who proclaimed theological things.  
Thou didst wound the foolishness of the enemy with the wisdom of the Holy 
Spirit, as he inflicted wounds upon thy body, O all-glorious Romanus.  
Theotokion: In that thou hast given birth unto Joy, O Virgin Mary who knewest 
not wedlock, thou hast destroyed the curse and restored mankind through thy 
birthgiving.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy martyr Plato  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Transcending sufferings and tortures, thou didst endure the cutting away of thy 
flesh, O glorious one; for thou didst have Christ as thy Helper, Assistant and 
Companion.  
Ever gazing upon the majesty of the Creator with spiritual understanding, and 
contemplating ineffable beauty, thou didst spurn the baseness of visible things.  
Theotokion: As an animate ark thou didst hold the Bestower of life, as a holy 
temple thou didst receive the Holy One Who had become a man, for the good of 
mankind, O all-blessed one.  
Canon of the holy martyr Romanus  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons' * by 
the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 
Having with ease shed mortality and corruption and arrayed thyself in the beauty 
of life incorruptible, O Romanus, thou hast been adorned with never-diminishing 
spiritual splendors.  
Thy tongue was severed and poured forth torrents of blood like teachings, O 
passion-bearer, and thou didst thereby inherit the imperishable blessedness which is 
ever-abiding.  
Thirsting for a stream of wisdom, by the counsel of his mother thou didst pour 
drink into the mouth of the boy who uttered theology, and who entered into the 
endless life by means of the sword.  
Theotokion: Be thou a ready refuge for me, O most pure Mother of God, 
delivering me from violence, taking from me the shame of the passions and guiding 
me to the godly path. 
  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Kontakion of the holy martyr Plato, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Thy holy memory doth gladden the whole world, * summoning all the faithful to 
thine all honorable temple, * where, assembled now with joy, we chant in hymns amid 
splendor. * Wherefore, O Plato, we cry out to thee: ** Deliver thy city from the 
invasion of the heathen, O holy one.  
Ikos: Having abandoned all pagan superstition, the divinely wise Plato came to 
love the soul-saving teachings of the disciples of Christ. Wherefore, he appeared 
honorable to all, like an anchor of the Faith in his native land, and manifestly bore the 
title “Of Ancyra.” For, nurtured well, it found him to be an excellent protection 
against the enemy and a fervent helper in battle, crying aloud: Deliver thy city from 
the invasion of the heathen, O holy one!  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy martyr Plato  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God's condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
He Who set down the law hath crowned with a wreath of victory thee who 
suffered lawfully and trampled underfoot thine enemies, and who cried aloud, saying: 
O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst pass over, rejoicing, to Him Whom from of old thou didst desire, 
emulating His most pure sufferings, which were the cause of the salvation of 
mankind; and thou didst chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
All the hosts of heaven, and the people looking on, marveled at thy patient 
endurance of suffering; for thy severed tongue supra-naturally cried aloud: O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Delivered from the bonds of death and the curse of the first-formed 
Adam by the divine Offspring of thy virginity, O most pure one, mindful that thou 
art the Theotokos, we cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy martyr Romanus  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
By being strangled, thou didst choke the serpent, O passion-bearer, and didst truly 
find life, O most glorious Romanus, ever crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple 
of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Illumined with rays of never-waning light, O Romanus, thou didst quench the 
lofty flame, adorned with the gift of prophecy and numbered among the choirs of the 
martyrs, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
A fragrant rose of tender growth, watered with his mother's teachings and the 
blood of martyrdom, hath been incorruptibly offered to Christ as from a garden of 
many flowers.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned one who hast alone given birth to God without seed, 
lead us forth who have fallen into the abyss of sin, but who hymn thee, saying: 
Blessed art Thou among women, O all-immaculate Lady.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy martyr Plato  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Thou didst struggle in radiant feats, O all-praised one, and Christ bestowed upon 
thee the most splendid, blessed and ever-enduring fame, causing thee to dwell in the 
mansions of heaven, wherefore thou dost fervently chant: Ye priests hymn; ye people, 
supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages!  
As a most faithful supplicant, as a most fervent intercessor for us, we now set thee 
before the King of all, the Author of creation. Pray thou for us, interceding in thy 
martyr's boldness on behalf of those who praise thee and chant with faith: Ye people, 
supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages!  
Because of thine active faith thou wast deemed worthy to receive a kingship which 
cannot be taken away; for God, Who lieth not, promised to give it thee, and for Him 
thou didst commit thy body to fire and torture, crying aloud: Ye priests hymn; ye 
people, supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: In a manner most divine thou didst give birth to the Word of God, 
Who is co-beginningless and of equal honor with the Father, Who brought all things 
forth out of non-existence by the counsel of the Father, and assumed flesh for the 
sake of mankind. Wherefore, acknowledging thee, in an Orthodox fashion, to be the 
Theotokos, we supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages.  
Canon of the holy martyr Romanus  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Thou wast obedient to the words of Christ, O glorious one, laying down thy life 
for thy flock, being strangled in thy zeal for it, tortured, lacerated and wounded; and 
thou didst cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Truly thy mouth and tongue were full of joy and gladness, continually blessing 
God; for, cut out and dripping with blood, O Romanus, it setteth forth for us the law 
of faith, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord.  
Theotokion: Having given birth to the Word of the Father through the divine 
Spirit, thou didst remain a virgin, O Birthgiver of God, who knewest not a man, 
transcending the laws of nature in thy birthgiving. Wherefore, rejoicing, we chant: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX 
Canon of the holy martyr Plato  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God's ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin's womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
O ye who love the martyrs, come, let us hymn the martyr, crowned by God, who 
extended the piety of his birth; for, as an offshoot of the branch of life, he bringeth 
forth fruit which poureth forth the wine of compunction for us.  
Precious in the sight of the Lord was the death of the martyr, for he hath become 
the mediator of the true life which is everlasting and imperishable, giving abundant 
recompense, incorruption and immortal glory.  
All thy life didst thou consecrate to God almighty, O martyr, and, rejoicing, thou 
didst offer thyself as a well-pleasing and living sacrifice. Wherefore, thou hast 
manifestly been deemed worthy of the sweetness which passeth understanding. Pray 
thou that those who hymn thee be delivered from temptations.  
Theotokion: Save me, O Mother of God who hast given birth to Christ my Savior, 
Who is both God and man, in two natures, but not in two hypostases, the Only-
begotten of the Father and of thee, the first-born of all creation. Wherefore, all of us 
ever magnify thee.  
Canon of the holy martyr Romanus  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
All thy trust didst thou place in the Master, O glorious martyr Romanus, enduring 
many and varied wounds; wherefore thou hast received ineffable glory and divine 
delight.  
Behold, instead of pain a torrent of sweetness hath been granted thee, O martyr 
Romanus, bearing a crown and wearing a robe dyed red in thine own blood. Like a 
fragrant and never-fading rose thou wast slain as a child for Christ's sake.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou hast delivered mortals from the primal curse of our 
ancestors, and opened unto us the life of Eden by thy birthgiving, which transcendeth 
nature. Wherefore, in gladness we magnify thee, O Theotokos.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyrs:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
In all thy ways thou didst tread the hard and divine path, ascending unto the 
expanse of the kingdom of heaven, O Plato, glory of martyrs, shining with the light of 
the incorruptible Trinity. Wherefore, partaking of endless glory, be thou mindful of 
those who honor thee.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, I set forth thy protection as a truly invincible 
help and wall of defense and thee as a mediator before God, that I may be delivered 
from everlasting torment, O Lady, and through thee find a share in the kingdom, and 
in life incorruptible.  
 
 
 AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr Plato, in Tone III: 
Thy holy memory doth gladden the whole world, * summoning all the faithful to 
thine all honorable temple, * where, assembled now with joy, we chant in hymns amid 
splendor. * Wherefore, O Plato, we cry out to thee: ** Deliver thy city from the 
invasion of the heathen, O holy one.  
 
 
 
 
 
