--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, INNOCENT, BISHOP 
OF IRKUTSK, THE WONDERWORKER  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
We chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first Antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera, in Tone VI: 
Let us praise a man glorious in his being, our father, the holy hierarch Innocent; 
for the Lord hath wrought much glory in the incorruption of his holy body, placing it 
as a candle upon a candle-stand, and enlightening the flock of Irkutsk with the rays of 
his miracles, that the memory of the righteous one not depart therefrom, but his 
name live unto generations of generations; that the nations declare his wisdom, 
beholding the holy Church, proclaiming his praise continually in hymns and spiritual 
odes. (Twice)  
Let us praise the new apostle of Christ, who hath come to the land of barbarous 
heathens bearing the Gospel, who maketh fragrant the uttermost ends of Russia with 
faith, who flourisheth like a lily in the east of the Siberian realm, who rained with 
words of heavenly wisdom upon the pagans who had not been watered with streams 
of grace, (Twice)  
When the dark kingdom of the Chinese, clouded over with the pride of the ancient 
serpent, could not contain the light of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, and did not wish 
to receive the right glorious Russian hierarch, the holy Christian Faith began to grow 
and increase among the pagans ruled by the Russian scepter, through the mouth of 
the holy and great hierarch Innocent, who prayeth for our souls. (Twice)  
Thy name was like a fragrant myrrh, O father, pouring forth upon thy flock, 
illumining them, and all those who reverently honor thy holy memory, with the rays 
of thy spiritual beauty, enlightening all Christian cities and lands which glorify the 
God of Israel, Who is wondrous in His saints. Him do thou entreat, that our souls be 
saved.  
Upon thee, O father, the truth of the Lord was confirmed, which was foretold by 
the prophet David, who of old proclaimed: The righteous shall flourish like a palm 
tree, and like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied; and he shall be like the tree 
which is planted by the streams of the waters. Wherefore, we beseech thee, O most 
wondrous hierarch: Overshadow this city and all Orthodox Christians by thine 
intercessions.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
O holy hierarch, father Innocent, thy life was in accordance with thy name, for 
thou wast whitened with innocence all the days of thy life. And, sojourning upon the 
earth as a pilgrim and wanderer, thou didst receive within thyself the Holy Trinity, 
preparing within thy heart a habitation for the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Wherefore, even in the grave thy holy body flourished, and not one of thy divinely 
preserved bones was broken. Thus, venerating with faith thy precious relics, which 
have been glorified by an abundance of healings, we beseech thee, O favorite of God, 
zealous pastor, adornment of hierarchs: Render us pleasing unto the Holy Trinity, 
Whom on earth thou didst glorify in holiness and righteousness, and before Whom 
thou dost now stand, ever interceding for the peace of thy flock and the salvation of 
our souls.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth forth 
from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, * twofold in nature 
but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect 
man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O unwedded Mother, ** 
that our souls find mercy!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the Day. Three Lessons:  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH  
The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them: and the desert shall 
rejoice, and blossom as the rose. It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with 
joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellence of Carmel 
and Sharon; they shall see the glory of the Lord, and the excellence of our God. 
Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. Say to them that are of a 
fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come with vengeance, even 
God with a recompense; he will come and save you. Then the eyes of the blind shall 
be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap 
as a hart, and the tongue, of the dumb sing: for in the Wilderness shall waters break 
out, and streams in the desert. And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the 
thirsty land springs of water: in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall be 
grass with reeds and rushes. And a highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be 
called The way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be for those: 
the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein. No lion shall be there, nor any 
ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall 
walk there: and the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs 
and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow 
and sighing shall flee away.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
But the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 

--- PAGE 3 ---
God proved them, and found them worthy for himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
he tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with him: for grace and mercy is to his saints, and he hath 
care for his elect.  
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
But though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was loved of him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted he to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in their minds, 
That his grace and mercy is with his saints, and that he hath respect unto his chosen.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera, in Tone V:  
O ye peoples of Siberia, kiss ye the footprints of the beautiful feet of the holy 
hierarch Innocent, who proclaimed peace and the confirmation of the faith within 
your borders, who initiated a new hierarchy in one of your cities, and flourished in 
incorruption in one of your monasteries, as if flourishing an irrigated garden which 
lacketh not the water of grace, giving those who thirst to drink of spiritual and bodily 
healings without recompense.  
Thou art the glory of Irkutsk, O Innocent; thou art the adornment of the Siberian 
lands, the boast of the Orthodox Church, the magnification of the Ukraine, wherein 
thou didst bud forth as a fragrant lily; wherein thou wast kindled as a most radiant 
beacon; wherein thou wast born, a son of the kingdom of Christ; from whence thou 
wast called forth, an apostle who made thy way bearing the Gospel from the royal 
cities unto the boundaries of Mongolia, instructing darkened pagans during thy 
lifetime and after thy repose.  
In an earthly school thou wast a teacher of heavenly wisdom, instructing all to set 
their affection on things above, and not on the things of earth. Impressing upon 
young minds the ancient truths of the Gospel, thou didst show thyself to be a God-
bearer, sealed with the Holy Spirit, walking in God's sight, zealous for God, and 
standing before God as an intercessor for those who honor thy holy memory, O 
Innocent.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
The Spirit of wisdom and understanding rested upon thee, O holy hierarch, 
whereby thou wast made wise for the salvation of the heathen; the Spirit of good 
counsel and strength, whereby thou wast able to comply with the wondrous counsel 
of the far-sighted Emperor Peter; the Spirit of knowledge and piety, whereby thou 
didst piously teach those who sought a new heart and spirit to know the Holy Trinity.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to thee with 
faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of our souls! 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VII: 
O brethren, let us commemorate the wondrous instructor, who with eloquent 
tongue and a right glorious life spake unto us the words of salvation. Wherefore, 
regarding the blessed end of his life, let us emulate the faith of the hierarch, which 
clothed this corruptible flesh in incorruption and robed this mortal body in 
immortality, prefiguring an image of the general resurrection.  
Verse: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, * and like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
The vine transplanted from the ancient city of Kiev hath blossomed in the land of 
Siberia, stretching forth its branches beyond the sea, and bringing forth the fruit of 
the healing of the heathen. Wherein, O ye faithful, finding great spiritual gladness, let 
us not depart from beneath the shadow of his grace until we obtain healing of our 
infirmities, both spiritual and bodily.  
Verse: The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be broken.  
Come, O ye former pagans, and see that in your days a great deed hath been 
accomplished by the Lord, in Whom ye would not have been able to believe had ye 
not been shown how to do so. Yet behold and marvel how the Lord preserveth all 
the bones of His elect one, and not one of them is broken. Wherefore, be ye not 
faithless, but believing.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
O holy hierarch, father Innocent, thou didst make manifest the glory of Christ's 
kingdom in thy sanctity; by good struggles thou didst proclaim the might of His 
grace; by many miracles thou didst exalt the holy Faith, the victory which vanquisheth 
things worldly, and wast thyself robed as a priest in salvation. Wherefore, the holiness 
of the Lord flourisheth within thee, for thou wast anointed by the Holy Spirit, of 
Whom may He Who is good deprive not us sinners, but by thy prayers may He renew 
us, O favored one of God.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * Mother of 
God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, * 
granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting now our supplications, 
** pray thou that we all be saved. 
At the blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
O most radiant beacon of the Church, * who hast illumined the Russian land with 
the rays of thy good works, * and hast glorified God by many healings of those * who 
have recourse to thy reliquary with faith, * O holy hierarch Innocent, our father, * we 
entreat thee to protect this city ** from all misfortune and grief. (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin Theotokos; 
* for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in the flesh * He had 
received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in that He is the Lover of 
mankind.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
O most radiant beacon of the Church, * who hast illumined the Russian land with 
the rays of thy good works, * and hast glorified God by many healings of those * who 
have recourse to thy reliquary with faith, * O holy hierarch Innocent, our father, * we 
entreat thee to protect this city ** from all misfortune and grief. (Twice) 
 Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin Theotokos; 
* for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in the flesh * He had 
received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in that He is the Lover of 
mankind.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Thou gavest neither sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, O man of 
God, until thou didst find a place for the Lord amid the ruined dominion of the 
ancient deceiver of the pagans, and established there a dwelling-place for the God of 
Jacob, not in Judea, nor in Jerusalem, but in the confines of Mongolia. Wherefore, 
thou wast revealed to be like David, in laying a firm foundation for the Faith in a land 
of unbelief, and as Solomon, being wise in building up the, salvation of thy flock.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V:  
The God Who was incarnate of thee have we come to know, O Virgin Theotokos. 
Him do thou entreat for the salvation of our city and of all those signed with the 
name of thy Son.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Like the oil of myrrh upon the head, which runneth down upon the beard, upon 
the beard of Aaron, which runneth down to the fringe of his raiment; like the dew of 
Hermon, which cometh down upon the mountains of Zion, so the grace of the Holy 
Spirit, which ever wafteth its fragrance upon thy body, which hath been glorified with 
incorruption, doth pour forth abundantly upon those who make haste to thy reliquary 
with faith, in the joy of the Lord Who glorifieth thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O most pure one, with the holy hierarch and all the saints, do thou entreat Him, 
Who alone resteth in the saints, to sanctify all of us who glorify thee, throughout all 
ages.  
After the Polyeleos, the Megalynarion: We magnify thee, O Hierarch, Father 
Innocent, and honor thy holy memory, for thou dost pray for us unto Christ 
our God. 
Verse: Hearken unto this all ye nations, praise him, all ye peoples. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice) 

--- PAGE 7 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
The Lord, not withholding good things from those who walk in innocence, 
bestowed upon thee grace and glory, O holy hierarch Innocent, which thou didst 
plant in the Russian land. Wherefore, by thy supplications grant unto us everlasting 
crowns of glory in heaven, with thee and all the saints who have been well-pleasing 
unto God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Be thou my defense and mediation, aid and boast, O Virgin; for thou art the 
invincible might of the helpless and the hope of the hopeless.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (5:14-19)  
The Lord said unto His disciples; Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on 
a hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a 
candlestick, and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine 
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come 
to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot 
or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever 
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he 
shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach 
them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
Let my mouth be filled with Thy praise, O Lord, that I may hymn the glory of Thy 
saint, whom Thou hast glorified with incorruption and the working of wonders, 
whom Thou hast revealed to be a helper for those who are amid misfortunes, a quick 
healer for the afflicted, a comforter amid sorrows, and a fervent intercessor for those 
who honor his holy memory.  
Canon of supplication to the Theotokos (the Paraklisis), with 6 Troparia, including 
the Irmos; and that of the holy hierarch, with 8 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: 
“Innocent, intercessor for our souls,” in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Unto Him Who overthrew the tyranny of Pharaoh in the sea * and led 
Israel over dry land, * let us chant unto Christ our God, * for He hath been 
glorified throughout the ages. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
O blameless hierarch, look down from heaven and behold, and with thy divine 
overshadowing visit this vine, which thy right hand hath planted in a pagan land, that 
we may piously glorify Thy wonders, even though it is impossible to number them.  
Once, upon the way, the ass warned Balaam not to go forth to curse Israel, and he 
who came from Mesopotamia blessed them. In a like manner the enraged traveler was 
admonished by his troubled steeds to render unto the holy hierarch Innocent glory, 
which he vowed to do.  
Thou didst manifest thyself as a speedy healer unto him who was afflicted with a 
disease of the legs and paralysis of all his members, O Innocent, our father. 
Wherefore, disdain not now those who in faith have recourse to thy life-bearing and 
ever-healing relics.  
Theotokion: Thou didst give birth in the flesh to the Son, Who is co-beginningless 
with the Father, O all-immaculate Virgin, Whom do thou beseech with the holy 
hierarch, that He make us sons of His kingdom and heirs to the eternal promise.  
Katavasia: Christ is born ...,  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Thou Who established the heavens by Thy word, * establish our 
mind and heart, * that we may hymn and glorify Thee * unto the salvation of 
our souls.  
Thou didst show forth a second unburnt bush, O noetic shepherd, when, by thy 
prayers, thou didst preserve unharmed in the midst of the flame the holy church 
wherein thine incorrupt body rested, which had not yet been glorified on earth, but 
whose sanctity was clearly attested to by an abundance of wonders from heaven.  
Thou hast appeared to be accessible to the only true faith. Wherefore, contrary to 
the laws of nature, ice and snow hid thy purity from the eyes of the impious, who 
dared, in their unbelief, to attempt to look upon thee; and thou didst not grant them 
to behold thy glory, teaching us to glorify thee with a pure heart.  
Speedily didst thou hasten to help the old man who saw with difficulty; and, 
touching his afflicted head, thou didst make manifest upon him an act of God. 
Wherefore, illumine also our spiritual eyes through thy supplications, O high priest.  
Theotokion: We know thee to be a firm and steadfast hope, O Theotokos, which 
we hold fast; and, trusting therein, we pray: Preserve this city and all Christian cities 
and lands from all the misfortunes which befall sinful people, who nevertheless 
straightway receive remission of their offenses through thine intercession.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: 
Such a hierarch is it fitting we should have, for he was venerable, guileless, meek, 
removed from sinful things, and ever prays before Jesus Christ, the eternal High 
Priest, for the salvation of his flock, for the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous 
man availeth much.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., in Tone III: 
Water rose up in the wilderness; a fount of healings floweth forth from the 
incorrupt relics of the holy hierarch Innocent. Everlasting joy is upon his head, of 
may which we also be deemed worthy, through his supplications, on the never-
waning day of the resurrection.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Thee, O Maiden, did the prophet proclaim, saying: Behold the gate of the East; it 
shall be shut, and no one shall pass through it; but the Lord God alone shall enter by 
it, and the gate shall remain shut.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
In Peter's house Jesus touched the hand of his disciple's mother-in-law, who was 
sick of a fever, and straightway the fever left her. And these signs followed thee, also, 
His faithful wonderworker; for thou didst subdue by a single touch the fever of him 
that lay upon his deathbed, but who cried aloud to thee in the hope of life.  
Of old believers were cured by the application of Paul's handkerchiefs and aprons. 
And God hath not wrought His powers simply through thy hands, O new apostle, for 
the dust from thy sacred reliquary and the oil from thy lamp open the eyes of the 
blind and bestow healing.  
The prayer of faith saved him who was grievously ill, and who confessed that the 
physician cannot raise the dead; and hope in thee never putteth to shame those who 
with faith call upon thee for help in time of need, O compassionate father.  
Theotokion: The unwedded Maiden gave birth to Him Who was foreseen by 
Habbakuk in the Spirit, and she prayeth to Him Who was born from her for the souls 
of us who have been wisely tended by the pastor who, in the incorruption of his holy 
body, doth ever abide with us, even after his repose.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Out of the night of ignorance * hath the day of divine knowledge 
dawned, * in the light O Christ, of Thy countenance. * May Thy praise shine 
forth in our hearts * like the light of the dawn.  
He who was covered from head to toe with sores, and could find no healing for 
his flesh, was plunged by love into torrents of hope in the favorite of God; and 
straightway he was cleansed of his painful impurity, as was Naaman of leprosy 
through immersion in the Jordan at the command of Elisha.  
Thou art found to be a ready helper for those who seek thee, O holy hierarch 
Innocent; and thou dost quickly grant healing unto the infirm; for of old thou didst 
appear in a dream unto a woman afflicted in her right arm, and restored it to health at 
the invocation of thy holy name.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Establishing a firm knowledge of grace in the faithful, thou hast taught us to know 
thee as a merciful instructor, a treasury of compassion, a teacher of the true faith, the 
boast of hierarchs, a helper of the helpless, who ever prayest for the salvation of thy 
children who have recourse unto thee in faith.  
Theotokion: The bars of the gates of Hades were shattered, and the everlasting 
bolts were driven apart by Him Who was born of thee, O most pure Mother. 
Wherefore, we beseech thee: Deliver us from eternal death by thine intercession, and 
grant us to dwell in the light of thy Son, Who hath shone upon the world the light of 
redemption.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
As many as have had recourse unto thee, O fervent helper, have not departed 
ashamed, the infirm have been healed; those who were in the pangs of childbirth 
received speedy relief from their affliction through thy much-healing beneficence; the 
blind recovered their sight. Wherefore, visit thou even us with thine aid, O 
compassionate father.  
Be thou not faithless, but believing, thou didst say, O father, appearing twice to 
him who suffered grievously from a broken leg; and striking with thy staff the place 
whereon thy feet stood, thou didst heal by a mark in the wood the spiritual wound of 
him who was darkened by unbelief; for straightway he confessed thee to be the grace-
bearing physician who had raised him up from his bed of pain.  
With thine immaculate hands thou didst dispense the immortal Food to a suffering 
woman, O hierarch of God. O, the wonder! Whilst partaking more fully of the 
unwaning light in heaven, more than seventy years after thy repose thou didst appear 
on earth as a celebrant of the divine Mysteries, assuring thy flock of thine 
uninterrupted stay among those who ever have recourse unto thine aid.  
Theotokion: O teacher of the truth, instruct us in the true Faith, together with the 
most pure Virgin Theotokos, imploring our salvation from Him Who was born of her 
for the salvation of the whole world.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Ye faithful, let us all with love praise the pastor * the namesake of innocence, * the 
preacher of the Faith among the pagans of Mongolia, * the glory and adornment of 
the flock of Irkutsk; ** for he is the protector of this land and an intercessor for our 
souls.  
Ikos: Thou wast exalted in thine angelic life, O father, even beholding face to face 
uncreated beauty, wherein delighting now in heaven, thou dost pray for our salvation, 
instructing us on earth to cry out to thee such things as these: Rejoice, O lily, who 

--- PAGE 11 ---
budded forth in the mild south; Rejoice, thou firstborn son of spiritual adoption, 
dedicated to God by the Ukraine! Rejoice, glory and pride of the city of Kiev; Rejoice, 
teacher of heavenly wisdom in an earthly school! Rejoice, wise fulfiller of the 
commandments of an earthly sovereign; Rejoice, spiritual athlete of the King of 
heaven! Rejoice, preacher of the Faith among the heathen of Mongolia; Rejoice, 
initiator of the good and sacred labor in the lands of Siberia! Rejoice, adornment of 
the flock of Irkutsk; Rejoice, sweet fragrance of the wilderness! Rejoice, assurance of 
the general resurrection in thine incorruption; Rejoice, wellspring of inexhaustible 
wonders! Rejoice, O Innocent, intercessor for our souls!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: O Thou who in the beginning founded the earth * and by Thy word 
made the heavens firm, * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * O Lord God 
of our Fathers. 
Those afflicted in the flesh have received strength and healing from thee, O father; 
and those who sorrow in spirit and are overcome by the grief of life have found spiri-
tual comfort in calling upon the holy and glorious name of thee with compunction, 
glorifying the God of Israel, Who is wondrous in His saints.  
O father, thou namesake of innocence: thy light hath so shone before us that, 
seeing thy good works and thy many miracles, we glorify the God of Israel, wondrous 
in His saints, Who worketh wonders through thee.  
Trinitarian: O God, heal Thou our spiritual ailments through the supplications of 
the saint whom Thou hast glorified, and who with tender solicitude doth hasten to 
Thee, O Holy Trinity, to the aid of those who are in need of his active assistance.  
Theotokion: Lead our mind captive to obedience to the Faith, O Birthgiver of 
God, keep our spirit and soul most perfect, and preserve our bodies undefiled until 
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Beginningless King of glory, * before Whom tremble all the hosts 
of heaven, * ye priests hymn, and ye peoples * supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
The wide path which leadeth to destruction didst thou shun, O venerable one, and 
by the narrow gate entered into the kingdom of heaven. From thenre, ever regarding 
those who call upon thee with faith, do thou strengthen us also to bear the light and 
easy yoke of the Cross, that we may enter into the rest of our blessed God.  
Through thy life on earth, like unto that of the angels, didst thou find the grace of 
healing; and truly revealed thyself to be a guardian angel for thy flock, carefully 
confirming it in the Faith by thy divers miracles and keeping it fast in the pure 
confession of the blessed God of our fathers.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Thou hast made manifest the fragrance of Christ among those who were saved by 
thee from infirmities, both spiritual and bodily, O father; wherefore, the inhabitants 
of the city chosen by thee, glorifying thy holy memory, bless the blessed God of our 
fathers, Who hath glorified thee.  
Theotokion: Our battle is not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, 
against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this age, against spirits of 
wickedness in high places. Show us forth as victorious over them, O Lady, that, 
following the example of this blameless pastor, we may quench all the fiery darts of 
the evil one.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire of 
the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the salvation 
of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we magnify thee. 
Like Paul thou wast an apostle to the heathen. Wherefore, thou hast now been 
caught up to the heights of the vision of God, where thou dost pray that God 
increase that which thou hast planted and watered, O wise husbandman.  
Taking up the helmet of salvation and girding thyself with the sword of the Spirit, 
thou didst go forth to thy task, O wondrous pastor, and built a rampart of piety amid 
the darkness of paganism. Wherefore, entreat the supremely good God, that He 
strengthen that which He hath wrought among us through thy hand.  
O thou who art innocent in name and life, accept these hymns of praise offered 
unto thee with love, overshadowing with thy supplications thy flock, which hath been 
illumined with the rays of thy virtues, and making haste in thy gracious assistance in 
the time of need.  
Theotokion: O thou that art more honorable than the cherubim and more glorious 
beyond compare than the seraphim, disdain not the entreaties of thy servants; but 
protect us with thy precious omophorion. Save thou our faithful hierarchs and 
people, who piously honor in this city the memory of the innocent pastor, the won-
drous Innocent.  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Glory be to Thee; the God Who hast shown us the light of salvation in the life and 
words of Thy favorite one! Glory be to Thee, the Benefactor Who hast shone forth 
the radiance of truth in this champion of piety and truth! Glory be to Thee, the 
wondrous Bestower of compassion, Who hast made wondrous Thy mercies upon 
him who walked in the light of Thy countenance, the holy hierarch and 
wonderworker Innocent!  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
In thy birthgiving thou didst illumine the world, O most pure Theotokos. 
Wherefore, illumining our minds with the knowledge of thy Son, wound thou our 
hearts with love for the divine commandments, strengthening us in faith and the 
doing of good by thy supplications.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
The great multitude of thy wonders, O Innocent, proclaimeth the greatness of the 
glory of our God, Who is unceasingly hymned by the noetic hosts of heaven, and on 
earth is glorified in the souls and bodies of His saints. Him do thou beseech, O 
exceedingly glorious and holy hierarch, for the salvation of our souls.  
With one mouth and one mind, O ye people, let us glorify God, Who worketh 
wonders, and Who is wondrous in His compassions in our days; Who gaveth 
utterance to the ancient mercies spoken of to our fathers in the wonders of His saints 
and, now, in the incorruption of the innocent pastor, the new wonderworker, who set 
his beauteous feet firmly in the lands of Siberia, adorning the wilderness like a comely 
lily.  
It is not our fathers who have proclaimed thy glory unto us, O father, nor is it our 
elders who have published abroad tidings of thy miracles, O wonderworker; but we 
ourselves have beheld the power of God which overshadoweth Thine unblemished 
body and which through thee worketh wonders in many marvelous signs. Our 
kinsmen and friends have known thy grace-bearing aid, which we also dare to request, 
and which we receive in abundance.  
God, Who of old spake through the prophets to our fathers, spake to us in times 
past in His Son, through Whose grace He speaketh to us even now in our instructors, 
who in their life teach us faith and hope, and after their repose confirm us in perfect 
love which never faileth.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Rejoice, O father Innocent, namesake of innocence, confirmation of the Church, 
treasury of countless miracles, boast of hierarchs, model for pastors, helper of the 
flock, intercessor for strangers and those who are afar off, adornment of thy 
monastery, glory of the Russian land. Pray thou therefore, that the arrogance of 
schisms be extinguished, and that peace flourish in the days of its Orthodox children.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplications of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  
Great Doxology. Troparion.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
O most radiant beacon of the Church, * who hast illumined the Russian land with 
the rays of thy good works, * and hast glorified God by many healings of those * who 
have recourse to thy reliquary with faith, * O holy hierarch Innocent, our father, * we 
entreat thee to protect this city ** from all misfortune and grief.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in the same tone:  
We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin Theotokos; 
* for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in the flesh * He had 
received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in that He is the Lover of 
mankind.  
Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the holy hierarch.  
Thou didst show forth a second unburnt bush, O noetic shepherd, when, by thy 
prayers, thou didst preserve unharmed in the midst of the flame the holy church 
wherein thine incorrupt body rested, which had not yet been glorified on earth, but 
whose sanctity was clearly attested to by an abundance of wonders from heaven.  
Thou hast appeared to be accessible to the only true faith. Wherefore, contrary to 
the laws of nature, ice and snow hid thy purity from the eyes of the impious, who 
dared, in their unbelief, to attempt to look upon thee; and thou didst not grant them 
to behold thy glory, teaching us to glorify thee with a pure heart.  
Speedily didst thou hasten to help the old man who saw with difficulty; and, 
touching his afflicted head, thou didst make manifest upon him an act of God. 
Wherefore, illumine also our spiritual eyes through thy supplications, O high priest.  
As many as have had recourse unto thee, O fervent helper, have not departed 
ashamed, the infirm have been healed; those who were in the pangs of childbirth 
received speedy relief from their affliction through thy much-healing beneficence; the 
blind recovered their sight. Wherefore, visit thou even us with thine aid, O 
compassionate father.  
Be thou not faithless, but believing, thou didst say, O father, appearing twice to 
him who suffered grievously from a broken leg; and striking with thy staff the place 
whereon thy feet stood, thou didst heal by a mark in the wood the spiritual wound of 
him who was darkened by unbelief; for straightway he confessed thee to be the grace-
bearing physician who had raised him up from his bed of pain.  
With thine immaculate hands thou didst dispense the immortal Food to a suffering 
woman, O hierarch of God. O, the wonder! Whilst partaking more fully of the 
unwaning light in heaven, more than seventy years after thy repose thou didst appear 
on earth as a celebrant of the divine Mysteries, assuring thy flock of thine 
uninterrupted stay among those who ever have recourse unto thine aid.  
Theotokion: O teacher of the truth, instruct us in the true Faith, together with the 
most pure Virgin Theotokos, imploring our salvation from Him Who was born of her 
for the salvation of the whole world.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
O most radiant beacon of the Church, * who hast illumined the Russian land with 
the rays of thy good works, * and hast glorified God by many healings of those * who 
have recourse to thy reliquary with faith, * O holy hierarch Innocent, our father, * we 
entreat thee to protect this city ** from all misfortune and grief.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Ye faithful, let us all with love praise the pastor * the namesake of innocence, the 
preacher of the Faith among the pagans of Mongolia, * the glory and adornment of 
the flock of Irkutsk; * for he is the protector of this land ** and an intercessor for our 
souls.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 
THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE HEBREWS (7:26-8:2).  
Brethren: Such a high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; who needeth not daily, as those high 
priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: for this he 
did once, when he offered up himself. For the law maketh men high priests which 
have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, 
who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the 
sum: We have such a high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the 
Majesty in the heavens; a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which 
the Lord pitched, and not man.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The saints shall boast in glory, and they shall rejoice upon 
their beds.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (1O:9-16).  
The Lord said unto the Jews who came unto Him; I am the door: by me if any 
man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief 
cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might 
have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the 
good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the 
shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the 
sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling 
fleeth, because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, 
and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so 
know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, 
which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and 
there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.  
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
