--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER ALYPIUS THE STYLITE OF 
ADRIANOPOLIS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
O all-blessed Alypius, * from thy childhood thou didst offer thy life * to Christ our 
God, and, strengthened by Him, * thou didst submit the passions of thy flesh to thy 
mind, * subjecting what is worse to that which is higher. * Wherefore, pray thou * 
that the Lord grant our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
O divinely wise Alypius, * thou wast revealed to be a magnificent beacon, * 
illumining the earth with the splendors of thy wonders * and thy godly deeds. * 
Wherefore, after thy repose * the unwaning Light received thee. * Wherefore, pray 
thou, * that Christ grant to our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
Thou wast an immovable pillar for monks, O wise one, * standing higher than thy 
pillar, * vexed by the heat of day and the cold of night * and by many fasts. * 
Wherefore, thou didst receive the divine gifts of the Spirit * to heal infirmities and to 
drive out the most cruel passions. * Pray thou now, that Christ grant our souls ** 
peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
Rejoice, O bush unburnt! * Rejoice, thou who alone hast given birth * unto the 
Angel of Great Counsel! * Rejoice, thou choice of the honored Trinity! * Rejoice, 
confirmation of mortals! * Rejoice, thou who gavest rise unto the uncultivated Grain 
of paradise: * the King and Lord, ** Who withereth the shoots of malice!  
Or this Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody:  
The unblemished ewe-lamb and Lady, * as she beheld her Lamb on the Cross, * 
bereft of form and beauty, * lamenting, said: Woe is me! * Whither hath Thy beauty 
set, O Thou Who art most sweet? * Where is Thy splendor? * Where the shining 
grace of Thine image, ** O my Son most beloved?  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Thou wast a pillar of endurance, O venerable one, * emulating the forefathers: * 
Job in sufferings and Joseph in temptations, * and the life of the incorporeal ones 
while yet in thy body. * O Alypius, our father, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls 
be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos. and that of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof 
is: “Rejoicing, I praise the pangs of Alypius”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone V:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath 
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they 
chanted a song of victory. 
Full of grace, O Alypius, do thou fill my soul with joy to praise thy life and manner 
of living, wherein struggling, thou didst fill all the angels with gladness.  
God consecrated thee like a second Samuel from thy mother's womb, O blessed 
Alypius, causing thee, as a divine prophet, to see things to come, O right glorious one.  
That God might reveal the splendor which thou didst possess in the latter times O 
venerable one, as one who would struggle well in a manner transcending 
understanding, He filled the house with divine light when thou wast born.  
Theotokion: The saying of the honored prophet hath come to pass; for, lo! the 
Virgin hath given birth in the flesh unto God, Who fashioned mankind anew who 
before was crushed by sins and transgressions.  
ODE III 
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing * and 
suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * who alone art good * 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Set like a candle upon the candlestick of lofty activity, O father, with thy splendid 
virtues thou hast illumined with pious wisdom every soul which approacheth thee 
with faith, delivering it from the darkness of sin.  
Directing the sacred movements of thy mind toward the keeping of the divine 
commandments of the Spirit, thou wast revealed to be an angel on earth, leading an 
angelic way of life in the flesh, O God-bearing father Alypius.  
Thou didst wisely show thyself to be a recluse from the tumults of life, O 
venerable Alypius, eagerly undertaking the contests of the path of fasting, showing 
thy heart to be a dwelling-place of the Spirit.  
Theotokion: O pure Virgin, thou palace of the Word, show my soul to be a 
habitation of the Spirit, and grant me to drink of the water of the life-creating 
Wellspring, for I am parched by the burning heat of sin, that I may glorify thee as is 
meet.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
By the radiance of faith and the light of spiritual activity wast thou truly revealed to 
be an equal of the angels on earth, O venerable Alypius; and manfully showing the 
strength of thy mind, thou didst vanquish all the assaults of the passions through 
fasting. Wherefore, as thou livest even after thy repose, pray that we be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O all-immaculate Virgin * who hast given birth to the transcendent God: * do 
thou unceasingly entreat Him with the incorporeal ones, * that He grant forgiveness 
of transgressions * and correction of life before the end, * to us who, as is meet, 
hymn thee with faith and love, ** O thou who alone art all-hymned.  
Stavrotheotokion: O most immaculate Virgin, * Mother of Christ God, * a sword 
pierced thy most holy soul * when thou didst behold thy Son and God * crucified of 
His own will. * Him do thou never cease to entreat, O blessed one, ** that He grant 
us the forgiveness of our transgressions.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying, O 
Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the salvation 
of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed Ones. 
Possessed of true love and compassion, steadfast faith and hope, and a guileless 
manner of life, O father, thou wast a favorite of Christ.  
Standing upon thy pillar, unmoved by the assaults of the adversary, thou didst 
vanquish hordes of demons and wast an immovable foundation for the wavering, O 
all-blessed one.  
Full of divine waters, thou didst bedew souls which were wasting away in the 
burning heat of grievous sin, O divinely wise and spiritually rich Alypius.  
Thou wast shown to be truly dreadful and unapproachable to all the demons, O 
Alypius, inflicting upon them wounds by thy sacred prayers, driving them far away.  
Theotokion: Heal thou the sufferings of my soul and illumine my mind and heart, 
O Lady, who hast given birth unto the supremely good God, Christ the Bestower of 
light.  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise 
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O Christ, 
* in that Thou alone art compassionate!  
Placing thyself wholly in the hands of the Almighty, O father, and suffering greatly 
in thy standing without shelter for many years, through rain and the heat of day, thou 
didst earnestly endure.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Training thyself in hymnody and prayer, O venerable one, in thy purity of mind 
thou didst receive the grace of the radiance of the threefold Sun, emitting the brilliant 
light of healings.  
Confining thy body to thy pillar, O father, full of light, thou didst permit thyself to 
pass unhindered to Him Whom thou didst desire.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth, O holy Maiden, unto our holy God, Who, in 
His tender compassion, became a man and sanctified those who hallow Him with 
faith and fear.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its soul-
destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou art 
compassionate. 
The spirits of wickedness, openly smiting with stones, thee who stood on the pillar 
like a steadfast stone, were in no wise able to shake thee.  
With patience didst thou endure for the Lord, Who gaveth thee true patience and 
delivered thee from all difficulties.  
Most gloriously was a light seen above thy pillar every day, illumining thy spiritual 
senses, O venerable wonderworker.  
Theotokion: All we who are in sorrow have thee as a mighty consolation, a refuge 
and a renowned helper, O Theotokos. Save thou thy servants from misfortunes.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “As the first-fruits ...”:  
Today the Church doth glorify and hymn thee, O Alypius, * as a cause of virtues 
and the adornment of fasters. * In accordance with thy name thy supplications grant 
deliverance from grievous transgressions ** unto those who with love honor thy 
brave deeds and struggles.  
Ikos: Come, ye priests and princes, ye monastics and all ye divinely wise people, let 
us marvel at the godly life of Alypius, which equaled that of the angels, and let us 
emulate his deeds, that by his prayers we may be deemed worthy of his portion, O ye 
who love the feasts of the Church; for he happily chanteth a heavenly hymn unto 
God in accordance with his name.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, * and 
bedewed the Youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed art Thou! 
The most patient and mighty Alypius, vexed by winter for many years, was most 
gloriously warmed by the fervor of the Spirit.  
Possessed of a way of life which led thee toward the heights of heaven, thou didst 
disdain the body as something which was destined for corruption; and when it began 
to putrefy, thou didst pay no heed to thy pain.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Spurning all love of pleasure, O father, thou didst suffer, contending against winter 
and the heat of day, chanting whilst exposed to the elements: Blessed is the God of 
our fathers!  
Theotokion: The Unapproachable One received noetic and animate flesh from 
thee, O Ever-virgin, that He might save those who chant: O God, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace chanted a 
hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Thou wast revealed to be like a new Samuel, O father Alypius, foreseeing the 
future with purity of mind and foretelling to all, as a prophet of God, the things 
revealed to thee by the Lord.  
Let Alypius, the favorite of Christ, be honored, the luminous pillar of the Church, 
the immovable bulwark, the indestructible rampart of all those who believe in God.  
Thou didst sleep well the needful sleep of the just, O father, having first lulled to 
sleep the multifarious passions by prayers and vigils. Wherefore, we have become 
rich, having thee now as an ever-vigilant intercessor.  
Theotokion: Thine Offspring hath now rendered fruitless the sin engendered by 
the malice of the serpent, O only Virgin, who hast abolished the curse. Wherefore, we 
honor thee throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and man; * and 
Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed. 
From earliest infancy thy sacred life was revealed to Christ, shining with the light 
of the virtues, O blessed one; and thy death was precious in the sight of God, O 
father Alypius, instructor of monastics.  
Like a most radiant beacon, thou dost illumine the whole earth, driving away the 
wicked passions, dispelling the darkness of sin, and enlightening those who hymn 
thee with the divine splendors of healings.  
Contending most diligently like a spiritual athlete, O wise father, thou didst 
unflaggingly make thy stand upon thy pillar for fifty-three years, vexed by winter, 
frost and the heat of day.  
Thy holy commemoration sanctifieth by the Holy Spirit us who keep it in a sacred 
manner and hymn thee thereon with faith, O wise father, as the helper and 
intercessor of our souls.  
Theotokion: Do thou grant unto me enlightenment, for I languish in the darkness 
of the passions, and am wretched and sinful; deliver me from my wicked deeds and 
from the flame which lieth before me, O most pure Lady, who ever intercedest for 
those who hymn thee.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
By the power of Christ thou didst pass through struggles exceeding the power of 
human nature, O venerable one; for thou didst stand for fifty three years upon thy 
pillar, vexed from every quarter, O wise Alypius, and hast now found the goal of all 
good things, O blessed one.  
Theotokion: Thou art mine intercessor and steadfast refuge, O pure one; thou art 
my helper and protection; and, falling down before thee, I cry: deliver me from mine 
ailments, in that thou art the greatest of all; and from everlasting fire rescue me, who 
place my hope in thee, O Virgin.  
 
AT LITURGY 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Thou wast a pillar of endurance, O venerable one, * emulating the forefathers: * 
Job in sufferings and Joseph in temptations, * and the life of the incorporeal ones 
while yet in thy body. * O Alypius, our father, ** entreat Christ God, that our souls 
be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Today the Church doth glorify and hymn thee, O Alypius, * as a cause of virtues 
and the adornment of fasters. * In accordance with thy name thy supplications grant 
deliverance from grievous transgressions ** unto those who with love honor thy 
brave deeds and struggles.  
 
