--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 21st DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
THE ENTRY OF OUR MOST HOLY LADY, THE THEOTOKOS & EVER-VIRGIN 
MARY, INTO THE TEMPLE  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the feast, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Having received from the Lord * the fruit of the promise, the Mother of God, * the 
right acceptable sacrifice, * Joachim and Anna lead her into the temple today; * and 
Zachariah, the great high priest, ** receiveth her with his blessing. (Twice)  
The holy of holies is fittingly brought * to dwell in the sanctuary * as a sacrifice 
pleasing to God; * and virgins, well adorned with the virtues, * bearing candles before 
her, ** accompany her to the Lord, as a most hallowed vessel.  
Let the portal of the God-receiving temple be opened! * For today the temple and 
throne of the King of all * is received therein with glory! * Joachim bringeth her 
forth, * dedicating to the Lord ** her who was chosen by Him to be His Mother.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
David foretold thee, O most pure one, foreseeing the sanctification of thine entry 
into the Temple. Therein do the ends of the earth, holding festival today, glorify thee, 
O all-hymned one, for, O Mother of the Word of life, who before giving birth wast 
Virgin and after giving birth remained incorrupt, today Zechariah rejoiceth with 
exceeding gladness in the Temple, accepting thee, O Lady; and the Holy of Holies 
rejoiceth, receiving thee, the wellspring of our life. Wherefore, we also cry out in 
psalms to thee: Beseech thy Son and our God on our behalf, that He grant us great 
mercy.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
O ye heavenly gates, * accept ye the Virgin, * the undefiled tabernacle * of God 
Almighty, ** into the Holy of holies.  
Verse: The virgins that follow after her shall be brought unto the King, * those 
near her shall be brought unto Thee.  
O ye choirs of virgins, * receive the pure Virgin * as the Bride of God, the King of 
all, * splendidly bearing candles ** unto the Holy of holies.  
Verse: They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing, * they shall be brought 
into the temple of the King.  
The bridal-chamber of God the Word * receiveth noetic bread * from the hands 
of the divine angel, * while making her habitation ** in the Holy of holies.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody: 
The thrice-radiant Light * enkindling thee, O Theotokos, * in the temple of glory, 
* sendeth thee heavenly food, ** magnifying thee.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, thou fulfillment of the Creator's 
dispensation!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the feast; 4 in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O wondrous marvel ...”: 
Let us join chorus today, O ye faithful, chanting to the Lord in psalms and hymns, 
and honoring His sacred tabernacle, the animate ark, who contained the 
uncontainable Word; for she is brought to the Lord, having become a babe in a 
manner transcending nature. And Zachariah, the great high priest, receiveth her with 
gladness as the dwelling-place of God. (Twice) 
Today the animate temple of the holy glory of Christ our God, the pure one who 
alone among women is blessed, is led into the temple of the law, to dwell in the Holy 
of holies; with her Joachim and Anna rejoice in spirit, and choirs of virgins sing to the 
Lord, chanting in psalms and honoring His Mother.  
Thou art the proclamation of the prophets, the glory of the apostles, the boast of 
the martyrs, the restoration of all mortals, O Virgin Mother of God; for through thee 
have we been reconciled with God. Wherefore, we honor thine entrance into the 
temple of the Lord, and with the angel all of us who find salvation through thy 
supplications cry out to thee in hymns: Rejoice, O most pure one!  
And 4 Stichera in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Into the Holy of holies * is the holy and immaculate one * led by the Holy Spirit; * 
and she is fed by a holy angel, * in that she is the most holy temple * of our holy God, 
* Who hath sanctified all things by her entry * and hath deified the nature of mortal 
men ** which had fallen. (Twice) 
Rejoicing today * and bearing candles, * the maidens precede the noetic lamp * 
and escort her with sanctity * to the Holy of holies, * revealing beforehand * the 
Effulgence which would ineffably shine forth from her * to illumine with the Spirit ** 
those who sit in darkness of ignorance.  
The all-praised Anna cried out: * “O Zacharias, in gladness receive her * whom 
the prophets of God proclaimed in the Spirit, * and escort her to the holy temple, * 
there to be raised in sanctity, * that she might become * the divine throne, * the 
palace and bower, ** and the radiant abode of the Master of all!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
After thy nativity, O Lady, Bride of God, thou didst go to the Temple of the Lord 
to be raised in the Holy of Holies as a consecrated maiden. Gabriel was then sent to 
thee, the all-immaculate one, bringing food unto thee. All of the heavenly powers 
marveled, beholding the Holy Spirit abiding within thee: Wherefore, O most pure and 
undefiled Mother of God, who art glorified in heaven and on earth, save thou our 
race.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three lessons:  
A READING FROM EXODUS  
The Lord spake to Moses, saying: “On the first day of the first month, at the new 
moon, thou shalt set up the tabernacle of the witness, and thou shalt place therein the 
ark of the testimony, and shalt cover the ark with the veil. And thou shalt bring in the 
table and the candlestick; and thou shalt place the golden censer, to burn incense 
before the ark of the testimony; and thou shalt put a covering of a veil on the doors 
of the tabernacle of witness. And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and shalt anoint 
the tabernacle, and all things therein; and shalt sanctify it, and all its furniture, and it 
shall be holy. And thou shalt hallow the altar, and the altar shall be most holy. And 
Moses did all things whatsoever the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, commanded him. 
And a cloud covered the tabernacle of witness, and the tabernacle was filled with the 
glory of the Lord. And Moses was not able to enter into the tabernacle of testimony, 
because the cloud overshadowed it, and the tabernacle was filled with the glory of the 
Lord.  
A READING FROM THE THIRD BOOK OF KINGS  
It came to pass that Solomon finished building the house of the Lord. And he 
assembled all the elders of Israel in Sion, to bring the ark of the covenant of the Lord 
out of the city of David, which is Sion. And the priests took up the ark, and the 
tabernacle of testimony, and all the holy vessels which were in the tabernacle of 
testimony. And the king and all Israel stood before the ark. And the priests brought in 
the ark of the covenant of the Lord into its place, into the oracle of the house, even 
into the Holy of holies, under the wings of the cherubim. For the cherubim spread 
out their wings over the place of the ark; and the cherubim covered the ark and its 
holy things above. There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets of stone, the 
tablets of the covenant which Moses put there in Horeb, which the Lord made. And 
it came to pass when the priests departed out of the holy place, that the cloud filled 
the house. And the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud, for the 
glory of the Lord God Almighty filled the house.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF EZEKIEL 
Thus saith the Lord: “It shall come to pass from the eighth day and onward, that 
the priests shall offer your wholeburnt-offerings on the altar, and your peace-
offerings; and I will accept you, saith the Lord.” Then He brought me back by way of 
the outer gate of the sanctuary that looketh eastward; and it was shut. And the Lord 
said tome: “This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no one shall pass 
through it; for the Lord God of Israel shall enter by it, and it shall be shut. For the 
Prince, he shall sit in it, to eat bread before the Lord; He shall go in by the way of the 
porch of the gate, and shall go forth by the way of the same.” And He brought me in 
by way of the gate that looketh northward, in front of the house: and I looked, and, 
behold, the house was full of the glory of the Lord.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
At Litiya, the Stichera, the composition of George of Nicomedia, in Tone I:  
Let heaven rejoice today from on high, and let the clouds drop down gladness at 
the exceedingly glorious and mighty works of our God! For, lo! the portal which 
faceth east, who was born from a barren woman according to God's promise, and 
who became a dwelling-place sanctified for God, is brought forth as an unblemished 
offering. Let David rejoice, striking his harp! For he said: “The virgins that follow 
after her shall be brought before the King; those near her shall be brought unto the 
tabernacle of God, into His sanctuary, to be reared in the dwelling-place of Him 
Who, for the salvation of our souls, was incorruptibly begotten of the Father before 
time.”  
In Tone IV: Today the Theotokos, the temple which held God, is escorted into 
the temple of the Lord; and Zachariah receiveth her. Today the Holy of holies 
rejoiceth and the choir of angels mystically keepeth festival. And we, celebrating with 
them today, cry aloud with Gabriel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord, 
Who hath great mercy, is with thee!  
Come, all ye faithful, let us praise her who alone is immaculate, who was 
proclaimed beforehand by the prophets, and is brought into the temple, the Mother 
chosen before all ages, the Theotokos who hath appeared in the latter days. O Lord, 
through her supplications grant us Thy peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Leo Magister, in Tone V: 
The day of joy and the most honored feast hath shone forth! For today she who 
remained Virgin after giving birth, as she was before birthgiving, is led into the temple 
of the Lord, and the elder Zachariah, the father of the forerunner, rejoiceth and crieth 
out in gladness: “The intercessor for the sorrowful draweth nigh unto the holy 
temple, in that she is holy, to be hallowed in the habitation of the King of all! Let 
Joachim, her forebear, be glad, and let Anna rejoice! For they have offered unto God 
the unblemished Lady like a heifer three years of age. Rejoice, ye mothers! Leap up, O 
virgins! Ye barren women, join chorus! For the Queen of all, who hath been foretold, 
hath opened unto us the kingdom of heaven! Rejoice, ye people, and be glad!”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Rejoice, O heaven and earth, beholding the only immaculate Virgin, the noetic 
heaven, coming forth to be raised in honor in the house of God! To her Zachariah 
cried out, marveling: “O portal of the Lord, I open unto thee the gates of the temple! 
Rejoice therein, joining chorus! For I have come to know and believe that the 
deliverance of Israel is manifestly coming, and that God the Word will be born 
through thee, granting the world great mercy!”  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Verse: The virgins that follow after her shall be brought unto the King, * those 
near her shall be brought unto Thee.  
O divinely manifest grace! With gladness Anna leadeth into the temple of God the 
pure Ever-virgin given her by grace, and she calleth maidens to go before her, bearing 
lamps and saying: “Go forth, my child! Be thou an offering and incense of sweet 
savor unto Him Who gave thee to us! Enter into the impassable precincts and learn 
the mysteries! And prepare thyself to be the gladsome and comely dwelling-place of 
Jesus, Who bestoweth upon the world great mercy!”  
Verse: They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing, * they shall be 
brought into the temple of the King.  
The all-holy Virgin, the temple in which God dwelleth, is borne into the temple of 
God, and maidens bearing lamps now precede her. Joachim and Anna, the excellent 
couple, her parents, leap for joy, dancing, for they gave birth to her who gave birth to 
the Creator, who, rejoicing in the divine tabernacles is fed by the hand of an angel, 
and hath been revealed to be the all-immaculate Mother of Christ, Who bestoweth 
great mercy upon the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Sergius of Jerusalem, in Tone VI:  
Assembling today, ye councils of the faithful, let us keep spiritual festival, and let 
us piously praise the divine Maiden, the Virgin Theotokos, who is led into the temple 
of the Lord, she who was chosen before out of all generations to be the habitation of 
Christ God, the King of all. Bearing candles, O virgins, go ye on before, doing 
homage to the honored entry of the Ever-virgin! Ye mothers, setting aside all grief, 
follow joyously her who is to become the Mother of God, the mediatress of joy for 
the world! And with the angel let us all joyfully cry out to the joyous one “Rejoice!”, 
for she ever prayeth for our souls.  
At the blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, thou fulfillment of the Creator's 
dispensation! (Thrice)  

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, thou fulfillment of the Creator's 
dispensation! (Thrice)  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of angels ...”: 
The fruit of the righteous Joachim and Anna is offered to God in the holy 
sanctuary, the nourisher of our Life who became a babe in the flesh, whom the sacred 
Zachariah blessed. With faith let us all bless her as the Mother of God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Even before thy conception thou wast consecrated to God, O pure one, and, 
having been born on earth, thou hast now been offered to Him as a gift, fulfilling thy 
parents' vow; and having been presented in the divine temple, accompanied as a babe 
by lighted lamps in purity, thou hast been revealed to be the receptacle of the 
unapproachable and divine light, as the temple of God. Truly great is thy going forth, 
O only Ever-virgin Bride of God!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O most holy Virgin, 
divinely chosen Maiden, and we honor thine entry into the temple of the Lord.  
Selected Psalm verse:  
A: Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, in the city of our God, in His 
holy mountain.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded ...”:  
Let David the psalmist rejoice, and let Joachim and Anna join chorus, for the 
radiant Mary, the divine lamp, issued forth from them like a holy fruit, and she 
rejoiceth, entering the temple. Beholding her, the son of Barachiah blessed her, and, 
rejoicing; cried aloud: “Rejoice, O wonder of the world!” (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV:  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine 
ear.  
Verse: My heart hath poured forth a good word; I shall speak of my works to 
the king.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE§4(1:39-49,56) 
In those days; Mary arose and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of 
Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came to 
pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; 
and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost: and she spake out with a loud voice, 
and said: Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And 
whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For lo, as soon 
as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for 
joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of those things 
which were told her from the Lord. And Mary said: My soul doth magnify the Lord, 
and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath regarded the low estate of 
His handmaiden; for, behold, from henceforth, all generations shall call me blessed. 
For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is His name. And Mary 
abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.  
After Psalm 50, instead of “Through the prayers of the Theotokos ...,” we chant:  
Glory ..., Today the animate temple of the great King entereth the temple to 
prepare herself as a divine dwelling-place for Him.  
Both now ..., The foregoing is repeated.  
Have mercy on me O God ..., 
And then this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
Today the Theotokos, the temple who contained God, was led into the temple of 
the Lord, and Zachariah received her. Today the Holy of holies rejoiceth, and the 
choir of angels keepeth mystic festival. And with them we also, celebrating today, cry 
out with Gabriel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace, the Lord is with thee, Who 
hath great mercy!  
Two canons of the Theotokos: the first with 8 Troparia including the Irmos, the 
Irmos being chanted twice, and the second like the first, with 8 Troparia, including 
the Irmos, the Irmos being chanted twice.  
Canon I of the Theotokos:  
The acrostic whereof is: “O Lady, grant me the grace of discourse”, the composition 
of George, in Tone IV:  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her entry. 
O most pure one, we know thee to be a treasury of wisdom and an ever-flowing 
fountain of grace; and we pray thee rain down upon us knowledge, that we may praise 
thee forever.  
Being a temple and palace more exalted than the heavens, O most pure one, thou 
wast set apart in the Temple of God to be prepared as a divine dwelling-place for His 
advent.  
Shining with the Light of grace, the Theotokos hath illumined all and assembled us 
to adorn her most splendid festival. Come ye, let us draw nigh to her!  
The glorious portal which surpasseth human thought, having opened the doors of 
the Temple of God, doth now command us who have assembled to delight in her 
divine wonders.  
Canon II of the Theotokos, the composition of Basil, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
Let us hasten today, honoring the Theotokos with hymns, and let us celebrate a 
spiritual feast; for she is offered as a gift to God in the temple.  
With songs let us hymn the glorious arrival of the Theotokos; for today, as the 
prophets foretold, she is borne as a gift of great price into the temple, though she is 
herself the temple of God.  
Glory ..., The blameless Anna rejoiced, maternally bringing a gift of great price to 
God in the temple; and with her Joachim keepeth splendid festival.  
 Both now ..., Of old, David, thine ancestor, hymned thee, O Virgin Bride of God, 
calling thee the daughter of Christ the King; and, having given birth to Him, as a 
Mother thou didst feed Him with milk as a babe.  
Katavasia: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet 
ye Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the 
Lord, * and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
(From this day until the 1st day of January, this Katavasia is chanted) 
ODE III 
Canon I  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * that by thine entry, * they be 
granted crowns of glory.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Receiving the pure and undefiled one, who is more splendid than all creation, the 
animate bridal chamber of God, the beautiful Temple and chamber doth appear today 
like a bride adorned for her wedding.  
David, preceding the chorus, doth leap and dance with us, declaring thee, O all-
pure one, to be the queen all-adorned, standing in the Temple before our King and 
God, O most pure one.  
From her, whom transgressions issued forth among the race of mankind, hath her 
correction and incorruption blossomed forth, the Theotokos, who is led today into 
the house of God.  
The angelic armies and the multitudes of all mankind leap for joy, and they 
advance as lamp-bearers before thy countenance, proclaiming thy majesty in the 
house of God.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 
O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us keep festival and rejoice today 
together in spirit, and in gladness, on the holy feast of the daughter of the King, the 
Mother of our God.  
Rejoice today, O Joachim! Be thou glad in spirit, O Anna, leading to the Lord the 
three year old child born from thee, as though she were a pure and most immaculate 
heifer.  
Glory ..., Mary, the Theotokos, the habitation of God, is led into the holy temple, 
being three years of age in the flesh; and, going before her, virgins bear lighted lamps.  
 Both now ..., The pure ewe-lamb of God, the undefiled turtle-dove, the tabernacle 
containing God, the sanctuary of glory, hath chosen to dwell within the holy 
tabernacle.  
Katavasia: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before 
all ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * 
to Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art 
Thou, O Lord. 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Tell us, O David: what is this present festival? Who is she whom of old thou didst 
hymn in the Book of Psalms as the daughter, divine Maiden and Virgin? “The virgins 
that follow after her, together with those near her,” said he, “shall be mystically 
brought unto the King.” Make this a wondrous and universal feast for those who cry 
aloud: the Theotokos is come unto us, the mediatress of salvation!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody:  
With gladness Mary, the Theotokos, is most gloriously brought into the house of 
God: the unblemished ewe-lamb, the undefiled bridal-chamber, whom the angels of 
God, escort with faith and all the faithful ever call blessed and hymn her unceasingly 
with a loud voice in thanksgiving: Thou art our glory and salvation, O most 
immaculate one!  
ODE IV 
Canon I  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
The Temple of God, receiving today the portal through whom none may pass, 
hath ceased to perform any service of the Law, crying: Truly truth hath appeared to 
those who are on earth!  
The mountain overshadowed, which Habbakuk beheld of old, prefigured her who 
hath made her abode in the inaccessible chambers of the Temple, flourishing with 
virtues, for she doth cover the ends of the earth therewith.  
All the earth hath seen most glorious things, things strange and marvelous, for the 
Virgin, receiving food from an angel, doth receive tokens of God's dispensation.  
Revealed as the temple and palace and animate heaven, O divine bride of the 
King, thou art brought today to the Temple of the Law to be kept for Him, O most 
pure one.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
O Prophet Isaiah, prophesy unto us: Who is the Virgin Who will conceive in her 
womb, who springing forth from the root of Judah, and who shall give birth to the 
right glorious Fruit of the holy seed of King David?  
O virgins, commence ye to chant hymns, holding candles in your hands, and 
praising the arrival of the pure Theotokos who now cometh to the temple of God, 
celebrating with us!  
Glory ..., Rejoice now, O Joachim and Anna, leading into the temple of the Lord, 
like a heifer three years of age, the pure one born from you, who will become the 
Mother of God.  
 Both now ..., As the holy of holies, O pure one, thou didst love to dwell in the 
holy temple, remaining there and conversing most gloriously with the angels, 
receiving bread from heaven, O Virgin, thou nourisher of Life.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Katavasia: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, 
* O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 
ODE V 
 Canon I  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst enter into the temple of the Lord; * thyself 
being a most pure temple, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
The most pure Virgin, the glorious sanctity and sacred offering which is brought 
today to the Temple of God, is preserved as a habitation for our one God, the King 
of all, as He Himself knoweth.  
Zachariah, having of old beheld the beauty of thy soul, cried out in faith: Thou art 
the deliverance, thou art the joy of all, thou art our restoration, through whom the 
Uncontainable One shall appear unto me contained.  
O, thy wonders which pass understanding, O all-pure one! Strange is thy 
birthgiving; strange is the manner of thy maturation; strange also, most glorious and 
unutterable by mortals, are all thy wonders, O Bride of God.  
As a most radiant lamp, O Bride of God, hast thou shone forth today in the house 
of the Lord, illumining us with the precious gifts of thy wonders, O pure and all-
hymned Theotokos.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light * upon us who rise early at 
dawn, * unto the judgments of Thy commandments, * O Master, Lover of 
mankind, * Christ our God.  
O all ye Orthodox, let us take up lamps, hastening to glorify the Mother of God, 
for she is led to the Lord today as a right acceptable sacrifice.  
Let thine ancestors be glad today, O Lady; and let her who gave birth to thee 
rejoice with thy father, for their fruit is offered to the Lord.  
Glory ..., Celebrating with faith, let us all hymn the unblemished heifer, most 
glorious and of great renown, for she gave birth to the divine Bullock in the flesh.  
 Both now ..., The divine tokens of thy betrothal, of thy birthgiving which passeth 
understanding, O pure Virgin; are recorded today by the Holy Spirit in the house of 
God.  
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Katavasia: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou 
hast sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * 
Wherefore guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching 
by night we glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
ODE VI 
Canon I  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Thou Who hast upheld all things by Thy word hast hearkened to the prayer of the 
righteous ones. Wherefore, Thou hast loosed the infirmity of the barren woman, in 
that Thou art compassionate, and given them her who is the cause of joy.  
Wishing to make His salvation known to the Gentiles, the Lord hath now taken 
from among mankind her who hath not known wedlock, as a sign of reconciliation 
and renewal.  
As a house of grace, wherein treasures of the ineffable dispensation of God are laid 
up, O all-pure one, thou didst share in unfading delight in the Temple.  
Receiving thee as a royal diadem, O Bride of God, the Temple hath been rendered 
splendid and been elevated to better things, beholding in thee the fulfillment of the 
prophecies.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
O ye faithful, let us celebrate the spiritual feast of the Mother of God, chanting 
piously; for she is more holy than the heavenly intelligences.  
With spiritual hymns let us praise the Mother of the Light, O ye faithful, for she 
hath appeared to us today, going forth into the temple of God.  
Glory ..., The unblemished ewe-lamb, the pure turtle-dove, is brought to dwell in 
the house of God, for, as one all-immaculate, she was chosen beforehand to be the 
Mother of God.  
 Both now ..., The temple of God, the heavenly tabernacle, maketh entry into the 
temple of the law, and from her hath the Light shone forth upon us who are in 
darkness.  
Katavasia: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a 
babe from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken 
flesh, * came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not 
subject to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
The most pure temple of the Savior, * the precious bridal chamber and Virgin, * 
the sacred treasury of the glory of God, * hath been brought into the house of the 
Lord this day, * bringing with her the grace that is in the divine Spirit. * To her do the 
angels of God chant the hymn: ** She is the heavenly tabernacle!  
Ikos: Beholding the grace of the ineffable and divine mysteries of God made 
plainly manifest in and filling the Virgin, I rejoice; yet I know not how to understand 
this strange and ineffable image. How hath the pure one alone been shown to be 
above all creation, visible and immaterial? Wherefore, wishing to praise her, I am 
greatly in awe in mind and word; yet, bold, I proclaim and magnify her, saying: She is 
the heavenly tabernacle!  
  
ODE VII 
Canon I 
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Lo, today a joyous spring hath dawned upon the ends of the earth, enlightening 
our souls, thoughts and minds with grace: the festival of the Theotokos. Let us 
mystically make festival this day! 
Let all things - heaven and earth, the ranks of angels and the multitudes of 
mankind - bear gifts today unto the Queen and Mother of God; and let them cry 
aloud: Our joy and deliverance is brought into the Temple!  
The Scriptures have come to pass, the Law hath faded like a shadow, and rays of 
grace have shone forth upon thee who hast entered into the Temple of God, O pure 
Virgin Mother wherein thou art blessed.  
Heaven and earth and the netherworld are subject to thine Offspring as Creator 
and God, O all-pure one, and every nation of mortals doth confess that the Lord and 
Savior of our souls hath appeared.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The furnace became bedewed, O Savior, * and the children dancing, 
chanted: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
O ye who love the feasts of the Church let us join chorus and hymn the pure Lady 
honoring Joachim and Anna as is meet.  
Prophesy, O David, speaking in the Spirit: The virgins who follow after thee shall 
be brought to thee into the temple of the Queen and Mother.  
Glory ..., The ranks of the angels rejoiced and the souls of the righteous were 
gladdened, for the Mother of God is led into the Holy of holies,  

--- PAGE 15 ---
 Both now ..., Receiving heavenly food, she who was to become the Mother of 
Christ God in the flesh, excelled in wisdom and grace.  
Katavasia: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children 
brought up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing 
in the midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII  
Canon I  
Irmos: Hearken, O pure Virgin Maiden, * that Gabriel may tell thee the true 
counsel of the Most High of old. * Make ready to receive the Godhead; * for 
through thee the Infinite One hath come to dwell among mankind. * 
Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Anna, once, leading the most pure temple to the house of God, faithfully said unto 
the priest, crying aloud: Now accept thou this child, given me by God; lead her into 
the Temple of the Creator; and, rejoicing, chant unto Him: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord! 
And Zachariah then, beholding them in the Spirit, said unto Anna: Thou dost 
bring hither the true Mother of Life, whom the prophets of God have clearly foretold 
as the Theotokos! How, therefore, can the Temple hold her? Wherefore, marveling, I 
cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The handmaid of God have I been, answered Anna unto him, and I call upon Him 
with faith and prayer to accept the fruit of my birth-pangs, that, having received this 
child, I might bring her that was born unto Him that bestowed her. Wherefore, I cry 
aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Truly this is a matter of the Law, the priest said to her, and strange doth this thing 
seem unto me, beholding her that doth most gloriously surpass the holy ones in grace 
led into the house of God. Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Joachim rejoiceth today in splendor, and the blameless Anna offereth to the Lord 
God a sacrifice: the holy daughter given her according to God's promise.  
The holy David and Jesse render praise, and Judah offereth homage; for the pure 
Virgin, of whom the pre-eternal God was born, grew forth as fruit from their root.  
We bless the Father, the son and the Holy Spirit, the Lord:  
The most pure Mary, the animate tabernacle, is brought today into the house of 
God; and Zachariah taketh her in his arms as the sanctified treasure of the Lord.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
 Both now ..., O ye faithful, let us truly honor the Virgin Mother of God, who is 
blessed by the hands of the priests, as the portal of salvation, the noetic mountain and 
the animate ladder.  
Katavasia: The furnace moist with dew showed forth an image * of a wonder 
past nature, * for it burned not the youths whom it had received; * neither did 
the fire of the Godhead consume the Virgin * when it descended into her 
womb. * Wherefore, chanting, we sing: * Let all creation bless the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
At ODE IX we do not chant the Magnificat, but sing instead the refrains of the feast:  
Refrain: The angels, beholding the entry of the most pure one, were amazed to 
see the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.  
The Irmos of Canon I is then chanted: “ In nowise may the hand of the defiled 
...,” whereupon the second choir chanteth the same refrain and Irmos. A refrain is 
also chanted before each Troparion of the ode, alternating between both choirs.  
ODE IX  
Canon I  
Irmos: In nowise may the hand of the defiled * touch the animate ark of God; 
* and let the lips of the faithful * never-silently cry out with joy to the 
Theotokos, * chanting the words of the angel: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of 
grace! * The Lord is with thee!  
Refrain: The angels, beholding the entry of the all-pure one, were amazed to see 
the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.  
O pure Theotokos, as thou hast the most radiant beauty of purity of soul and art 
full of the grace of God from heaven, with the ever-existent light thou dost ever 
enlighten those who cry out with joy: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O 
pure Virgin!  
Refrain: The angels, beholding the entry of the all-pure one, were amazed to see 
the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.  
Thy wonder doth surpass the power of words, O pure Theotokos, for in thee I 
perceive a body impervious to the movement of sin. Wherefore, thankfully I cry out 
to thee: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!  
Refrain: The angels, beholding the entry of the all-pure one, were amazed to see 
the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.  
Most gloriously did the Law prefigure thee, O pure one, as the tabernacle, the 
divine jar, the awe-some ark, the veil, the staff, the inviolable temple and portal of 
God. Wherefore, all these things teach us to cry to thee: Truly thou art more highly 
exalted than all, O pure Virgin!  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Refrain: The angels, beholding the entry of the all-pure one, were amazed to see 
the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.  
In hymnody David cried out to thee prophetically, calling thee the daughter of the 
King in the comeliness of thy virtues, beholding thee standing, elaborately adorned, at 
the right hand of God. Wherefore, in prophecy he cried out: Truly thou art more 
highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!  
Refrain: The angels, beholding the entry of the all-pure one, were amazed to see 
the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.  
Foreseeing thee who art pleasing to God, Solomon proclaimed thee to be the 
bower of the King, the living and sealed fountain, from whence untroubled waters 
have issued forth for us who cry out with faith: Truly thou art more highly exalted 
than all, O pure Virgin!  
Refrain: The angels, beholding the entry of the all-pure one, were amazed to see 
the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.  
O Theotokos, thou givest to my soul the tranquility of thy gifts, pouring forth life 
upon those who honor thee as is meet, defending, protecting and preserving them 
thyself, that they might cry to thee: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O 
pure Virgin!  
Then the first choir chanteth the refrain of Canon II of the feast:  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, her who hath been led into the temple of the 
Lord and been blessed by the hands of the priest.  
Then the Irmos is chanted: “The light-bearing cloud upon whom ...” The second 
choir then chanteth the same refrain and Irmos of the feast. And before each 
Troparion of the canon we chant the above festal refrain.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of all 
descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom He was 
incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as the pure 
Mother of God. (Twice) 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, her who hath been led into the temple of the 
Lord and been blessed by the hands of the priest.  
The divine maiden Mary, the fruit of the promise, issued forth from the righteous 
Joachim and Anna, and, a babe in the flesh, she is brought into the holy sanctuary like 
pleasing incense, to dwell in the Holy of holies.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, her who hath been led into the temple of the 
Lord and been blessed by the hands of the priest.  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
With hymns let us praise her who was a babe by nature and was supernaturally re-
vealed as the Mother of God; for she is led unto the Lord in the temple of the law, as 
the fragrance of sweet savor for the righteous, as the spiritual fruit of her righteous 
parents.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, her who hath been led into the temple of the 
Lord and been blessed by the hands of the priest.  
O ye faithful, with the angel let us fittingly cry out to the Theotokos “Rejoice!” 
Rejoice, O most comely Bride! Rejoice, O radiant cloud, from whom the Lord hath 
shone forth upon us who sit in the darkness of ignorance! Rejoice, thou hope of all!  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, her who hath been led into the temple of the 
Lord and been blessed by the hands of the priest.  
O pure Mary Mother of God, thou Holy of holies, from the snares of the enemy 
and from all heresy and tribulation do thou free us by thy supplications, who bow 
down with faith before the image of thy holy countenance.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, her who hath been led into the temple of the 
Lord and been blessed by the hands of the priest.  
With the Angel Gabriel all creation uttereth a fitting hymn to the Theotokos, 
crying: Rejoice, O most immaculate Mother of God, by whom we have been 
delivered from the primal curse, coming to share in incorruption!  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, her who hath been led into the temple of the 
Lord and been blessed by the hands of the priest.  
O Virgin, thou hast been shown to be greater than the cherubim, more exalted 
than the seraphim and more spacious than the heavens, for thou didst contain within 
thy womb our God Whom naught can contain, and hast given birth to Him ineffably. 
Him do thou earnestly beseech on our behalf.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, her who hath been led into the temple of the 
Lord and been blessed by the hands of the priest.  
Triadicon: Let us glorify the indivisible Trinity, the Essence in three Hypostases, 
the undivided glory, Who in a single Godhead, is unceasingly hymned in heaven and 
on earth, piously worshiping the Father, the Son and the Spirit.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, her who hath been led into the temple of the 
Lord and been blessed by the hands of the priest.  
O Virgin Birthgiver of God, pray thou, that we who flee with faith beneath thy 
compassion and piously worship thy Son as God and Lord of the world be delivered 
from corruption, misfortunes and all manner of temptations.  
Then both choirs, descending together, chant the refrain of Canon I, followed by the 
Katavasia:  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Refrain: The angels, beholding the entry of the most pure one, were amazed to 
see the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.  
Katavasia: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is 
heaven; * the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in 
which Christ God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and 
magnify. 
Exapostilarion of the feast: Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
With faith let us praise the divine Maiden Mary, whom the company of the 
prophets of old proclaimed to be the jar, the staff, the tablet and the unquarried 
mountain; for she is led today into the Holy of holies to be raised for the Lord. 
(Thrice)  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Virgins bearing lamps, * escorting the Ever-virgin with splendor, * truly prophesy 
the future in the Spirit; * for the Theotokos, as the temple of God, * is led as a child 
with virginal glory ** into the temple.  
Truly the Theotokos hath appeared to the world * as the right glorious fruit of a 
holy promise, * for she surpasseth all. * Piously led into the temple of God, * she 
fulfilleth the supplication of her parents, ** and is preserved by the divine Spirit.  
Faithfully raised on heavenly bread, O Virgin, * in the temple of the Lord, * thou 
hast given birth to the Word, the Bread of life, for the world, * to Whom thou wast 
mystically promised beforehand by the Spirit * as the chosen and all-immaculate 
temple, ** betrothed to God the Father.  
Let the portal of the God-receiving temple be opened! * For today the temple and 
throne of the King of all * is received therein with glory! * Joachim bringeth her 
forth, * dedicating to the Lord ** her who was chosen by Him to be His Mother.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Leo Magister, in Tone II: 
Today the all-immaculate Virgin is brought to the temple, to the habitation of 
God, the King of all, the Nourisher of our whole life. Today the most pure and holy 
one, is led to the Holy of holies like a heifer three years of age. Let us cry out unto her 
like the angel: “Rejoice, thou who alone art blessed among women!”  
Great Doxology. Troparion, in Tone IV:  
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, thou fulfillment of the Creator's 
dispensation!  
Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I, and 4 from ODE 
VI of Canon II of the feast.  
Receiving the pure and undefiled one, who is more splendid than all creation, the 
animate bridal chamber of God, the beautiful Temple and chamber doth appear today 
like a bride adorned for her wedding.  
David, preceding the chorus, doth leap and dance with us, declaring thee, O all-
pure one, to be the queen all-adorned, standing in the Temple before our King and 
God, O most pure one.  
From her, whom transgressions issued forth among the race of mankind, hath her 
correction and incorruption blossomed forth, the Theotokos, who is led today into 
the house of God.  
The angelic armies and the multitudes of all mankind leap for joy, and they 
advance as lamp-bearers before thy countenance, proclaiming thy majesty in the 
house of God.  
O ye faithful, let us celebrate the spiritual feast of the Mother of God, chanting 
piously; for she is more holy than the heavenly intelligences.  
With spiritual hymns let us praise the Mother of the Light, O ye faithful, for she 
hath appeared to us today, going forth into the temple of God.  
Glory ..., The unblemished ewe-lamb, the pure turtle-dove, is brought to dwell in 
the house of God, for, as one all-immaculate, she was chosen beforehand to be the 
Mother of God.  
 Both now ..., The temple of God, the heavenly tabernacle, maketh entry into the 
temple of the law, and from her hath the Light shone forth upon us who are in 
darkness.  
After the entrance, the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, thou fulfillment of the Creator's 
dispensation!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
The most pure temple of the Savior, * the precious bridal chamber and Virgin, * 
the sacred treasury of the glory of God, * hath been brought into the house of the 
Lord this day, * bringing with her the grace that is in the divine Spirit. * To her do the 
angels of God chant the hymn: ** She is the heavenly tabernacle!  
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: the Song of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 320(HEB. 9: 1-7)  
Brethren; the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly 
sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and 
the table, and the showbread; which is called the sanctuary. And after the second veil, 
the tabernacle which is called the holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the 
ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that 
had manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it 
the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy seat; of which we cannot now speak 
particularly. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into 
the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the 
high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, 
and for the errors of the people.  
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 54(LK. 10: 38-42, 11: 27-28)  
At that time, Jesus entered into a certain village; and a certain woman named 
Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat 
at Jesus' feet, and heard His word. But Martha was cumbered about much serving, 
and came to Him, and said, Lord, dost Thou not care that my sister hath left me to 
serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me. And Jesus answered and said unto 
her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing 
is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from 
her. And it came to pass, as He spoke these things, a certain woman of the company 
lifted up her voice, and said unto Him, Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the 
paps which Thou hast sucked. But He said, Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the 
word of God, and keep it.  
Instead of “It is truly meet...,” we chant the Irmos of ODE IX of Canon I: 
Refrain: The angels, beholding the entry of the most pure one, were amazed to 
see the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.  
Irmos: In nowise may the hand of the defiled * touch the animate ark of God; 
* and let the lips of the faithful * never-silently cry out with joy to the 
Theotokos, * chanting the words of the angel: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of 
grace! * The Lord is with thee!  
This is done through to the leave-taking of the feast. 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
