--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 23rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
AFTERFEAST OF THE ENTRY OF THE THEOTOKOS INTO THE TEMPLE  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHERS AMONG THE SAINTS, AMPHILOCHIUS, 
BISHOP OF ICONIUM, & GREGORY, BISHOP OF AGRIGENTUM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the hierarch Amphilochius, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Having inherited a mind with free will * and an intellect with absolute power over 
the passions, * O all-blessed father, * thou didst impart intelligent mastery to thy 
higher part, * that, weighed with a most true scale, * it might ascend higher. * 
Wherefore, thou hast been admitted to divine vision * and the knowledge of God, ** 
O divinely inspired hierarch.  
Thou didst break asunder the snares * and foil the pursuit of the heretics, O vener-
able father, * avoiding division * and most wicked contraction * by the rightness of 
thy dogmas * and most excellent theology; * and, remaining within the bounds * of 
our pious Faith, ** thou didst preach the Trinity in the unity of the Godhead.  
Skillfully instructing * him who reigned on earth, * thou didst pass over his son * 
without rendering him homage, * teaching him sensibly that when the Son is ignored 
as unworthy of worship * the Father is exceedingly displeased, * Who, in a manner 
past understanding, * begat Him before time dispassionately as One incorporeal, ** as 
He Himself knoweth, O venerable one.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch Gregory, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
O sacred father Gregory, * thou wast offered to God, * cleaving from thine 
earliest infancy * unto Him Who with His mighty hands created all things, * and 
illumined by Him, * thou didst pass through the night of the passions * shining forth 
with the light of healings and miracles of grace, * dispelling chronic ailments ** and 
the spirits of delusion.  
O wondrous father Gregory, * in purity didst thou illumine thy mind * with 
visions of light, * calming the raging sea of the passions, * and having taken wing with 
dispassion * on most precious wings, * thou didst attain to ineffable and 
inconceivable beauty, * ever praying for us ** who praise thee.  
O Gregory, father of fathers, * thou wast a standard of the priesthood, * a model 
of chastity, a beacon of love, * a throne of sensibility, * a wellspring of miracles, * a 
tongue of fiery inspiration, * a mouth of sweet discourse, * a vessel of the divine 
Spirit ** and a noetic garden of paradise, O blessed of God.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Come, all ye faithful, let us praise her who alone is immaculate, who was 
proclaimed beforehand by the prophets, and is brought into the temple, the Mother 
chosen before all ages, the Theotokos who hath appeared in the latter days. O Lord, 
through her supplications grant us Thy peace and great mercy.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Let the virgins be brought to the King in the temple of the Lord, * following thee, 
O Virgin, * joining chorus with radiant lamps, * preceding thee into the holy place, O 
pure one, * as thou art the holy ark of God, ** saith David, the ancestor of God. *  
Verse: The virgins that follow after her shall be brought unto the King, * those 
near her shall be brought unto Thee.  
Let the gates of the temple of the Lord be made ready, * and let the house of glory 
be opened wide, * and, rejoicing, let them receive * her who alone is far greater than 
the heavens * surpassing all understanding, ** and let them hymn Christ the Savior.  
Verse: They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing, * they shall be 
brought into the temple of the King.  
Let the portals of the most divine temple be opened, * let them receive the gate of 
heaven within themselves; * let human nature keep festival, * and let the angels leap 
up, * all of them celebrating with us ** the entry of the Mother of God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V:  
The day of joy and the most honored feast hath shone forth! For today she who 
remained Virgin after giving birth, as she was before birthgiving, is led into the temple 
of the Lord, and the elder Zachariah, the father of the forerunner, rejoiceth and crieth 
out in gladness: “The intercessor for the sorrowful draweth nigh unto the holy 
temple, in that she is holy, to be hallowed in the habitation of the King of all! Let 
Joachim, her forebear, be glad, and let Anna rejoice! For they have offered unto God 
the unblemished Lady like a heifer three years of age. Rejoice, ye mothers! Leap up, O 
virgins! Ye barren women, join chorus! For the Queen of all, who hath been foretold, 
hath opened unto us the kingdom of heaven! Rejoice, ye people, and be glad!”  
Troparion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the Feast: 
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the 
Creator's dispensation!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
 AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the 
Creator's dispensation! (Twice)  
Glory ..., that the holy hierarchs; in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Both now ..., that of the feast (Once).  
After the first chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”:  
Being thyself the Holy of Holies, O Theotokos, thou wast brought to live in the 
Holy of Holies, as is meet, as the animate ark of the Lord and a truly divine habitation 
of the Holy Spirit, O Virgin Mary. Wherefore, thy Son, Who is the only-begotten of 
the Father, and consubstantial with the Holy Spirit, made His abode within thee 
without the aid of a man, deifying all mankind.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., The foregoing is repeated.  
After the second chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
The whole world is filled with gladness today on the right notable feast of the 
Theotokos, crying aloud: She is the tabernacle of heaven!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., The foregoing is repeated.  
Canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and two canons of the holy 
hierarchs, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, the composition of Basil, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
Let us hasten today, honoring the Theotokos with hymns, and let us celebrate a 
spiritual feast; for she is offered as a gift to God in the temple.  
With songs let us hymn the glorious arrival of the Theotokos; for today, as the 
prophets foretold, she is borne as a gift of great price into the temple, though she is 
herself the temple of God.  
The blameless Anna rejoiced, maternally bringing a gift of great price to God in 
the temple; and with her Joachim keepeth splendid festival.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Of old, David, thine ancestor, hymned thee, O Virgin Bride of God, calling thee 
the daughter of Christ the King; and, having given birth to Him, as a Mother thou 
didst feed Him with milk as a babe.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Amphilochius, the acrostic whereof is, “I hymn the pastor 
who put delusion to shame”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Thou didst easily destroy the words and insolence of heresies, illumined with the 
radiance of Orthodoxy. O thou who art manifestly sacred, preserve us also who 
honor thee therein.  
The Lord Who ever desires the salvation of all appointed thee as a guide for His 
sacred flock, O hierarch, seeing thee shining excellently in word and life.  
Having chosen to contend lawfully for the Church of Christ, O glorious father, 
thou didst protect thyself with the sword of the Cross, and through grace wast 
revealed to be a victor and crown-bearer.  
Theotokion: To the Word Who is co-beginningless and equally everlasting with the 
Father, and is the image of His essence, didst thou ineffably give birth, incarnate, O 
thou who knewest not wedlock.  
Canon of holy hierarch Gregory, the acrostic whereof is, “I marvel at the wonder-
working Gregory”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: To Him who crushed the enemy with His arm * and led Israel 
through the Red Sea, * to our Redeemer and our God let us sing, * for 
He hath been glorified. 
Ever illumined with the rays of the Spirit and having become a brilliant star, O 
sacred Gregory, wholly enlighten me by thy prayers, that I my hymn thee.  
He Who knoweth all things beforehand, having shown grace to thy mind with 
divinely imparted effulgence, from thine earliest infancy hallowed thee, who desired 
to shine forth with godly virtues and miracles, O father.  
Casting off the slumber of despondency from thine eyelids, thou didst show 
thyself to be a vigilant luminary, O God-bearer, showing forth thy calling which is 
confirmed as true by material things, O Gregory.  
Theotokion: I truly and decisively confess thee to be the Theotokos; for thou didst 
ineffably give birth to the Lord Who is understood in two natures and wills, O most 
pure Virgin.  
ODE III 
Canon of the Feast  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us keep festival and rejoice today 
together in spirit, and in gladness, on the holy feast of the daughter of the King, the 
Mother of our God.  
Rejoice today, O Joachim! Be thou glad in spirit, O Anna, leading to the Lord the 
three year old child born from thee, as though she were a pure and most immaculate 
heifer.  
Mary, the Theotokos, the habitation of God, is led into the holy temple, being 
three years of age in the flesh; and, going before her, virgins bear lighted lamps.  
The pure ewe-lamb of God, the undefiled turtle-dove, the tabernacle containing 
God, the sanctuary of glory, hath chosen to dwell within the holy tabernacle.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Amphilochius  
Irmos: Thy Church rejoiceth in Thee, O Christ, crying aloud: Thou art my 
might, O Lord, my refuge and confirmation!  
The divine and luminous effulgence of thy dogmas put down the evil hordes of 
the heretics, O glorious Amphilochius.  
As a high priest, like a river filled by God to overflowing with life-creating waters, 
thou dost give us thy piety to drink.  
Illumined with abundant radiance, thou didst illumine thy mind with the mystic 
splendor of thy teachings, O venerable one.  
Theotokion: All of us, the faithful, declare thee to be the lustrous candle-stand, the 
spiritually nourishing banquet of piety, and the ark, O most pure one.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Gregory  
Irmos: My heart is established in the Lord, * my horn is exalted in my God, * 
my mouth is enlarged against mine enemies, * and I rejoice in Thy salvation. 
The Creator, accepting thy labors for His sake, O father Gregory, led thee to an 
elder in the desert, who taught thee the meaning of every Scripture.  
Passing a whole week without food, O father, thou wast nourished with heavenly 
food, drinking the rain of thy tears, divinely filled to repletion.  
To thee, O hierarch, was breadth of heart given by God; for thou didst richly pour 
forth the most pure waters of teachings watering thereby the hearts of the faithful.  
Theotokion: The words of the divinely eloquent preachers have been fulfilled; for, 
lo! the Virgin hath given birth to a little Babe, Who is more ancient than Adam and 
co-enthroned with the Father.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
The most pure temple of the Savior, * the precious bridal chamber and Virgin, * 
the sacred treasury of the glory of God, * hath been brought into the house of the 
Lord this day, * bringing with her the grace that is in the divine Spirit. * To her do the 
angels of God chant the hymn: ** She is the heavenly tabernacle!  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Ikos: Beholding the grace of the ineffable and divine mysteries of God made 
plainly manifest in and filling the Virgin, I rejoice; yet I know not how to understand 
this strange and ineffable image. How hath the pure one alone been shown to be 
above all creation, visible and immaterial? Wherefore, wishing to praise her, I am 
greatly in awe in mind and word; yet, bold, I proclaim and magnify her, saying: She is 
the heavenly tabernacle!  
  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch Gregory, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
With effulgence of splendid radiance * the Church of the Holy Spirit illumineth 
those who celebrate thy splendid repose, ** O venerable and all-blessed father 
Gregory.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch Amphilochius, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Thou dost enlighten the ends of the earth at thy memorial, O wise and glorious 
Amphilochius; for thy body poureth forth a well-spring of healings. Wherefore, thou 
deliverest from every infirmity those who with faith approach thine honored temple. 
For this cause, pray thou now, that we be saved.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Offered to the Lord from earliest infancy, as the most glorious Samuel had been of 
old, thou didst likewise hear the Savior calling thee, and, having purified thy soul with 
gifts of good things, thou didst worthily receive the grace of the priesthood. 
Wherefore, shepherding thy flock in the pasture of divine knowledge, thou didst 
shine forth acts of healing, O Gregory. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission 
of sins unto those who celebrate thy holy memory with love.  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
O David, go thou before us into the Temple of God, and, rejoicing, receive thou 
our Queen, and cry out unto her: Enter thou, O Sovereign Lady! Enter thou into the 
Temple of the King! Her glory is understood allegorically, for from her doth Christ 
the Light desire to pour Himself forth upon all!  
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
O Prophet Isaiah, prophesy unto us: Who is the Virgin Who will conceive in her 
womb, who springing forth from the root of Judah, and who shall give birth to the 
right glorious Fruit of the holy seed of King David?  

--- PAGE 7 ---
O virgins, commence ye to chant hymns, holding candles in your hands, and 
praising the arrival of the pure Theotokos who now cometh to the temple of God, 
celebrating with us!  
Rejoice now, O Joachim and Anna, leading into the temple of the Lord, like a 
heifer three years of age, the pure one born from you, who will become the Mother 
of God.  
As the holy of holies, O pure one, thou didst love to dwell in the holy temple, 
remaining there and conversing most gloriously with the angels, receiving bread from 
heaven, O Virgin, thou nourisher of Life.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Amphilochius  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Come, ye divinely wise, let us clap our hands with faith on the sacred festival of 
the godly and divinely eloquent Amphilochius, strengthened by his doctrines and 
theology.  
As an attendant of the Church, the bride in Christ, O God-bearer, thou didst 
adorn her with the beauty of thy discourses and render her radiant with the 
comeliness of Orthodoxy.  
Thy divinely eloquent tongue of theology hath clearly explained to all the 
dominion of the Trinity One in honor, that they may worship the one Godhead in 
three Hypostases.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, we know thee to be the new tabernacle and pure sanctuary 
of the Master of all; for thou hast given birth to Him in the flesh in two united 
hypostases, O all-immaculate one.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Gregory  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee O Lord, * and I was afraid, * for thy 
counsel is ineffable, * being the ever-existent God, * Thou didst come forth 
from the Virgin, * wherefore I hymn Thee: * glory to thy condescension, O 
Christ, * glory to Thy power.  
Like fertile soil thou didst bring forth grain an hundredfold, O father, and with the 
axe of thy teachings thou didst cut down the impious opinions of the heretics, 
showing thyself to be a champion of the Council, O venerable Gregory.  
The judgment of heaven showed thee forth as a hierarch, guiding well the flock 
which Christ, Who perceived the radiance of thy soul, obtained through His blood, O 
father, favorite of God.  
Thou wast a temple of God cleansed of the defilement of the passions, and, 
standing before Him in the sacred temple, thou didst openly receive the advent of the 
Spirit in the form of a pure dove, when Christ glorified thee.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: The race of mankind hath been saved by thy birthgiving, which 
surpasseth understanding; and those in the darkness of corruption have seen the 
Light Which shone forth from thy womb, the Author of our restoration, O most pure 
Lady and Maiden.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light * upon us who rise early at 
dawn, * unto the judgments of Thy commandments, * O Master, Lover of 
mankind, * Christ our God.  
O all ye Orthodox, let us take up lamps, hastening to glorify the Mother of God, 
for she is led to the Lord today as a right acceptable sacrifice.  
Let thine ancestors be glad today, O Lady; and let her who gave birth to thee 
rejoice with thy father, for their fruit is offered to the Lord.  
Celebrating with faith, let us all hymn the unblemished heifer, most glorious and of 
great renown, for she gave birth to the divine Bullock in the flesh.  
The divine tokens of thy betrothal, of thy birthgiving which passeth 
understanding, O pure Virgin; are recorded today by the Holy Spirit in the house of 
God.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Amphilochius  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Illumined with the light of the threefold Sun of the Godhead, O divinely wise 
Amphilochius, thou didst take thy seat upon thy hierarchal cathedra.  
Thou didst dedicate thyself wholly to God and wast a trumpet-voiced divine 
herald, O all-blessed father Amphilochius.  
The joyous and most sacred feast of the divine and wise teacher hath dawned for 
us, sanctifying the world.  
Theotokion: O most pure Mother of God, magnificent adornment of all the 
faithful, by thy supplications wash away the defilement of my soul.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Gregory  
Irmos: Disperse, O Word, the darkness from my soul, * O Christ God, the 
Light-Giver, * Having driven out the primordial darkness of the abyss, * grant 
unto me the light of Thy commandments, * that early in the morning I may 
glorify Thee. 
With thy word thou didst once cleanse the vile infirmity of the leper who came to 
thee with faith; for, like the godly Elisha, O divinely wise Gregory, thou didst receive 
from God the grace of miracles.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
By thine entreaty thou didst open the mouth and ears of the deaf-mute, O all-
blessed Gregory; for enriched with the ability to work healings, thou didst also plumb 
the depths of theology, drying up the seas of ungodliness.  
Having cleansed thyself of every passionate earthly attachment, O father, like 
Peter, the first-chosen of the apostles, thou didst effect healings by thy shadow, 
divinely curing those held fast by the cruel assaults of illness.  
Theotokion: Without leaving the bosom of the Father to become incarnate, the 
Word is seen held at thy bosom as a babe, O all-immaculate one. Him do thou render 
merciful unto those who piously honor thee, O Virgin Bride of God.  
ODE VI 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
O ye faithful, let us celebrate the spiritual feast of the Mother of God, chanting 
piously; for she is more holy than the heavenly intelligences.  
With spiritual hymns let us praise the Mother of the Light, O ye faithful, for she 
hath appeared to us today, going forth into the temple of God.  
The unblemished ewe-lamb, the pure turtle-dove, is brought to dwell in the house 
of God, for, as one all-immaculate, she was chosen beforehand to be the Mother of 
God.  
The temple of God, the heavenly tabernacle, maketh entry into the temple of the 
law, and from her hath the Light shone forth upon us who are in darkness.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Amphilochius  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons' * by 
the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 
Having mortified worldly understanding in the flesh, thou didst array thyself in the 
grace of dispassion, O father, initiate of the sacred mysteries, proclaiming the Trinity 
in most pure teachings. (Twice)  
Protected by the fear of God, O venerable God-pleaser, having rendered thy soul 
pure of defilement, thou wast shown to be the most sacred instrument of theology.  
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be the pure habitation of the King of glory and the 
temple and throne of the Most High, we pray: Save thou our souls, O all-hymned 
one!  
Canon of the holy hierarch Gregory  
Irmos: As Thou didst deliver the prophet from the depths * of the abyss, O 
Christ God, * so deliver me also from my sins, * O Lover of mankind, * and 
guide my life, I pray Thee.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
The maiden whose body had been paralyzed for many years, came to thee with 
faith and was strengthened by thy prayer, O venerable one, magnifying Christ, the 
Author of all things.  
Following in the steps of the Master with a blameless life, O glorious one, unjustly 
oppressed and slandered, thou didst remain impervious to thine ill treatment.  
Seizing thee like savage beasts, as if an innocent lamb, O father, those who lived 
together in wickedness condemned thee to prison; but by divine grace thou didst 
remained unharmed.  
Theotokion: The mind is at a loss how to understand the great mystery of thy 
birthgiving; for thou hast given birth to the incomprehensible God Who become a 
man, O Ever-virgin.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch Amphilochius, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
O hierarch Amphilochius, * thou divine thunder, trumpet of the Spirit, * 
husbandmen of the garden of Faith, * scythe cutting down heresies, * great favorite 
of the Trinity, * standing ever with the angels, ** pray thou unceasingly on behalf of 
us all.  
Ikos: Inspired by the Holy Spirit, the allwise hierarch of Christ sealed the Church; 
for, possessed of the working of power, the glorious initiate of the mysteries, the 
acceptable teacher of the Faith, having hearkened to the reading of the divine 
Scriptures, drove away Eunomius by making the sign of the life-bearing and precious 
Cross; and, explaining the Faith and preaching Christ, he prayeth unceasingly on 
behalf of us all.  
ODE VII 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The furnace became bedewed, O Savior, * and the children dancing, 
chanted: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
O ye who love the feasts of the Church let us join chorus and hymn the pure Lady 
honoring Joachim and Anna as is meet.  
Prophesy, O David, speaking in the Spirit: The virgins who follow after thee shall 
be brought to thee into the temple of the Queen and Mother.  
The ranks of the angels rejoiced and the souls of the righteous were gladdened, for 
the Mother of God is led into the Holy of holies,  
Receiving heavenly food, she who was to become the Mother of Christ God in the 
flesh, excelled in wisdom and grace.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Amphilochius  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Heeding thy most mystical and divine admonitions, O father, we avoid Arius' 
division of the Godhead, glorifying with faith the uncreated and consubstantial 
Trinity.  
Beholding Macedonius denounced by thy teachings, O father, with faith we glorify 
the good Spirit, Who is equally worshipped and co-beginningless with the Father and 
the Son.  
Explaining by thy words the incarnation of the Word in a manner surpassing 
words, O God-pleaser, with divine wisdom thou didst teach us to worship the one 
God in two natures and to avoid division and commingling.  
Theotokion: Come and, saved by faith in the Almighty Who was born of her, let 
us all fervently praise the Theotokos, crying: Blessed art thou among women, O all- 
immaculate one.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Gregory  
Irmos: By an angel didst Thou refresh the Children in the furnace * 
transforming the roaring flames into dew. * O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
The Creator worked a miracle when thou wast condemned, O blessed one; for the 
adulterous woman fell prey to the assault of the demons and showed thee to be pure, 
O Gregory.  
The light-bestowing divine disciples of the Savior, standing before thee, O 
venerable one, loosed the bonds which bound thee to the tree kissing them with joy.  
Taking heed of thy patience, O father, the Master sacredly adorned thee with yet 
greater miracles, in that thou drivest away the gloom of infirmities.  
Theotokion: As a Mother thou hast given birth to the Creator of all and bore in 
thine arms, as though thou wast the throne of the cherubim, Him Who holdeth all 
things, O thou who knewest not wedlock.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Joachim rejoiceth today in splendor, and the blameless Anna offereth to the Lord 
God a sacrifice: the holy daughter given her according to God's promise.  
The holy David and Jesse render praise, and Judah offereth homage; for the pure 
Virgin, of whom the pre-eternal God was born, grew forth as fruit from their root.  
The most pure Mary, the animate tabernacle, is brought today into the house of 
God; and Zachariah taketh her in his arms as the sanctified treasure of the Lord.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
 Both now ..., O ye faithful, let us truly honor the Virgin Mother of God, who is 
blessed by the hands of the priests, as the portal of salvation, the noetic mountain and 
the animate ladder.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Amphilochius  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Thy mouth, adorned with hymns, manifestly theologized concerning the 
uncreated, beginningless, consubstantial Trinity uncommingled in three Hypostases, 
O divinely wise father, wherefore to the Trinity we cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
The hypostatic Wisdom gave thee riches and the glory of honor, O most wise one, 
when thou didst piously theologize, casting down the arrogance of heresies and 
chanting with love: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
He Who bestoweth life upon all led thee into the church of the firstborn as a 
faithful and divinely eloquent hierarch who mystically exercised the priestly office and 
who chants with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Behold, the tribe of Judah shall not now lack for a guide and leader; 
for thou, O all-immaculate one, hast given birth to Christ, the long-awaited 
expectation of the nations. To Him do we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord!  
Canon of the holy hierarch Gregory  
Irmos: O Thou who dost cover Thy chambers on high with the waters, * Thou 
Who hast set the sands to bound the sea * and Who upholdest all things: * the 
sun doth sing Thy praises, * the moon giveth Thee glory, * every creature 
offereth a hymn unto Thee, * as their Fashioner, throughout the ages. 
The maiden who slandered thee, a most righteous man, because of the wickedness 
of all-iniquitous men, was freed from the dreadful wounding of the demons by thy 
prayer, O blessed one, and in the midst of the council God, the Judge of the contest, 
doth glorify thee throughout all ages.  
Those who through wickedness taught against thee are filled with gloomy 
darkness, O father Gregory, and thy radiant life shined forth before the fathers, in 
whose presence thou didst work a miracle, holding a burning coal in thy hand.  
Thou hast been truly revealed to be like a most brilliant star in the firmament of 
the Church, O father, ever illumining with virtues and rays of miracles those who 
hymn thy luminous memory, O divinely wise and holy hierarch Gregory.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: Thy most glorious birth giving doth fill our thoughts with awe, O 
thou who alone art blessed; for God received flesh from thee, while remaining 
immutable in essence, as He was, O Theotokos. Him do we supremely exalt 
throughout the ages.  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of all 
descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom He was 
incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as the pure 
Mother of God. 
The divine maiden Mary, the fruit of the promise, issued forth from the righteous 
Joachim and Anna, and, a babe in the flesh, she is brought into the holy sanctuary like 
pleasing incense, to dwell in the Holy of holies.  
With hymns let us praise her who was a babe by nature and was supernaturally re-
vealed as the Mother of God; for she is led unto the Lord in the temple of the law, as 
the fragrance of sweet savor for the righteous, as the spiritual fruit of her righteous 
parents.  
O ye faithful, with the angel let us fittingly cry out to the Theotokos “Rejoice!” 
Rejoice, O most comely Bride! Rejoice, O radiant cloud, from whom the Lord hath 
shone forth upon us who sit in the darkness of ignorance! Rejoice, thou hope of all!  
O pure Mary Mother of God, thou Holy of holies, from the snares of the enemy 
and from all heresy and tribulation do thou free us by thy supplications, who bow 
down with faith before the image of thy holy countenance.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Amphilochius  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Most piously theologizing concerning the one Essence in three Hypostases, the 
most holy, divine and unapproachable Trinity, thou hast been honored thereby, O 
Amphilochius manifest in sanctity.  
Possessing boldness before God as a hierarch, O God-bearer, standing before thy 
Master be thou ever mindful of those who celebrate thy sacred and luminous 
memory, O blessed one.  
O divinely wise and venerable father Amphilochius, as a most faithful hierarch 
thou dost grant an abundance of grace unto those who with an ardent heart weave 
praises for thee and ask for the remission of sins.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Theotokion: Thou wast revealed to be a descendant of Adam and art known to be 
the Mother of God; for from ages past thou wast revealed to be more holy than all of 
creation, O most pure and blessed one, wherefore, we magnify thee.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Gregory  
Irmos: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, * Who hath exalted the horn of 
salvation on our behalf * in the house of His child David, * wherein the 
Dayspring from on high hath visited us, * and guided us on the path of peace.  
Behold, the radiant festival! Behold, the sacred memorial! Behold, the grace which 
is upon all the faithful who have assembled, pouring forth healings in abundance! Let 
us draw nigh, for the shrine of Gregory poureth forth ever-flowing enlightenment 
and immortality upon us.  
Like a river full of the waters of Christ, like an olive-tree pouring forth the oil of 
life, like a date-palm wast thou exalted, O Gregory. Like a vine thou didst bear the 
grapes of thy virtues for us, and we drink the wine of incorruption therefrom.  
Let the council of the sanctified, the multitude of the venerable and the ranks of all 
the angels rejoice with us today in thy memory, O father. Standing with them, 
illumined, before the Creator, be thou mindful of those who hymn thee with love.  
Thou wast the sanctified vessel of Christ, O father, a pillar of the Church, the 
haven of the faithful, a sword cutting down falsehood, a wellspring of healings, and 
an abyss of divine understanding, an inextinguishable lamp and a shepherd of 
shepherds.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Maiden who hast given birth to the timeless Light Who 
shone forth from the Father, illumine my soul and mind, driving far from me the 
darkness of the passions, that I may bless thee, the ever-blessed hope of the faithful  
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch Amphilochius:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the disciples ...”: 
Becoming divine through immaterial communion with the nature of God, O all-
wise one, thou wast anointed by angels as a high priest for the clergy of God, 
mediating between the Creator and creation, O God-pleasing father Amphilochius. 
Wherefore, celebrating thy memory, we hymn thee, delivered by thy prayers from 
corruption and perils.  
Glory ..., Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch Gregory:  
Having adorned thy life with fasting, O wise and blessed father Gregory, thou 
wast revealed to be a hierarch of the honored Church of Christ, illumining the 
Orthodox with the rays of thy teachings and ineffable miracles. Wherefore, through 
thy prayers for us, ask for the salvation of the souls of those who celebrate thy most 
holy repose.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the feast: 
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
With faith let us praise Mary, the divine Maiden, whom the company of the 
prophets proclaimed of old as the jar and the staff, the tablets and the unquarried 
mountain; for she is led today into the Holy of holies, to be raised for the Lord.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
The middle wall of partition * hath been truly taken away * by the divine entry of 
the Theotokos, * and those below have now been united ** with those on high.  
Verse: The virgins that follow after her shall be brought unto the King, * those 
near her shall be brought unto Thee.  
The choirs of virgins * chanted a divine hymn as, * bearing torches, * they 
accompanied the only all-immaculate one ** into the house of God.  
Verse: They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing, * they shall be 
brought into the temple of the King.  
Into the Holy of holies, * within the sanctuary, * receive thou, O Zachariah, * the 
Theotokos, ** who is the Holy of holies.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Assembling today, ye councils of the faithful, let us keep spiritual festival, and let 
us piously praise the divine Maiden, the Virgin Theotokos, who is led into the temple 
of the Lord, she who was chosen before out of all generations to be the habitation of 
Christ God, the King of all. Bearing candles, O virgins, go ye on before, doing 
homage to the honored entry of the Ever-virgin! Ye mothers, setting aside all grief, 
follow joyously her who is to become the Mother of God, the mediatress of joy for 
the world! And with the angel let us all joyfully cry out to the joyous one “Rejoice!”, 
for she ever prayeth for our souls.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia, from ODES IV and V of the canon of the feast.  
The Temple of God, receiving today the portal through whom none may pass, 
hath ceased to perform any service of the Law, crying: Truly truth hath appeared to 
those who are on earth!  
The mountain overshadowed, which Habbakuk beheld of old, prefigured her who 
hath made her abode in the inaccessible chambers of the Temple, flourishing with 
virtues, for she doth cover the ends of the earth therewith.  
All the earth hath seen most glorious things, things strange and marvelous, for the 
Virgin, receiving food from an angel, doth receive tokens of God's dispensation.  
The most pure Virgin, the glorious sanctity and sacred offering which is brought 
today to the Temple of God, is preserved as a habitation for our one God, the King 
of all, as He Himself knoweth.  
Zachariah, having of old beheld the beauty of thy soul, cried out in faith: Thou art 
the deliverance, thou art the joy of all, thou art our restoration, through whom the 
Uncontainable One shall appear unto me contained.  
O, thy wonders which pass understanding, O all-pure one! Strange is thy 
birthgiving; strange is the manner of thy maturation; strange also, most glorious and 
unutterable by mortals, are all thy wonders, O Bride of God.  
Troparion of the Feast, in Tone IV: 
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the 
Creator's dispensation!  
Troparion of the holy hierarchs, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch Gregory, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.:  
With effulgence of splendid radiance * the Church of the Holy Spirit illumineth 
those who celebrate thy splendid repose, ** O venerable and all-blessed father 
Gregory.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch Amphilochius, in Tone II: 
O hierarch Amphilochius, * thou divine thunder, trumpet of the Spirit, * 
husbandmen of the garden of Faith, * scythe cutting down heresies, * great favorite 
of the Trinity, * standing ever with the angels, ** pray thou unceasingly on behalf of 
us all.  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
The most pure temple of the Savior, * the precious bridal chamber and Virgin, * 
the sacred treasury of the glory of God, * hath been brought into the house of the 
Lord this day, * bringing with her the grace that is in the divine Spirit. * To her do the 
angels of God chant the hymn: ** She is the heavenly tabernacle!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: the Song of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE HEBREWS §334(13:7-16)  
Brethren: Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto 
you the word of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. 
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. Be not carried about with 
divers and strange doctrines: for it is a good thing that the heart be established with 
grace; not with meats, which have not profited them that have been occupied therein. 
We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle. For 
the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high 
priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might 
sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth 
therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. For here have we no 
continuing city, but we seek one to come. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of 
praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name. But 
to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well 
pleased.  
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §103(MT 24: 42-47)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your 
Lord doth come. But know this, that if the good man of the house had known in 
what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have 
suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as 
ye think not the Son of man cometh. Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom 
his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Verily I 
say unto you, That he shall make him ruler over all his goods.  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet...,”  
Refrain: The angels, beholding the entry of the most pure one, were amazed to 
see the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.  
Irmos: In nowise may the hand of the defiled * touch the animate ark of God; 
* and let the lips of the faithful * never-silently cry out with joy to the 
Theotokos, * chanting the words of the angel: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of 
grace! * The Lord is with thee!  
 
Communion Verse of the feast: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call 
upon the name of the Lord.  
Communion Verse of the saints: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is 
meet for the upright.  
 
