--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
AFTER-FEAST OF THE ENTRY OF THE THEOTOKOS INTO THE TEMPLE  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY APOSTLE PHILEMON & THOSE WITH HIM  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the feast, in Tone VIII, 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder, * the ineffable future * is now described beforehand, * 
understood today in visible images; * for she who shone forth the divine light upon 
the world * is led like a bride into the holy temple. * Let us praise her as the most 
resplendent temple, * holy and radiant, ** of Christ God, the Bestower of life.  
Truly the wise Joachim and Anna * have manifestly offered * their right acceptable 
first-fruits, * the Virgin Mary, the divine maiden, * unto Him Who willed to grant her 
to them as a divine fruit, * whereby the debt of grief hath been cancelled. * In 
gladness let us piously hymn her, * for she hath been made the mediatress of joy ** 
for all the world.  
Come, let us now mystically hasten * and, adorned with lamps of faith, * let us 
now begin the procession of the Virgin; * for she hath gloriously entered the temple 
of God, * betrothed to Christ, * the King of all. * We all celebrate her beauteous 
solemnity, * keeping festival in a godly manner ** with her entry.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
As a branch of the Vine of life, * O glorious Philemon, * thou hast poured forth 
the wine of divine knowledge * upon those in pain of soul, * gladdening hearts 
downcast * by the darkness of deception * and held fast in the gloom of the madness 
of idolatry; * wherefore, in gladness ** we celebrate thy divinely radiant memory.  
The city of Gaza doth honor thee, * having through thee * come to see the light of 
understanding, O blessed one, * and the Colossians, possessing thy divine body as a 
treasure, * have healings and grace * which ever floweth forth; * wherefore, 
celebrating thy memory, * O glorious Philemon, ** we are preserved from 
misfortunes by thy supplications.  
With faith let us send up praises * to the wise hierarch Archippus * and the 
honorable Apphia, * lauding Philemon, and Onesimus, * the sacred preachers of 
God, * the honorable teachers, * who by their preaching uprooted the delusion of 
polytheism, * planting the knowledge of the Truth for all ** who ever honor them 
with piety.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Doxasticon of the feast, in Tone I: 
Let heaven rejoice today from on high, and let the clouds drop down gladness at 
the exceedingly glorious and mighty works of our God! For, lo! the portal which 
faceth east, who was born from a barren woman according to God's promise, and 

--- PAGE 2 ---
who became a dwelling-place sanctified for God, is brought forth as an unblemished 
offering. Let David rejoice, striking his harp! For he said: “The virgins that follow 
after her shall be brought before the King; those near her shall be brought unto the 
tabernacle of God, into His sanctuary, to be reared in the dwelling-place of Him 
Who, for the salvation of our souls, was incorruptibly begotten of the Father before 
time.”  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Having lit their candles today, * the assembly of virgins, * chanting hymns, * doth 
splendidly precede her who alone ** is all-immaculate.  
Verse: The virgins that follow after her shall be brought unto the King; * those 
near her shall be brought unto Thee.  
O prophet, receive her * who alone is all-immaculate: * the noetic mountain, * the 
divine table, ** the bridge and the jar.  
Verse: They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing, * they shall be 
brought into the temple of the King.  
Opening the portals of the sanctuary, * O Prophet Zachariah, * truly accept thou * 
the Mother of God, ** the only Ever-virgin.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Today the all-immaculate Virgin is brought to the temple, to the habitation of 
God, the King of all, the Nourisher of our whole life. Today the most pure and holy 
one, is led to the Holy of holies like a heifer three years of age. Let us cry out unto her 
like the angel: “Rejoice, thou who alone art blessed among women!”  
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostles * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins ** 
unto our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the 
Creator's dispensation!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the 
Creator's dispensation! (Twice) 
Glory ..., that of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostles * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins ** 
unto our souls. 
Both now ..., that of the feast.  
After the first chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”: 
Praise ye, O virgins! Keep festival, ye mothers! Give glory, ye people! Ye priests, 
bless ye the most pure Mother of God! For she, who before was a little child in the 
flesh, is brought to the Temple as the most holy temple of God. Wherefore, 
celebrating a spiritual feast, we hymn her as an intercessor for the human race.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the second chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
O David, go thou before us into the Temple of God, and, rejoicing, receive thou 
our Queen, and cry out unto her: Enter thou, O Sovereign Lady! Enter thou into the 
Temple of the King! Her glory is understood allegorically, for from her doth Christ 
the Light desire to pour Himself forth upon all!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Canon of the feast, with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the holy 
apostles, with 4 Troparia.  
ODE I 
Canon of the feast, the acrostic whereof is “O Lady, grant thou grace and discourse”, 
the composition of George, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her entry. 
O most pure one, we know thee to be a treasury of wisdom and an ever-flowing 
fountain of grace; and we pray thee rain down upon us knowledge, that we may praise 
thee forever.  
Being a temple and palace more exalted than the heavens, O most pure one, thou 
wast set apart in the Temple of God to be prepared as a divine dwelling-place for His 
advent.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Shining with the Light of grace, the Theotokos hath illumined all and assembled us 
to adorn her most splendid festival. Come ye, let us draw nigh to her!  
The glorious portal which surpasseth human thought, having opened the doors of 
the Temple of God, doth now command us who have assembled to delight in her 
divine wonders.  
Canon of the holy apostle, the acrostic whereof is “I glorify thee who lovest Christ, O 
Philemon”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone II: 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Joining chorus joyously in the mansions of heaven, O accomplisher of sacred 
things, grant grace unto me who hymn thy holy memory in a godly manner, for thou 
hast been glorified. 
Giving drink to men's hearts with the streams of thy words, O blessed and right 
wondrous Apostle Philemon, thou hast prepared them to accomplish divine 
understandings with faith.  
Having delivered men's souls from the gloom of the madness of idolatry, O wise 
apostle, thou hast illumined them with the splendors of the Spirit, doing the sanctified 
works of the sacred Gospel.  
Theotokion: O pure one, of old the divine assembly of the prophets truly 
described thee from afar in many and varied images, as the only one who gave birth 
to the Master.  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns of praise * of thine honored entry: * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Receiving the pure and undefiled one, who is more splendid than all creation, the 
animate bridal chamber of God, the beautiful Temple and chamber doth appear today 
like a bride adorned for her wedding.  
David, preceding the chorus, doth leap and dance with us, declaring thee, O all- 
pure one, to be the queen all-adorned, standing in the Temple before our King and 
God, O most pure one.  
From her, whom transgressions issued forth among the race of mankind, hath her 
correction and incorruption blossomed forth, the Theotokos, who is led today into 
the house of God.  
The angelic armies and the multitudes of all mankind leap for joy, and they 
advance as lamp-bearers before thy countenance, proclaiming thy majesty in the 
house of God.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Canon of the holy apostles  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Preaching the sufferings and resurrection of Christ, O right glorious Philemon, 
thou dost raise us up from the tomb of unbelief and mortality.  
With sacred hymnody let us praise the godly Onesimus and Philemon, Apphia and 
Archippus, the stars who illumine the ends of the earth.  
Having purified the eyes of your mind, ye received divine vision and have raised 
erring hearts up to knowledge, O most sacred ones.  
Theotokion: Having been shown to be pure and supremely incorrupt, O Virgin, 
thou didst receive within thy womb God the Word Who hath cleansed nature, which 
had been defiled by our fall into sin. 
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Let us praise the apostles of Christ, * the glorious Philemon, the sacred Archippus, 
Onesimus, Mark and Apollos, * and with them the all-wise Apphia * as most radiant 
stars illumining the ends of the earth; ** and let us cry out: Pray ye unceasingly on 
behalf of us all!  
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Cultivating stony hearts with the plough of the word, O sacred husbandman, thou 
didst prepare them for divine knowledge, and, casting down the temples of the idols, 
O blessed one, thou didst erect churches to the glory of thy Creator. Wherefore, 
assembling, we who are illumined in a most sacred manner glorify thy holy memory, 
O Philemon, and cry out to thee together: Entreat Christ God, that He grant re-
mission of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded ...”:  
Let David the psalmist rejoice, and let Joachim and Anna join chorus, for the 
radiant Mary, the divine lamp, issued forth from them like a holy fruit, and she 
rejoiceth, entering the temple, and beholding her, the son of Barachiah blessed her, 
and, rejoicing, cried aloud: “Rejoice, O wonder of the universe!”  
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
The Temple of God, receiving today the portal through whom none may pass, 
hath ceased to perform any service of the Law, crying: Truly truth hath appeared to 
those who are on earth!  
The mountain overshadowed, which Habbakuk beheld of old, prefigured her who 
hath made her abode in the inaccessible chambers of the Temple, flourishing with 
virtues, for she doth cover the ends of the earth therewith.  
All the earth hath seen most glorious things, things strange and marvelous, for the 
Virgin, receiving food from an angel, doth receive tokens of God's dispensation.  
Revealed as the temple and palace and animate heaven, O divine bride of the 
King, thou art brought today to the Temple of the Law to be kept for Him, O most 
pure one.  
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.  
With the Cross as mast and sail, thou didst pass over the cruel abyss of the 
temptations of life without foundering, O blessed one, directing many of those at sea 
to the harbor of salvation through divine grace.  
The godly city of Colossae manifestly setteth forth radiant luminaries: the sacred 
Archippus, Philemon and Apphia, and the glorious Onesimus, who enlighten the 
ends of the world.  
A divine river arose in thy heart, O godly eloquent one, stopping the rivers and 
torrents of ungodliness; and through grace giving drink to souls parched by the 
burning heat of ignorance, O glorious one.  
Theotokion: I hymn thee, O truly all-hymned one, who supra-naturally gave birth 
to the all-hymned Word of God, and I pray: In that thou art good, O Bride of God, 
heal thou the infirmities of my lowly soul.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst enter into the temple of the Lord; * thyself 
being a most pure temple, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
The most pure Virgin, the glorious sanctity and sacred offering which is brought 
today to the Temple of God, is preserved as a habitation for our one God, the King 
of all, as He Himself knoweth.  
Zachariah, having of old beheld the beauty of thy soul, cried out in faith: Thou art 
the deliverance, thou art the joy of all, thou art our restoration, through whom the 
Uncontainable One shall appear unto me contained.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
O, thy wonders which pass understanding, O all-pure one! Strange is thy 
birthgiving; strange is the manner of thy maturation; strange also, most glorious and 
unutterable by mortals, are all thy wonders, O Bride of God.  
As a most radiant lamp, O Bride of God, hast thou shone forth today in the house 
of the Lord, illumining us with the precious gifts of thy wonders, O pure and all-
hymned Theotokos.  
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Seeing those ailing with the wounds of evil deeds, O glorious Philemon, by thine 
active discourse thou didst heal those cruelly sick with the madness of idolatry.  
As a sure guide, O Philemon, thou didst point out the paths of salvation to those 
grievously lost, and wondrously led them to love Christ, the only Way.  
Today the honored Church of Christ in Colossae doth sing the splendid festival of 
the godly Archippus, honoring also the divinely eloquent Philemon.  
Theotokion: O Lady, save us who are tempest-tossed by the cruel billows of 
temptations, the audacious assaults of barbarians and the attacks of the cruel demons.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Thou Who hast upheld all things by Thy word hast hearkened to the prayer of the 
righteous ones. Wherefore, Thou hast loosed the infirmity of the barren woman, in 
that Thou art compassionate, and given them her who is the cause of joy.  
Wishing to make His salvation known to the Gentiles, the Lord hath now taken 
from among mankind her who hath not known wedlock, as a sign of reconciliation 
and renewal.  
As a house of grace, wherein treasures of the ineffable dispensation of God are 
laid up, O all-pure one, thou didst share in unfading delight in the Temple.  
Receiving thee as a royal diadem, O Bride of God, the Temple hath been rendered 
splendid and been elevated to better things, beholding in thee the fulfillment of the 
prophecies.  
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Thou hast been revealed to be a heaven proclaiming to all the saving glory of Him 
Who glorified thee and numbered thee among His seventy apostles, O spiritually rich 
martyr.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Having become a stranger to thy native land, with thy strange discourse thou didst 
pursue those who had become estranged from God, O hierarch Philemon, and 
showing them to be inhabitants of Sion.  
Shining with sacred virtues, and splendidly pleasing God, thou didst hasten to the 
heavens, where thou dost rejoice with the angels, O Apphia.  
Theotokion: The Word became incarnate within thy womb and became known as a 
man in His compassion, that He might deify mankind, O all-immaculate Maiden.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
The most pure temple of the Savior, * the precious bridal chamber and Virgin, * 
the sacred treasury of the glory of God, * hath been brought into the house of the 
Lord this day, * bringing with her the grace that is in the divine Spirit. * To her do the 
angels of God chant the hymn: ** She is the heavenly tabernacle!  
Ikos: Beholding the grace of the ineffable and divine mysteries of God made 
plainly manifest in and filling the Virgin, I rejoice; yet I know not how to understand 
this strange and ineffable image. How hath the pure one alone been shown to be 
above all creation, visible and immaterial? Wherefore, wishing to praise her, I am 
greatly in awe in mind and word; yet, bold, I proclaim and magnify her, saying: She is 
the heavenly tabernacle!  
  
ODE VII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Lo, today a joyous spring hath dawned upon the ends of the earth, enlightening 
our souls, thoughts and minds with grace: the festival of the Theotokos. Let us 
mystically make festival this day! 
Let all things - heaven and earth, the ranks of angels and the multitudes of 
mankind - bear gifts today unto the Queen and Mother of God; and let them cry 
aloud: Our joy and deliverance is brought into the Temple!  
The Scriptures have come to pass, the Law hath faded like a shadow, and rays of 
grace have shone forth upon thee who hast entered into the Temple of God, O pure 
Virgin Mother wherein thou art blessed.  
Heaven and earth and the netherworld are subject to thine Offspring as Creator 
and God, O all-pure one, and every nation of mortals doth confess that the Lord and 
Savior of our souls hath appeared.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Beautiful were thy precious feet, O Philemon, which meekly trod the paths of the 
Gospel, announcing sacred peace to all those who do battle, and hindering the 
assaults of the demons.  
The profound darkness of the Gazanenes was dispelled by the light of thy words, 
in that thou art a most sacred performer of the sacraments, O apostle, and among 
them thou wast most excellent, shepherding them all and teaching them to chant: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
The city of Gaza first shared in thy god-pleasing labors, being the first bishop 
there, O salvific hierarch Philemon, and as a sacred herald thou didst instruct them to 
cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
As a lover of Christ, Who loved mortals in His compassion, O Philemon, thou 
didst transform hate-filled enemies into loving friends through love, whereby they 
chanted unto God: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou art the strength of the lowly, the radiant lamp, the 
divine table, the impassable gate, the throne and palace of God, the staff of Aaron 
and the golden jar bearing Christ, the Manna of life.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Hearken, O pure Virgin Maiden, * that Gabriel may tell thee the true 
counsel of the Most High of old. * Make ready to receive the Godhead; * for 
through thee the Infinite One hath come to dwell among mankind. * 
Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Anna, once, leading the most pure temple to the house of God, faithfully said unto 
the priest, crying aloud: Now accept thou this child, given me by God; lead her into 
the Temple of the Creator; and, rejoicing, chant unto Him: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord! 
And Zachariah then, beholding them in the Spirit, said unto Anna: Thou dost 
bring hither the true Mother of Life, whom the prophets of God have clearly foretold 
as the Theotokos! How, therefore, can the Temple hold her? Wherefore, marveling, I 
cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The handmaid of God have I been, answered Anna unto him, and I call upon Him 
with faith and prayer to accept the fruit of my birth-pangs, that, having received this 
child, I might bring her that was born unto Him that bestowed her. Wherefore, I cry 
aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Truly this is a matter of the Law, the priest said to her, and strange doth this thing 
seem unto me, beholding her that doth most gloriously surpass the holy ones in grace 
led into the house of God. Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Bearing the word in thy heart like a splendidly lit lamp, O glorious one, thou didst 
raise up to the day of the knowledge of God those who before were like lamps 
extinguished and lay in the deep-darkness of ignorance.  
Thy sacred departure unto God was rendered magnificent by the sacred presence 
of the apostles and the incorporeal intelligences, whose life thou didst emulate on 
earth, as an initiate of the sacred mysteries, O divinely eloquent Philemon.  
Manifestly exuding the sweet-smelling myrrh of sacred miracles, O blessed and 
wise Philemon, thou didst perfume the minds and thoughts of the pious, dispelling 
the fetid passions of those who supremely exalt Christ.  
Like radiant stars ever shining in the firmament of the Church, the wondrous 
Archippus, Apphia, Philemon and Onesimus illumine our souls.  
Theotokion: Thy womb hath truly been revealed to us as a new garden of paradise, 
O pure Theotokos, producing the Tree of life, and it hath led back into paradise those 
who died through the fruit of the tree, giving them life.  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In nowise may the hand of the defiled * touch the animate ark of God; 
* and let the lips of the faithful * never-silently cry out with joy to the 
Theotokos, * chanting the words of the angel: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of 
grace! * The Lord is with thee!  
O pure Theotokos, as thou hast the most radiant beauty of purity of soul and art 
full of the grace of God from heaven, with the ever-existent light thou dost ever 
enlighten those who cry out with joy: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O 
pure Virgin!  
Thy wonder doth surpass the power of words, O pure Theotokos, for in thee I 
perceive a body impervious to the movement of sin. Wherefore, thankfully I cry out 
to thee: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!  
Most gloriously did the Law prefigure thee, O pure one, as the tabernacle, the 
divine jar, the awe-some ark, the veil, the staff, the inviolable temple and portal of 
God. Wherefore, all these things teach us to cry to thee: Truly thou art more highly 
exalted than all, O pure Virgin!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
In hymnody David cried out to thee prophetically, calling thee the daughter of the 
King in the comeliness of thy virtues, beholding thee standing, elaborately adorned, at 
the right hand of God. Wherefore, in prophecy he cried out: Truly thou art more 
highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!  
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Deified by divine communion, shining 'with ineffable light and ever filled with 
spiritual joy, O Philemon, thou dwellest in the heavens with the most sacred choir of 
the sacred apostles as is meet.  
Wondrous is thy character, comely and beautiful thy life, and most glorious was 
thy repose, O blessed apostle, as the radiant day whereon, forsaking that which is on 
earth, thou didst ascend in gladness to the circles of heaven.  
Today the whole Church of Christ is glad, spiritually ordaining festive joy at thy 
memorial, for thou hast preserved it unshaken by thy god-pleasing supplications to 
God the Savior, O most sacred Philemon.  
The shrine of thy relics poureth forth drops of healing upon those who approach 
it reverently, O blessed Apostle Philemon, for it banishes illnesses and hallows the 
souls of all who ever celebrate thy divine memory.  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate one, thou bearest Him Who holdeth all things, and 
who didst nourish the Nurturer, in nowise experiencing the usual pangs of 
birthgiving. Thy wonder surpasseth understanding, and fills with awe both angels and 
mortals, who know thee to be the only Virgin Mother of God.  
Exapostilarion of the feast:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
With faith let us praise the divine Maiden Mary, whom the company of the 
prophets of old proclaimed to be the jar, the staff, the tablet and the unquarried 
mountain; for she is led today in to the Holy of holies to be raised for the Lord.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., The foregoing is repeated.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Join chorus together, O ye virgins! * Leap up, ye maidens! * And, bearing your 
candles, * hymn ye with splendor * the only pure and most holy Theotokos! ** Sing 
forth, ye heavens!  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Verse: The virgins that follow after her shall be brought unto the King, * those 
near her shall be brought unto Thee.  
By the hand of the angel, O Virgin, * did thy Son, the Creator of all, * nourish thee 
with food, * O pure Lady, * revealing thy magnificence to the world ** as far greater 
than that of the Holy of holies.  
Verse: They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing, * they shall be 
brought into the temple of the King.  
O Virgin Bride of God, * holier than all the saints, * who hast given birth to the 
Master of all, * Who is One of the Trinity, * beseech Him, that He deliver from 
misfortunes ** all who hymn thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV:  
Today the Theotokos, the temple which held God, is escorted into the temple of 
the Lord; and Zachariah receiveth her. Today the Holy of holies rejoiceth and the 
choir of angels mystically keepeth festival. And we, celebrating with them today, cry 
aloud with Gabriel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord, Who hath great 
mercy, is with thee!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia from ODE I of the canon of the feast.  
O most pure one, we know thee to be a treasury of wisdom and an ever-flowing 
fountain of grace; and we pray thee rain down upon us knowledge, that we may praise 
thee forever.  
Being a temple and palace more exalted than the heavens, O most pure one, thou 
wast set apart in the Temple of God to be prepared as a divine dwelling-place for His 
advent.  
Shining with the Light of grace, the Theotokos hath illumined all and assembled us 
to adorn her most splendid festival. Come ye, let us draw nigh to her!  
The glorious portal which surpasseth human thought, having opened the doors of 
the Temple of God, doth now command us who have assembled to delight in her 
divine wonders.  
Let us hasten today, honoring the Theotokos with hymns, and let us celebrate a 
spiritual feast; for she is offered as a gift to God in the temple.  
With songs let us hymn the glorious arrival of the Theotokos; for today, as the 
prophets foretold, she is borne as a gift of great price into the temple, though she is 
herself the temple of God.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the 
Creator's dispensation!  
Troparion of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostles * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of sins ** 
unto our souls. 
Kontakion of the holy apostles, in Tone II:  
Let us praise the apostles of Christ, * the glorious Philemon, the sacred Archippus, 
Onesimus, Mark and Apollos, * and with them the all-wise Apphia * as most radiant 
stars illumining the ends of the earth; ** and let us cry out: Pray ye unceasingly on 
behalf of us all!  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
The most pure temple of the Savior, * the precious bridal chamber and Virgin, * 
the sacred treasury of the glory of God, * hath been brought into the house of the 
Lord this day, * bringing with her the grace that is in the divine Spirit. * To her do the 
angels of God chant the hymn: ** She is the heavenly tabernacle!  
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: the Song of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 
EPISTLE TO PHILEMON, FROM AFTER §302(PHILM. 1-24)  
Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, unto Philemon our 
dearly beloved, and fellow-laborer, And to our beloved Apphia, and Archippus our 
fellow-soldier, and to the church in thy house: Grace to you, and peace, from God 
our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. I thank my God, making mention of thee 
always in my prayers, Hearing of thy love and faith, which thou hast toward the Lord 
Jesus, and toward all saints; That the communication of thy faith may become 
effectual by the acknowledging of every good thing which is in you in Christ Jesus. 
For we have great joy and consolation in thy love, because the bowels of the saints 
are refreshed by thee, brother. Wherefore, though I might be much bold in Christ to 
enjoin thee that which is convenient, Yet for love's sake I rather beseech thee, being 
such an one as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ. I beseech thee 
for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds: Which in time past was to 
thee unprofitable, but now profitable to thee and to me: Whom I have sent again: 
thou therefore receive him, that is, mine own bowels: Whom I would have retained 
with me, that in thy stead he might have ministered unto me in the bonds of the 
gospel: But without thy mind would I do nothing; that thy benefit should not be as it 
were of necessity, but willingly. For perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that 
thou shouldest receive him for ever; Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a 
brother beloved, specially to me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh, 
and in the Lord? If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as myself. If he 
hath wronged thee, or oweth thee ought, put that on mine account; I Paul have 
written it with mine own hand, I will repay it: albeit I do not say to thee how thou 
owest unto me even thine own self besides. Yea, brother, let me have joy of thee in 
the Lord: refresh my bowels in the Lord. Having confidence in Thine obedience I 
wrote unto thee, knowing that thou wilt also do more than I say. But withal prepare 
me also a lodging: for I trust that through your prayers I shall be given unto you. 
There salute thee Epaphras, my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus; Marcus, Aristarchus, 
Demas, Lucas, my fellow-laborers. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your 
spirit. Amen.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: Verse: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and 
Thy truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE; § 50(LK. 10: 1-15)  
At that time, the Lord also appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and 
two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come. 
Therefore said he unto them: The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few: pray 
ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his 
harvest. Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Carry 
neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by the way. And into 
whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the son of peace 
be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again. And in the 
same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give: for the laborer is 
worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. And into whatsoever city ye enter, 
and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you: and heal the sick that are 
therein, and say unto them: The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But into 
whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your way out into the streets of 
the same, and say, Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe 
off against you: notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come 
nigh unto you. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for 
Sodom, than for that city. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! Woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if 
the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, 
they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it shall be 
more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment, than for you. And thou, 
Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell.  
Instead of “It is truly meet...” 
Refrain: The angels, beholding the entry of the most pure one, were amazed to 
see the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.  
Irmos: In nowise may the hand of the defiled * touch the animate ark of God; 
* and let the lips of the faithful * never-silently cry out with joy to the 
Theotokos, * chanting the words of the angel: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of 
grace! * The Lord is with thee!  
 
Communion Verse for the feast: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call 
upon the name of the Lord.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Communion Verse for the saints: Their sound hath gone forth into all the 
earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.  
 
