--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 27th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY GREAT-MARTYR JAMES THE PERSIAN 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER PALLADIUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Having forsaken the beauties of the world, * the splendor of thy birthright, * 
wealth and beauty, * and cast aside all sensuality, * and having broken thy body * 
through wounding the passions, * rejoicing thou didst follow after Christ, O James; * 
for through thy suffering thou hast now truly become ** a partaker of glory and a 
fellow heir of the kingdom. (Twice)  
When the members of thy flesh were cut off, * enduring unbearable pain and 
wounds, * O right glorious James, martyr of Christ, * and having manfully trampled 
underfoot * the savagery of the tormenters, * thou didst receive a priceless crown of 
victory; * and now adorned therewith, O blessed one, * thou dost stand, with those 
who suffered with thee, ** before the throne of thy Master. (Twice) 
Possessed of boldness before Christ, * O ever-memorable martyr, * thou dost 
fervently intercede for all * who celebrate thine honored festival with faith, * 
delivering them from misfortunes * and freeing them from the passions, * rescuing 
them from besetting evils * and granting their souls salvation by thy divine 
supplications, ** that we may glorify thy splendid struggles. (Twice) 
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
Thou didst astonish all in thy bearing of tortures, O James; for thou didst endure 
the amputation of thy fingers, hands and arms, and likewise thy feet and legs, until 
thou wast left with thy trunk alone; and then, as thou didst pray, thy precious head 
was severed. O much-suffering martyr, cease thou never to pray to Christ on our 
behalf, that our souls may find mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing her Lamb hastening to the slaughter * the Ewe-
lamb eagerly followed Him crying aloud: * ‘Whence goest Thou, O my sweetest 
Child? * O most beloved Jesus, * sinless Lord, rich in mercy, * O longsuffering 
Christ, * why dost Thou so swiftly and so fearlessly proceed? * Speak to me Thy 
handmaiden, * O my well-beloved Son: * pass not by me, Thy Mother, without a 
word, * O all-compassionate God, ** who grantest the world great mercy.’ 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos. 
  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., of the martyr, the composition of George the Syngellus, in Tone VIII: 
Assembling with faith today, O ye who love to gaze upon things divine, behold the 
strange and noetic contest of James of Persia, who hath shone upon us like the star 
which appeared to the magi, guiding us to true knowledge; for that valiant one, when 
he fell, destroyed those who fought against him, and when his members were severed, 
he rendered those who tortured him impotent, for he was strengthened by the 
providence of the Most High, crying aloud: “Even though ye sever my material limbs, 
yet I have Christ, Who hath spiritually become all things to me!” Wherefore, 
foreseeing the life to come, which lieth before all through death, he hastened to pass 
over to it, and abiding therein, he entreateth God, the Bestower of crowns, that He 
grant cleansing, enlightenment and great mercy unto us who celebrate his memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this sight which I see, * which mine eyes behold, O 
Master? * How is it that Thou Who dost sustain all creation, * art lifted up upon the 
Tree and diest, * granting life unto all? * thus said the Theotokos weeping, * upon 
seeing God and man * Who had shone forth ineffably from her ** hanging upon the 
Cross.  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr James O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Or this Troparion, in the same tone:  
Thou hast astonished all by thy terrifying torments * and the valor of thine 
endurance, O much suffering one, * most wondrously uttering prayers of 
thanksgiving to the Lord * as each of thy members was severed from thy body. * 
Wherefore, receiving a crown amid thy suffering, * thou hast ascended to the throne 
of Christ God, the King of heaven. ** Entreat Him, O James, that He save our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT COMPLINE  
Canon of the venerable Palladius, the acrostic whereof is: “I honor thy life, O all-
blessed father,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
Illumined with divine splendors, O venerable one, drive away the cloudiness of my 
mind, that I may behold thy luminous life and the correction of thy manner of living.  
Having risen early unto God, the Sun of righteousness, from thy childhood O 
spiritually rich father, thou didst avoid the darkness of the carnal passions through 
abstinence and wast enriched by the gift of miracles, O venerable one.  
Having acquired noetic purity through dispassion, thou didst become a habitation 
of the Spirit, O right wondrous and all-blessed Palladius, adornment of the fathers, 
universal beacon.  
Theotokion: O only Bride of God, thou didst bear in thine arms Him Who sitteth 
in the highest yet became a man; for wast found to be a worthy receptacle of the 
Ruler of all ages.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Offering unto God Almighty all-night supplication with vigilant mind, O father, 
thou didst lull the carnal passions to sleep. Wherefore, thou hast become for us all a 
never-tiring intercessor.  
Having mortified thy members with abstinence, O father, thou didst enliven thy 
soul with divine reasonings, enlivened by the virtues and the powers of the Creator, 
O Palladius, father of fathers.  
Theotokion: With the drops of thy mercy, O Maiden, quench the burning embers 
of the passions and light the lamp of my heart, which hath gone out, O Mary who 
knew not wedlock, thou golden candle stand, most immaculate one.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
By the all-accomplishing power and grace of our God, the King of all, thou didst 
truly escape the wickedness of the incorporeal foe, O divinely inspired father 
Palladius.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Celebrating the festive memorial of our eminent and honorable father, let us 
rejoice spiritually, delivered from misfortunes by his sacred prayers.  
Thy shrine poureth forth an ever-flowing stream of healings, O glorious Palladius, 
cleansing those who have recourse to it of their defilements, bodily and spiritual, O 
god-pleasing father of our fathers.  
By thy supplications deliver us from all the wiles of the serpent, O venerable one, 
and heal our cruel infirmities by thy prayers to the Master.  
Theotokion: Thou hast truly been revealed to be the God-containing temple of the 
King of all, O all-immaculate Birthgiver of God. Wherefore, with confidence we, the 
faithful, piously offer thee Gabriel's cry: “Rejoice!” 
ODE V  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Thou didst overturn the carnal passions with great abstinence, O divinely blessed 
one. Wherefore, divine grace was given thee to heal the sufferings of the faithful who 
have recourse to thee, O most glorious father Palladius.  
Having rendered thy life holy, O all-blessed one, thou wast numbered among the 
saints of ages past who were God's servants, sanctifying the souls of all who praise 
thy precious miracles.  
Truly blessed wast thou, O right glorious one; for, as one guileless and meek and 
adorned with goodly ascents, thou didst tread the path of the justifications of God 
Who seeth all things.  
Theotokion: Humanity was far removed from God, O Virgin; but when thou didst 
ineffably conceive the Savior, O divinely joyous one, it entered again into paradise, 
blessing thee with faith, O all-hymned one.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Taking upon thyself a pure life of abstinence, as though incorporeal, thou didst 
stand in all-night vigils, O wise one, praying copiously with true faith and godly 
humility.  
Adorned with visions of what is good, thou wast seen to be like an angel abiding in 
the flesh, and, passing on, thou hast made thine abode with the angels, O divinely 
blessed father Palladius.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Having the angels as thy helpers, thou didst dispel the illusions of the demons and 
all their wickedness, and without hindrance didst tread the path which leadeth to life, 
O divinely blessed one.  
Theotokion: When thou didst listen to the words of the divine Gabriel, O most 
immaculate Maiden, thou didst conceive the Word in thy seedless womb, and 
ineffably gave birth to Him.  
Lord, have mercy. (Thrice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”:  
Living the monastic life in God-pleasing manner, O our God-bearing father, thou 
didst search for God with prayer and fasting, and didst become a pure habitation of 
the Spirit, shedding rays of virtue upon the faithful, whereby thou dost illumine all 
who honor thee. Glory to Christ Who hath glorified thee! Glory to Him Who 
strengthened thee! Glory to Him Who performeth healing for all through thee!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
By the most glorious demonstration of thy miracles, O spiritually rich father, thou 
dost illumine the souls of all who have recourse to thee by the grace of the Almighty 
Who enlightened thy soul revealing it to be brighter than the sun.  
Loving the Lord most perfectly with an upright mind, O all-wise one, thou wast 
perfectly loved by Him, and received the grace to expel evil spirits and to heal all 
manner of infirmities.  
God Who seeth all things, accepting the outpourings of thy tears, imparted to thee 
a share of the angels' consolation, which those who have served God with upright 
heart receive.  
Theotokion: Having given birth to the merciful Lord, O pure one who alone art 
full of the grace of God, pray thou that, by His right hand He may have mercy upon 
me who am ever cruelly buffeted by the griefs of life.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
With divine power thou didst destroy the destructive hordes of the demons, and 
receiving the grace to banish ailments and to expel unclean spirits, thou didst cry 
aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having lived in God-pleasing manner, O all-blessed one, thou hast now manifestly 
fallen into the deserved sleep of the just and been translated to endless delight, O 
venerable one, crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Most gloriously doth thy shrine pour forth healings upon those who have recourse 
to it, O blessed father Palladius, dispelling infirmities and causing sufferings to cease; 
and bowing down before it we hymn thy life, pangs and divine struggles, O beacon of 
monastics.  
Theotokion: Fill me with divine waters, O Virgin who hast given birth to the Well-
spring; deliver me from the burning heat of sin, O portal of divine life, and guide me 
to life who cry aloud: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
the ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Through the power and grace of God thou wast able to vanquish the serpent who 
boasted in his mindlessness, and to crush his vile head, trampling it underfoot, O 
father. Wherefore, assembling, with compunctionate soul we call thee blessed.  
In the lofty eminence of thy manner of life thou, O spiritually rich father, wast 
revealed to be a heaven adorned with miracles as with divine stars, illumining the 
souls of those who ever piously approach thee and honor thy struggles with faith, O 
most radiant God-bearer and luminary.  
Thou didst staunch the flow of the passions with the streams of thy tears, O 
venerable one, and pourest forth streams of miracles for those who have recourse to 
thee, O thou who art blessed of God. Thou didst ever dispel the burning heat of the 
passions, O glorious Palladius, precious adornment of the Church.  
Like a sweet-smelling rose thou didst blossom forth in the Church of Christ 
perfuming all the ends of the world with thy wondrous fragrance. Wherefore, we 
celebrate thy divine memory, whereon ask thou remission of our many offenses, O 
God-bearer.  
Theotokion: Light from Light shone forth from thy womb, O Ever-virgin Mother, 
dispelling the darkness of deception and illumining all the ends of the earth. 
Wherefore, with faith we cry to thee: Rejoice, O Theotokos, thou boast of the 
venerable!  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
Verse: O venerable father Palladius, * pray to God for us.  
Thy mind illumined with light, * O all-blessed Palladius, * became a pure temple of 
the three-Sunned Godhead, * noetically receiving * the divine rays of the Holy Spirit. 
* Wherefore, pray thou, * that He grant our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
Verse: O venerable father Palladius, * pray to God for us.  
Having angels as thy companions, * strengthening thee, O wise one, * thou didst 
dispel the illusions of the demons * and their wicked activity, O father, * treading 
along the path * which leadeth to divine rest. * Wherefore, pray thou, that He grant 
our souls ** peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Emulating the pure God, * thy Creator, * with purity of soul, * O wise 
and glorious God-bearer, * thou didst offer thyself to Him as a pure sacrifice, * as an 
observer of His precepts. * Wherefore, pray thou, that He grant our souls ** peace 
and great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
O all-holy Maiden, full of the grace of God, * thou most pure temple of God, * 
more spacious than the heavens * and more holy than the cherubim: * fill my mind 
with grace * and illumine the eyes of my heart, * granting me remission of all 
transgressions ** through thy right acceptable mediation.  
Or this Stavrotheotokion: Of old, the unblemished Virgin, * beholding on the Tree 
* God to Whom she had given birth from her seedless womb, * unable to bear the 
wounding of her womb, * cried out in anguish: * “O Thou Who sustainest all 
creation, * how is it that thou art crucified upon a Cross as one condemned, ** 
desiring to save all mankind?”  
 
  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without the martyria; and that of the holy great-
martyr, with 6 Troparia, the acrostic whereof is: “With songs do I hymn the Persian 
martyr James,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone II: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Standing now before the throne of Christ as one crowned, O glorious martyr 
James, by thy supplications grant me radiant illumination and grace from heaven.  
Issuing forth from the east, O martyr James, thou hast shone upon us like a 
radiant dawn illumining the Church of Christ with the effulgence of thy sufferings.  
Having shown youthful resistance, as a victor thou wast deemed worthy of the 
honors of a successful combat and eternal glory, O martyr James.  
Theotokion: The trumpets of the prophets announced thee, proclaiming the 
mystery wrought within thee, O Virgin Theotokos, having beheld thy wonders from 
afar.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Thou wast like a choice vine of Christ, pruned with the sickle of torments, and 
which, bearing much fruit, is offered up in the winepress of the Savior.  
Thou didst sensibly perceive the corruption and instability of transitory things, O 
crown-bearer; and as one with a great intellect, prefered the stability of those things 
which abide forever.  
Thy body, dismembered by the savagery of the torturers, won thee splendid 
crowns, O James, and the delight of the food of paradise.  
Theotokion: Mankind, united hypostatically to the Master of all through thy divine 
birthgiving, O Virgin Bride of God, hath manifestly received mercy.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”-  
Christ hath caused the godly and ever-memorable martyr James to shine forth 
from Persia like a star newly-appeared; wherefore, he hath dispelled the darkness of 
deception and shone forth the grace of the Spirit upon the faithful. Therefore, let us 
keep his memory with faith and cry out, saying: O much suffering spiritual athlete, 
entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who with love celebrate 
his holy memorial. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII:  
Mired in the depths of sin, * there is no strength left in me; * the tempest of my 
trespasses hath engulfed me. * But since thou hast given birth to the Word, the only 
Lover of mankind, * look upon me thy servant, I entreat thee, * and deliver me from 
sin and the soul-corrupting passions, * and from every ill inflicted by the deceiver, O 
Lady, * that I may sing with joy: * Pray to Christ God on behalf of me thy servant, * 
that I may be granted the remission of sins; ** for I have set my hope in thee. 
Stavrotheotokion: The Virgin, the Mother of the Redeemer, standing before the 
Cross, cried out maternally, groaning with pain and tears: “What is this strange and 
most glorious sight which I see, O my Son? Thou Who pourest forth dispassion upon 
all men hast been crucified on a Cross between two condemned thieves, pierced in 
the side, and given gall to eat, all by hands which Thou didst make! But arise and 
grant remission of transgressions unto those who with faith hymn thy divine 
sufferings!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: I have heard report of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * and have glorified 
Thee * Who alone lovest mankind.  
Revived by the armor given thee by God, O glorious one, thou didst reduce to 
ashes all the deception of those who worship fire.  
Ask thou cleansing for us who celebrate thy precious memory, O martyr James, in 
that thou dost possess boldness.  
The torrents of blood gushing forth from thy members, O thrice blessed one, 
have quenched all the flames of delusion.  
Theotokion: Direct my thoughts to the calm haven of thy dispassion and purity, O 
most pure one. 
ODE V  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Thou wast truly like richly fertile earth, broken apart by the plough of bitter 
torments, O wise one, bringing a goodly harvest to the Creator.  
With the blood of the severed limbs of thy body thou didst extinguish the burning 
arrows of the enemy, O thrice-blessed one; for thou wast shown to be protected by 
hope and faith.  
As each of thy members was cruelly cut away, O most wise one, like a goodly lamb 
thou didst offer to Christ a hymn of victory and fitting praise.  
Thou hast given me cleansing of the defilements of my soul, O glorious martyr of 
Christ, through thy pangs, bestowing deliverance through the streams of thy blood, O 
all-praised one.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: Clearly offering a genuine cry to thine honored and awesome 
birthgiving with heart and tongue, we now call thee the pure Theotokos.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Having sensibly accepted the instruction of thy friends, O glorious one, rejoicing, 
thou didst hasten to the struggle and received a crown of victory.  
Suffering as though in another's body, O martyr James, thou didst endure 
dismemberment, sending up hymnody to the Master.  
As a victorious martyr, O most wise one, thou didst manifestly array thyself in the 
robe of salvation and the vesture of gladness, which had been dyed in thy blood.  
Having traversed the sea of martyrdom, thou didst receive a sacred crown of 
victory, and now joinest chorus with ranks of martyrs as is meet, O glorious James.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth without knowing a man, O Virgin, remaining a 
virgin forever, showing forth the impress of thy Son and God, the true Divinity.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
Persuaded by thy good spouse, O James who wast patient of soul, * and fearing 
rather the dread tribunal, * thou didst spit upon the Persians' command and the fear 
of them, * showing thyself to be an honorable martyr ** whose body was pruned like 
a vine.  
Ikos: Let us all sigh from the depths of our souls, pouring forth tears as we 
envisage the martyr cruelly dismembered by those who were like barking dogs, and 
who, gathering together, tore off the limbs of the wondrous martyr, who was valiant 
in his confession. What then shall I say? If ye desire, let me tell all with zeal, how one 
day death came to James, whose body was pruned like a vine.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
When thy body was dismembered, O martyr James, strengthened by divine faith, 
noetic might and spiritual endurance, thou wast unmoved and unshaken, crying 
aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Having set thy thoughts on the goal of a higher calling, thou wast not 
overwhelmed when torments were poured forth upon thee; but, enduring the wounds 
inflicted on thee by the iniquitous as is meet, dismembered, thou didst chant: O God 
of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Blessed art Thou, and well is it for thee now, O most blessed one, who vanquished 
the savage cruelty of the wicked one and the wrath of the tyrant, saying with zeal: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be a candle-stand of golden luster for the 
never-waning Light, the Candle of divine splendor, illumining all the world with the 
radiance of thine honorable virginity, and saving those who chant aloud: Blessed art 
thou who hast given birth to God in the flesh!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
 Strengthened by the power of God, O blessed one, thou didst drive off the 
assemblies and hordes of the wicked, and having mightily dispelled them, received a 
crown of victory, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! Hymn and 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Thou didst look upon the severing of thy members as goodly offerings, O martyr, 
ignoring the attendant pangs, but directing thy gaze rather to the beauteous crowning 
of the martyr's which is to come, and which hath been prepared by the just Judge.  
Having steadfastly acquired supra-natural endurance, thou didst remain like a 
pillar, O blessed one, fearlessly undergoing the assaults and receiving the darts of the 
enemy, crying aloud: Bless ye Christ throughout the ages!  
The soul-corrupting enemy, the author of evil, assailing thee with great fury, and 
inspiring the torturers to break the strength of thy soul, was unable to accomplish his 
ends, O glorious one, for Thou didst array thyself in the armor of Christ.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, we know thee to be the clear well-spring of 
immortality, for thou hast given birth to the Word of the immortal Father, Who hast 
delivered from death all who supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Joining chorus with the martyrs, O thrice-blessed one, and standing as a martyr 
before the throne of Christ, by thy supplications deliver from cruel misfortunes those 
who celebrate thy memory today and with gladness honor thy radiant festival.  
As a martyr, O James, thou hast now truly made thine abode in the heavens, where 
the assemblies of the martyrs are, where the holy multitude of all the saints rest, 
where the souls of the righteous and the Church of the firstborn are.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Thou hast taken thy place before the Savior of all as a lamp-bearer, for Whom 
thou didst endure the severing of the members of thy body and with might ignored 
the fire and wounds of thy trials. Wherefore, with faith and love we all call thee 
blessed, O James.  
Clad now in an embroidered purple robe dyed in thine own blood, thou dost reign 
with Christ, O James; for through sufferings thou didst find the well-spring of 
dispassion, in which thou hast been deemed worthy to delight eternally, O all-blessed 
one.  
Theotokion: Manifestly ascribing to thee a title befitting the nature of things, and 
likewise offering up to thee a divine cry, we glorify thee, the Theotokos, as the one 
who conceived God and truly became the pure Mother of God.  
Exapostilarion of the holy great-martyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the Sanctuary ...”: 
The Lord hath glorified thee as a branch pruned by manifold tortures, as an 
honored vine pouring forth wine in the wellsprings of thy blood, O spiritual athlete 
James, protector of those who with love keep thy most sacred memory as is meet.  
Theotokion: There is no salvation in me, O Virgin, for evilly I have fallen into the 
abyss of sin and await the threat of dread torment and the portion of the goats. Take 
pity upon me before the judgment, for thou art my fervent help, O Theotokos.  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., the composition of the Studite, in Tone II:  
Enduring amid thy sufferings, O martyr James, thou didst surrender thy body unto 
Christ God, and when thy fingers, hands, arms, and legs were cut off, and finally thy 
head, thou didst take wing to the heavens, and reignest with the King of all. 
Wherefore, O most mighty of spiritual athletes, cease thou never to pray, that our 
souls be saved from all the malice of the enemy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb * willingly 
led as a man to the slaughter, * she said, weeping: * “Dost Thou now hasten to leave 
me childless * who gave Thee birth O Christ,? * What is this that Thou hast done, O 
Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine extreme goodness, * which 
is beyond understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of mankind!”  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY    
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr James O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Or this Troparion, in the same tone:  
Thou hast astonished all by thy terrifying torments * and the valor of thine 
endurance, O much suffering one, * most wondrously uttering prayers of 
thanksgiving to the Lord * as each of thy members was severed from thy body. * 
Wherefore, receiving a crown amid thy suffering, * thou hast ascended to the throne 
of Christ God, the King of heaven. ** Entreat Him, O James, that He save our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II: 
Persuaded by thy good spouse, O James who wast patient of soul, * and fearing 
rather the dread tribunal, * thou didst spit upon the Persians' command and the fear 
of them, * showing thyself to be an honorable martyr ** whose body was pruned like 
a vine.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §233(6: 10-17) 
Brethren: be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV Verse: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and 
He delivered them out of all their tribulations 
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN, §50(15:1-7)  
The! Lord said to His disciples: I am the true vine, and my Father is the 
husbandman. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every 
branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Now ye are 
clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Abide in me, and I in you. As 
the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, 
except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I 
in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. If a 
man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather 
them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. If ye abide in me, and my 
words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
