--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 20th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
FOREFEAST OF THE ENTRANCE OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER GREGORY THE DECAPOLITE  
& OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS PROCLUS, ARCHBISHOP OF 
CONSTANTINOPLE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the forefeast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
The lamp-bearing virgins * who with splendor accompany the Ever-virgin * truly 
prophesy the future in spirit; * for, in that she is the temple of God, * the Theotokos 
is led as a child into the temple ** with virginal glory.  
The Theotokos, the right glorious fruit of the holy promise, * is truly revealed to 
the world; * she who surpasseth all things * is piously accompanied into the temple of 
God * fulfilling the vow of her parents, ** and preserved by the divine Spirit.  
O Virgin, having been faithfully nurtured with heavenly bread * in the temple of 
the Lord, * thou hast given birth unto the Word, the Bread of life for the world. * To 
Him wast thou mystically betrothed beforehand by the Spirit, * in that thou art the 
chosen and all-immaculate temple, ** betrothed to God the Father.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in the same melody: 
Dwelling with gladness in the mansions of heaven, O father, * and standing boldly 
with the angels * before the throne of the Lord, * pray thou that He grant * release 
from sins and the passions ** unto those who on earth celebrate thy memory.  
Having hewn down the tares of the passions * with the scythe of prayer, O father 
Gregory, * and having worked the ground of thy soul with the plough of abstinence, 
* thou didst scatter the seeds of piety upon it, * thereby producing for us ** the fruits 
of healing.  
We call thee a receptacle of the virtues, O venerable one, * a friend of silence, a 
keeper of vigils, * a model of chastity, * an abode of prayer which cannot be taken 
away, * a treasury of miracles, ** who prayest for those who honor thee, O Gregory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Today the Theotokos, the temple which contained God, is brought into the 
temple of the Lord, and Zachariah receiveth her; today the Holy of holies rejoiceth, 
and the choir of the angels doth mystically keep festival. And we, celebrating with 
them today, cry out with Gabriel: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace! The Lord 
Who hath great mercy, is with thee!  
But if it be Friday evening: Glory ..., of the forefeast; Both now ..., Dogmaticon in the 
tone of the week.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of Saint Proclus, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
With the splendor of thy dogmas * and the beauty of thy life * thou didst adorn 
the hierarchy with piety, * O ever-memorable Proclus, * showing thyself to be truly a 
pillar of the Church, * illumining all with thy words. * Wherefore, we call thee 
blessed, * and in psalms and hymns ** celebrate thy most honored memory.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
With splendor thou didst teach and with divine wisdom thou didst proclaim * the 
Theotokos, the most pure Maiden, * who gave birth to the Creator and Master, * the 
Son and Word of the Father, * Who was begotten before all ages, * and in latter days 
of His own will became a man for our sake, * remaining immutable in His essence; * 
and thou didst put to shame Nestorius, ** the impious and most foolish one.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
O ever-memorable one, * thou didst draw forth the golden waters * of the wise 
preacher of God * whose successor thou wast, * and wast shown to be a seat of piety 
as well, * making steadfast the flock of Christ * with thy teaching of the truth; * and 
his most precious and all-honored relics ** didst thou give to the Church likened to 
imperial ornaments.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Come, all ye faithful, let us praise her who alone is immaculate, who was 
proclaimed by the prophets and is led into the temple: her who before all ages was 
called to be a mother, and in the latter times was revealed to be the Theotokos. 
Through her supplications, O Lord, grant Thy peace and great mercy unto us.  
Troparion of the holy fathers, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., that of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Anna now beforehand doth betroth joy unto all, * bringing forth the only Ever-
virgin as a fruit assuaging grief, * and today bringeth her, rejoicing, * into the temple 
of the Lord, in fulfillment of her promise. ** For she is the pure Mother, the temple 
of God the Word.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Anna now beforehand doth betroth joy unto all, * bringing forth the only Ever-
virgin as a fruit assuaging grief, * and today bringeth her, rejoicing, * into the temple 
of the Lord, in fulfillment of her promise. ** For she is the pure Mother, the temple 
of God the Word. (Twice) 
Glory ..., of the holy fathers, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
Before thy conception thou wast dedicated to God, O pure one, and, having been 
born on earth, thou hast now been brought to Him, fulfilling thy parents' vow; and 
given over with radiant lamps in the temple of God, as a divine temple pure from 
thine infancy, thou wast shown to be the receptacle of the unapproachable and divine 
Light. Truly great is thine arrival, O only Bride of God and Ever-virgin!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in the same melody: 
The temple of God, the greatly honored chamber, with gladness cometh forth 
with radiant lamps to the temple of God to take up her abode therein. Zachariah 
rejoiceth in her, clearly perceiving the revelation of the sacred prophets fulfilled; and 
he is glad and hymneth the forefeast with song: Joy precedeth thine entry, O Maiden, 
Virgin and Mother!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Canon of the forefeast, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and those of the saints, 
with 4 Troparia each.  
ODE I  
Canon of the forefeast, the acrostic whereof is the Greek alphabet, through ODE VII 
(ODE VIII with its own Stichoi, ODE IX is the composition of Joseph), in Tone IV:  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
The all-holy and immaculate one cometh forth to make her abode within the Holy 
of holies, that she may become the sanctified temple of our Most holy God; and 
virgin maidens precede her.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
The pre-eternal counsel of our pre-eternal God cometh to fulfillment now that 
thou, O all-immaculate Lady, dost come forth to dwell in the Holy of holies, as the 
abode of the Word.  
Thy godly parents lead thee, who art to become the Mother of God, into the Holy 
of holies, to make thy habitation there, and thereby fulfill the promise they made 
when they offered up entreaty, O most pure one.  
O Lady, strengthen thou the weakness of my heart and make it steadfast, for it 
hath been shaken by the passions, that with faith and love I may call thee blessed, 
who art the ever-blessed and all-immaculate one.  
Canon of the venerable Gregory, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
By thy supplications, O blessed Gregory, enliven my lowly soul, which hath been 
slain by the passions; for thou hast now received the life which ageth not, having 
mortified thy members on earth with the struggles of asceticism, O venerable one.  
Abstaining from the pleasures of the body with purity of mind, O father, from 
childhood thou wast an instrument of the Spirit, splendidly receiving His powers and 
being recognized as godly of visage.  
With divine desire thou didst cause the desires of the flesh to wither away, O 
blessed one, espousing to thyself purity as a bride, from whom thou didst beget all 
the virtues as children for thyself, and who made thee a child of God, O ever 
memorable one.  
Theotokion: O most pure and blessed one, thou heavenly ladder stretching from 
earth unto the heavens, ineffable is the wonder and incomprehensible the vision, for 
God the Word hath come down to mortal mankind! do thou save those who have 
recourse unto thee.  
Canon of the holy hierarch Proclus, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it shattered 
the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the deep.  
The peer of the noetic archangels in activity and true discourse, O God-receiver, 
thou standest with them before the throne of the adored Trinity, O Proclus, Whom 
do thou beseech, that we be saved.  
Manifestly following in the footsteps of Chrysostom, O all-blessed and ever-
memorable one, thou didst receive his divine priestly vestments as a paternal 
inheritance, O right glorious father.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
In that Isaiah of old cried out in the Spirit that God would come to earth, 
Nestorius, who blasphemously slandered the incarnation, was deposed in council by 
thee, O thrice blessed one.  
Theotokion: With divinely inspired discourses thou didst explain the awesome 
incarnation of the Word of God from the Virgin, proclaiming her to be the 
Theotokos, following the all-wise dogmas of the apostles.  
ODE III  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
The virgin maidens who undertake to bear candles with splendor prefigure what is 
to come; for from her the enlightenment of knowledge will be born, Who looseth the 
darkness of deception.  
Anna of old, filled with divinely wise zeal, fulfilleth her vow and escorteth to the 
sanctuary thee, her most sacred offspring, who art to give birth unto God, O most 
immaculate one.  
The sun spread forth its rays, beholding the radiant cloud stretched forth at the 
behest of God within the Holy of holies, from whence remission will rain forth upon 
the stony passions.  
Having made His abode within thee in His tender compassion, O all-immaculate 
and pure one, God deifieth me who was seduced aforetime by the deception of the 
serpent and corruption; and hath again given me the food of incorruption.  
Canon of the venerable One  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Having ascended the mountain of the virtues, O venerable father, thou didst enter 
into the darkness of vision and, comprehending, thou didst contain, as far as thou 
wast able, Him Who is unapproachable in essence, O father, being filled with 
enlightenment.  
With heavenly light He Who was born in a cave for the deliverance of mortal 
mankind illumined thee like Paul, O all-blessed one, who of old wast dwelling in a 
cave, showing thee to be luminous, O father Gregory.  
The heavenly portal, the most pure Mother of Christ, furnished thee with wings, O 
father, who wast beset by the assaults of the demons, and through the grace of the 
Spirit rendered thee able to soar above them with strength.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: Rejoice, O thou who alone hast given birth to the Lord of all! 
Rejoice, thou who hast mediated life for all! Rejoice, thou mountain overshadowed 
and unquarried, confirmation of the faithful! Rejoice, O all-immaculate one!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
Receiving light from Light in a most godly manner, O all-blessed one, thou didst 
become a light for the Church. Wherefore, the divine Light shone upon thee 
noetically, as is written, and, illumined thereby, thou dost enlighten those who hymn 
thy memory.  
Sounding forth the thunder of thy dogmas, and as the walls of Jericho were cast 
down so were all the audacities and armies of heresy, and thou hast won the trophy of 
victory, manifestly proclaiming the incarnation of God from the Virgin.  
Setting thy mouth to the well-spring of wisdom, O Proclus in that thou art 
pleasing to God, thou didst draw forth divine waters of spiritual wisdom, drowning 
the turbid rivers, and ungodly opinions of Nestorius, O all-blessed one.  
Theotokion: The only-begotten Son who is ineffably understood to be with the 
Father on high, was the only-begotten born of thee below in a supra-natural manner 
past understanding, O most pure one; and hath deofied mankind, O most pure Lady 
Theotokos. Wherefore, we call thee blessed.  
Kontakion of the venerable Gregory, in Tone III: 
The Church knoweth thee to be a sun radiant with the beauties of the virtues, * 
illumining all with rays of healings, O favorite of Christ. * Wherefore, we celebrate 
thine honored memory * and honor thy struggles, ** O all-blessed and most wise 
father Gregory.  
 Kontakion of the holy hierarch Proclus, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
Today the most honored of all cities * doth truly celebrate as is meet on the feast 
of thine honored repose, ** O wise Proclus, father of fathers.  
Sessional Hymn of venerable Gregory, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Illumined with divine splendor, thou hast driven away the darkness of the soul-
destroying passions, O most wise Gregory; and caught up to the most pure heights of 
dispassion, thou hast most gloriously shone forth rays of healings, having made thine 
abode in the never-waning light of the kingdom of Christ.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch Proclus, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”:  
Being a divine and sacred preacher, O all-praised teacher of the mysteries, 
enriching the Church with divine doctrine, thou didst proclaim the most pure Virgin 
to be the Theotokos and didst thereby put Nestorius to shame. Wherefore, we all 
faithfully honor thy memory, asking that we be granted great mercy.  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the Forefeast, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”: 
Give praise, ye virgins! Keep the forefeast, ye mothers! Ye people, give glory! Ye 
priests, bless the most pure Mother of God! For having been born before, a babe in 
the flesh, she hath been brought to the temple as the most holy temple of God. 
Wherefore, celebrating this spiritual feast, we hymn her as the intercessor for the race 
of mankind.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Sacred tongues proclaimed thee beforehand to be the dwelling of Him Who is 
infinite in nature, O pure one. Wherefore, choirs of virgins accompany thee to the 
Holy of holies, bearing lamps.  
Joachim and Anna won glory, walking and bearing thee with gladness into the holy 
temple, O most holy temple of God, pure and all-immaculate Lady. 
The sentence pronounced upon our ancestors hath been annulled; for, lo! a branch 
hath sprung forth which shall bear for us the incorrupt cluster Who shall bring the 
wine of gladness unto the ends of the earth.  
The Word, the Creator, finding thee alone to be all-immaculate, made His abode 
within thy womb, accomplishing our salvation through grace, O most pure one, in 
His ineffable wisdom.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
He Who in His goodness for our sake became a stranger by a strange descent, O 
Gregory, seeing thee a stranger for His sake, received thee who wast far from thy 
homeland and made thee a divine heir of His kingdom, adorned with the virtues.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
For Christ Who for our sake became a babe and a child, O venerable one, thou 
didst give thyself over to a school of children, being as innocent as a babe, O divinely 
wise and venerable father; and with divine humility thou didst humble the malice of 
the enemy, O blessed Gregory.  
Watered with the showers of thy tears as with divine dew, O father Gregory, thou 
didst cause every virtue to grow bringing forth the blossoming of fruitfulness from 
the tree of perfect fasting planted by the springs of water.  
Theotokion: O blessed and all-immaculate Mother of God, heal thou the wounds 
of my soul, still the pleasures of the flesh, illumine my darkened heart, bring peace to 
my mind and deliver me from all the harm and assaults of the enemy.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain overshadowed 
by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy One of Israel * 
would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and restoration. 
The resounding thunder of the words of thy proclamation and the teachings of thy 
doctrines gladden the Church of God with wisdom, dispelling the audacity of heresy, 
O all-glorious and sacred Proclus.  
Having purified thine honored body by abstinence like gold by fire, O most sacred 
and wise one, thou didst present it to the Creator as beautiful. Wherefore, He hath 
forever bestowed the vesture of the priesthood upon thee.  
Being a sacred hierarch, and accustomed to divine knowledge, thou didst 
generously grant the divine radiance of enlightenment unto all, for the salvation of 
souls, O right glorious one.  
Theotokion: Having in a manner past understanding received the divine Ember in 
thy womb, O all-immaculate one, thou wast truly not consumed; for the bush of old 
prefigured thy birthgiving, for our salvation and restoration.  
ODE V  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Let the clouds drop down righteousness today, for in the noetic sky of the temple 
of God, the divine cloud is spread out letting drop the Sweetness which taketh away 
all bitterness from our souls.  
Strange is thy conception, strange thy nativity, O most pure Virgin, strange thy 
coming forth and thine entering of the holy place, and strange are Thy most glorious 
works, past all telling and understanding. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 The all-holy Spirit wholly sanctified thee who abode within the temple and wast 
fed with heavenly food, O most beauteous Bride of the Father, for Whose sake thou 
didst become the Mother of the Word.  
Setting all my hope on thee, O Maiden, I flee to thy compassions. Show forth my 
fallen soul to be untouched by the malice of the demons and unweakened by the 
floods of pleasures.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
By thine actions thou didst show thyself to be a fertile vine of the Word, O 
venerable father, bearing the magnificent ripe grapes of the virtues which exude the 
spiritual wine of salvation, making glad the hearts of the faithful.  
Glorious Rome, receiving thee from the East with faith, O father, as a never-
waning lamp, became enlightened by thy precious gifts; for thou didst have Christ 
within thy soul like a light illumining those who beheld thee, O father.  
Walking the paths of life with godly vigilance as a favorite of God, as a 
husbandman of the commandments of Christ with the power of the Spirit, thou didst 
slay the serpent who lay in wait to bruise thy heel.  
Theotokion: O Ever-virgin Mother, intercessor for the world, pilot me and guide 
me to the right path, and direct my thoughts along the straight paths of righteousness, 
setting aright the steps of my soul.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Hou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O 
Christ, * and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * enlighten with 
the light of thine understanding * the hearts of those who with right worship 
hymn Thee.  
Radiant as a beacon, O all-blessed one, thou wast shown to be a champion of the 
Church of God, clearly explaining the nativity of the Immutable One from the divine 
and all-holy Virgin, O glorious one.  
Placing the dogmas of the glorious incarnation of God from the Virgin in thy 
sling, like the godly David of old thou didst fell the audacious character of Nestorius 
as did Goliath the Philistine.  
Full of the teachings of Paul, and having beheld a vision of him, O most elect one, 
thou wast shown to be another Elisha, mystically anointed with the priesthood as 
with divine unction.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: God took upon Himself neither confusion nor co-mingling in the 
womb of the Virgin, issuing forth in the flesh; but what He had been, that He 
remained: revealed immutably to be both God and man in His activities.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Strengthened by the grace of God, the parents of the divine Virgin lovingly 
surrender her, like a pure dove, to be raised in the Holy of holies.  
Lighting lamps, O pure one, the maidens, dancing, radiantly accompany thee to 
the temple of God, for thou art to receive the Light Who proceedeth from the Light.  
A palace full of glory, the great proclamation of the prophets, the holy throne, is 
led into the Holy of holies, making herself ready for the King of all.  
I hymn thy conception, O Maiden, I also hymn thine ineffable nativity; and I 
likewise hymn thy protection, whereby we who flee to thy serenity are delivered from 
all harm.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Deified by mystic visions and divine splendors, and by thy yearning for God, O 
most sacred one, as a divine prophet, as a favorite of God thou hast been deemed 
worthy of the grace of God.  
Thou didst perfect thy life in silence, O divinely inspired one, and wast revealed to 
be greater than the tumults of this life, higher than the passions, and a strange 
wanderer throughout all the earth.  
Like a clear mirror thou wast enriched with divine radiance; like a sacred vessel 
thou hast adorned the temple, O Gregory, illumining the heavenly Church of the 
firstborn.  
Theotokion: O Mary, pure palace of the King, having cleansed me who have 
become the impure den of thieves by thy supplications, show me to be a holy temple 
for Him Who was born from thee.  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to deliver 
us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save Thy people 
O our God, * for Thou art the strength and restoration of the weak. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
With the noetic staff of thy teachings thou didst drive the proponents of heresy 
from the flock of Christ like marauding wild beasts, O blessed Proclus, leading thy 
flock into the fold of Orthodoxy.  
Like another ark, through thine exhortations, O Proclus, thou didst present the 
body of the all-blessed Chrysostom to the Church of Christ, gladdening the choirs of 
the Orthodox by its arrival.  
Ascending the great cathedra, O venerable one, with magnificent instructions thou 
didst adorn it in a most godly manner. Wherefore, assembling, we praise thee, O 
greatly wise and glorious hierarch Proclus.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to surpass the cherubim, O Virgin full of the 
grace of God; for He Who is borne upon their shoulders, O pure one, was borne also 
in thine arms. Wherefore, we all ever glorify thee, O Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”: 
Today, on the most eminent feast of the Theotokos * the whole world hath been 
filled with gladness, crying: ** She is the tabernacle of heaven!  
Ikos: The Creator, Fashioner and Master of all, Who bowed Himself down in the 
ineffable tender compassion of His love for mankind, and seeing that which He had 
fashioned with His own hands fallen, took pity, and wishing to raise it up by His 
condescension into a most divine building, in that He is good and by nature merciful, 
took Mary, the pure Virgin, and made her the mediatress of the mystery, and through 
her bore our nature, wherefore she is truly the tabernacle of heaven.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the Forefeast  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
The holy temple received thee as a radiant sun, shining forth with the radiance of 
salvation upon all the ends of the earth, O pure Virgin, who shalt contain the Son of 
God.  
Let us all clap our hands, beholding her who kneweth not wedlock bearing the 
images of deliverance; for by the hand of an angel, she who shall ineffably give birth 
for us to the Bread of life is fed.  
All the souls of the righteous beneath the earth proclaimed thee, O golden dove, 
and they declare thee to be her who beareth the calm which shall put an end to the 
noetic deluge wherefore she rejoiceth with piety in the Holy of holies.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
In that thou art beautiful, thou hast given birth to the Comely One Who restoreth 
our ugliness to its pristine beauty, O all-immaculate Maiden. To Him do we chant: O 
Lord God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God's condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
With the outpourings of thy tears thou didst quench the fire, O Gregory, pouring 
forth the water of dispassion and the pure beverage of healings upon those who 
chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Borne up by the perfection of honorable love as in a chariot of fire, thou didst 
mount to the summit, upon which thou didst acquire thy life, O divinely wise one, 
crying aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
With thy standing in all-night vigils thou didst still the threefold billows of the 
passions, and having fallen into the sleep of the righteous, thou hast passed over into 
the never-waning light, crying aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O pure virgin, thou who hast given birth to Light, enliven me who am 
perishing and dying through sin; save me and rescue me from Gehenna, who chant: 
O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; * 
for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so hath He 
wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou praised and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Having purified body, mind and soul by removing the passions, O wise hierarch 
Proclus, from thence thou didst declare the dogmas of God Who was born and 
received a body, soul and mind from the Virgin, without undergoing change, that He 
might save us.  
Having acquired boldness before Christ, O holy one, pray thou that those who 
with hymnody praise thy glorious memory on earth, hymning the praised and 
supremely glorious God, may be delivered from all manner of dangers.  
Having kindled a noetic fire in thy thoughts, thou didst utterly consume the vile 
heresy of the abominable Nestorius; wherefore, we beseech thee: having burned up 
the fuel of our pleasures by thy supplications to God, O glorious one, do thou cleanse 
us.  
Theotokion: O pure one, like the throne of the cherubim thou didst bear in thine 
embrace God Who became wrapped in the flesh, and Who beareth up all things by 
the word of His power. To Him do we chant in gladness: O all-hymned and 
supremely glorious God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
ODE VIII  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Hearken, O pure Virgin Maiden, * that Gabriel may tell thee the true 
counsel of the Most High of old. * Make ready to receive the Godhead; * for 
through thee the Infinite One hath come to dwell among mankind. * 
Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
“Hearken and understand, O wise elder,” Anna saith to Zachariah through divine 
counsel; “Accept the pure Maiden whom we have conceived, with valiant soul; for 
her sake shall deliverance come to pass. Let us lead her into the holy temple, crying 
aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!”  
“The Lord alone is blessed,” cried the priest; “Those who made declaration unto 
us now manifestly show us the gates of life, the divinely inhabited palace, wherein the 
Messiah, the King of all, shall make His abode. To Him doth all the earth cry aloud: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!”  
“Behold, O most wise elder,” Anna said with reverence, “receive with splendor the 
most comely Maiden whom God hath given me, and prophesy that she alone shall 
bring to a material end what was foretold. With the other prophets thou dost cry out: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!”  
“Now have I most clearly realized,” the elder said with understanding, “a tree will 
grow in the midst of the temple, which will truly issue forth a divine Fruit Who shall 
lead into paradise those who were driven out because they ate of the food of 
corruption, and who shall cry out with joy: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!”  
The elder manifestly spake words of ineffable teaching: “O pure Virgin Maiden, 
thy soul shall make its habitation in this divine temple; for, fed by an angel, thou shalt 
give birth to the Angel of great counsel, to Whom we chant: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!”  
With joy we chant to thee with the cry of Gabriel, O pure Maiden:' Rejoice, thou 
who alone art the cause of joy for all! Rejoice, cleansing of our souls, in that thou hast 
given birth to the deliverance of us who render praise in hymns to Him: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Patiently sending up thy supplications to God, thou didst receive that for which 
thou didst ask with faith, O all-blessed one; for when thou didst sleep at night, an 
angel appeared to thee, who gave thee a fiery sword which cutteth down the passions 
of thy heart, cleanseth thee with immaterial fire and illumining thee with ineffable 
glory.  
Like the most radiant sun hast thou shone noetically with the brilliant light of the 
virtues, O Gregory, illumining all the earth with the effulgence of thy miracles and 
enlightening those who piously chant: Ye children bless; ye priests chant; ye people 
supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages!  
Hearing the hymnody of the angels while still in thy mortal body, from which the 
senses of thy soul were manifestly delighted, O Gregory, thou wast shown to be godly 
and radiant of visage, crying out to the Master: Ye children bless; ye priests chant; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: O all-pure one who hast given birth to the Judge and Lord, Him do 
thou entreat as thy Son, at the hour of judgment, condemnation and fire, of darkness 
devoid of light and the gnashing of teeth, to deliver those who piously chant with 
faith: Ye priests chant; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone more 
brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed: Bless 
the Lord all ye works of the Lord, * hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Having cleansed the carnal passions like gold through purity in the glowing 
crucible, O all-glorious one, thou didst shine forth upon all, chanting: All ye works, 
hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Adorned by the sound of the instrument of thine honorable tongue, the Church of 
God: hymned the descent of the Savior to earth, manifestly singing for all to hear and 
crying: Thee do we supremely exalt, O Christ, throughout all ages!  
Thou hast truly been shown to be a divine harp whose music soundeth for all who 
with faith accept the saving incarnation of God for us, O blessed father Proclus, who 
chantest with faith: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
the ages!  
Theotokion: God the Master, preserving the tokens of thy virginity intact, O 
Virgin, passed through thee in a manner past understanding, that He might save those 
who cry: Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Behold, the holy mountain of God entereth the Holy of holies escorted with 
radiant lamps. From her shall be quarried the Stone which shall destroy the temples 
and idols of the demons and shall make mortals themselves into temples and 
honorable habitations of God.  
God hath sworn and shall now fulfill His vow, giving us the Ever-virgin from the 
tribe of Judah, whose womb shall put forth the Tree of Life which shall deliver those 
who fell through eating of the deadly fruit and were ruined by the deception of the 
serpent.  
With radiant mouth Anna cried out in the temple of God: “To Thee, O Master, do 
I offer the Maiden Thou hast given me, from whom, in Thine ineffable tender 
compassion, Thou shalt become a mortal man and shalt save the world which Thou 
hast created, magnifying her as Thy Mother!”  
Lo! the day of salvation hath dawned for those in the night of evils! The portal of 
heaven, the holy habitation of God, opening the gates of the temple, entereth into the 
Holy of holies accompanied by lighted lamps, to be nurtured by the holy hosts.  
Illumine the eyes of my soul, O pure one who hast given birth to the Light, lest the 
most profound darkness of sin overtake me, and the deep of despair cover me; but 
do thou thyself save me and guide me to the haven of the will of God.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God's ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin's womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
With the sweat of thy fasting thou didst quench the burning ember of sin, O wise 
one, and manifestly receive graced from heaven in the guise of fire which burneth 
not, but rather bedewed and showed thee to be one mighty in strength over the 
passions.  
Thou didst blossom like a rose, like a fragrant lily, amid the vales of fasting, O 
father Gregory. Wherefore, thou pourest forth fragrant myrrh, and thy bones 
abundantly perfume our life; for thy cheeks have been shown to be full, like a cup, of 
sweet fragrance.  
Today, the council of fasters and the venerable, the patriarchs and prophets, 
rejoice with us on thy memorial, O blessed one, and the apostles and martyrs 
celebrate with us. With them be thou mindful of those who honor thee with faith, O 
right wondrous one.  
The shrine wherein thy precious and much suffering body lieth, poureth forth the 
grace of miracles upon us, O father Gregory, sanctifying the souls and bodies of us 
who have been enriched by thee and have thee as an intercessor and fervent helper.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Theotokion: We, the faithful, with the cry of Gabriel joyfully cry aloud to thee: 
Rejoice, O garden of paradise who put forth the Tree of life! Rejoice, thou lifting of 
the curse, crown of martyrs, boast of the venerable and confirmation of the pious. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy pure 
birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * quench the 
raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may unceasingly 
magnify Thee. 
Passing by images and shadows, and truly understanding Christ, having been 
reborn in the baptismal font, thou wast anointed a most sacred priest. Wherefore, 
thou didst proclaim as Theotokos her who gave Him birth.  
Thou didst embrace the sacred character and dogmas of Chrysostom, O blessed 
one, and with his sacred zeal for the Faith, thou didst raise up from the noetic depths 
thy dogmas, which dry up the torrents of heresies with grace.  
By thy sacred prayers bring an end to the turmoil which riseth up against us, and 
dispel the darkness of the passions and the afflictions of all mankind, in that thou hast 
boldness before our Master and God.  
Theotokion: O thy wonders which pass understanding! For thou alone hast given 
birth supra-naturally to the Word of God, Who became flesh and wisely sustaineth, 
nurtureth, and preserveth all things by His divine will.  
Exapostilarion of venerable Gregory: 
Spec. Mel.: “While the disciples watched ...”:  
Thou wast a holy temple, O hierarch, and through divine communion thou hast 
now become a god and citizen of paradise, wherein thou dost partake directly of the 
tree of knowledge and incorruptible glory, mindful of those who with love and faith 
praise thee, O wise Gregory, sacred father.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
The temple doth now observe a day of pre-festival for the most pure entrance of 
Mary, the Theotokos, whom the angels hymn and we call blessed, and whom is 
accompanied by virgins, bearing lamps and rejoicing, into the temple of the Lord.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Come, ye faithful, and, assembling, * let us honor with hymns her * who was most 
gloriously born from a barren mother: * the divine Bride and Mother of the Creator; 
* and let us go forth with virgins and lamps to meet her ** as she entereth the Holy 
of holies of the temple.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
 
Verse: The virgins that follow after her shall be brought unto the King, * those 
near her shall be brought unto Thee.  
Having gathered the words of the Spirit * from noetic meadows, * like noetic 
flowers, * let us joyously weave wreaths of praise for the Virgin * and offer her a gift 
as is meet, ** on her forefeast.  
Verse: They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing, * they shall be 
brought into the temple of the King.  
Let the gates of the temple of the Lord be made ready, * and let them be opened; * 
and, rejoicing, let them receive the dwelling-place of glory, * her who alone 
transcendeth the heavens * in a manner transcending understanding; ** and let them 
hymn Christ the Savior.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., The composition of George of Nicomedia, in Tone I:  
Let heaven rejoice today from on high, and let the clouds rain down gladness for 
the exceeding glorious mighty works of our God; for, lo! the gate which faceth 
toward the East, having been born from the barren woman according to God's 
promise, hath been dedicated to God as His dwelling-place, and is today brought into 
the temple as an unblemished offering. Let David rejoice, striking his harp; for he 
said: Virgins shall follow after her, those near her shall be brought into the tabernacle 
of God, into His sanctuary, to be raised in the habitation of Him Who was 
incorruptibly begotten of the Father before all ages, for the salvation of our souls.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the forefeast.  
The virgin maidens who undertake to bear candles with splendor prefigure what is 
to come; for from her the enlightenment of knowledge will be born, Who looseth the 
darkness of deception.  
Anna of old, filled with divinely wise zeal, fulfilleth her vow and escorteth to the 
sanctuary thee, her most sacred offspring, who art to give birth unto God, O most 
immaculate one.  
The sun spread forth its rays, beholding the radiant cloud stretched forth at the 
behest of God within the Holy of holies, from whence remission will rain forth upon 
the stony passions.  
Having made His abode within thee in His tender compassion, O all-immaculate 
and pure one, God deifieth me who was seduced aforetime by the deception of the 
serpent and corruption; and hath again given me the food of incorruption.  
Strengthened by the grace of God, the parents of the divine Virgin lovingly 
surrender her, like a pure dove, to be raised in the Holy of holies.  
Lighting lamps, O pure one, the maidens, dancing, radiantly accompany thee to 
the temple of God, for thou art to receive the Light Who proceedeth from the Light.  
A palace full of glory, the great proclamation of the prophets, the holy throne, is 
led into the Holy of holies, making herself ready for the King of all.  
I hymn thy conception, O Maiden, I also hymn thine ineffable nativity; and I 
likewise hymn thy protection, whereby we who flee to thy serenity are delivered from 
all harm.  
Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Anna now beforehand doth betroth joy unto all, * bringing forth the only Ever-
virgin as a fruit assuaging grief, * and today bringeth her, rejoicing, * into the temple 
of the Lord, in fulfillment of her promise. ** For she is the pure Mother, the temple 
of God the Word.  
Troparion of the holy fathers, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Kontakion of the venerable Gregory, in Tone III: 
The Church knoweth thee to be a sun radiant with the beauties of the virtues, * 
illumining all with rays of healings, O favorite of Christ. * Wherefore, we celebrate 
thine honored memory * and honor thy struggles, ** O all-blessed and most wise 
father Gregory.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch Proclus, in Tone IV: 
Today the most honored of all cities * doth truly celebrate as is meet on the feast 
of thine honored repose, ** O wise Proclus, father of fathers.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Today, on the most eminent feast of the Theotokos * the whole world hath been 
filled with gladness, crying: ** She is the tabernacle of heaven!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the earth.  
 
EPISTLE OF THE DAY, AND THAT OF THE HOLY HIERARCH: 
HEBREWS, § 318(HEB. 7: 26, 8: 2)  
Brethren, such an high priest was fitting for us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; who needeth not daily, as 
those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people: 
for this he did once, when he offered up himself. For the law maketh men high 
priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, 
maketh the Son, who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have 
spoken this is the sum: We have such a high priest, who is set on the right hand of 
the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true 
tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom and his 
tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
 
GOSPEL OF THE DAY, AND THAT OF THE HOLY HIERARCH:  
JOHN § 36(JN. 10: 9-16)  
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: I am the door: by me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 
know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd.  
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
 
Be it known: if the forefeast of the Entrance of the most holy Theotokos falleth on a Sunday:  
On Saturday, at Little Vespers, the Stichera of the resurrection and the Theotokos as usual.  
At Great Vespers, after the usual Kathisma, on “Lord, 1 have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the 
resurrection, 3 of the forefeast, 3 of the venerable Gregory; Glory ..., of the forefeast; Both now 
..., the Dogmaticon of the current tone. The usual Stichera at the Litiya. On the Aposticha, 
Stichera of the resurrection; Glory ..., Both now ..., of the forefeast. At the blessing of the loaves, 
the Troparion: “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...” (Thrice).  
But if vigil not be served, we chant the Troparion of the resurrection. Glory ..., that of Saint 
Gregory, in Tone III:  
Thou wast a model of abstinence, illumining all with the divine Spirit Thou hast completed the 
race of the Orthodox Faith, enlightened the world with thy teaching and denounced the thoughts 
of the heretical. O venerable father Gregory, entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast.  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the resurrection, twice; Glory ..., that of Saint 
Gregory; Both now ..., of the forefeast. After the Kathismata, the Sessional Hymns of the 
resurrection with their Theotokia. Then, Polyeleos and the Evlogitaria, litany. the Hypacoi of the 
tone, song of ascents. Prokeimenon. Gospel of the resurrection, and the rest up to the canon. 
Canon of the resurrection. with 4 Troparia, including the Irmos; that of the Theotokos. with 2 
Troparia; that of the forefeast, with 4; and that of the venerable one. with 4. Katavasia: “I will 
open my mouth ...” After Ode III. the Kontakion of the forefeast, with its Ikos; and the 
Kontakion of Saint Gregory and his Sessional Hymn; Glory ..., Both now ..., that of the forefeast. 
After Ode VI. the Kontakion of the resurrection with its Ikos. Before Ode IX we chant the 
Magnificat. Exapostilarion of the resurrection; Glory ..., of Saint Gregory; Both now ..., of the 
forefeast. On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the resurrection, and 4 of the forefeast (the three of the 
Aposticha with their Doxasticon) using the Verse of the Aposticha; Glory , the evangelical 
Sticheron; Both now ...,”Most blessed art thou “ Great Doxology. After the Trisagion prayers, the 
Resurrectional Troparion alone. Litanies, dismissal and First Hour.  
In the First Hour. the Troparion of the resurrection; Glory ..., that of the forefeast; Both now 
..., the Theotokion of the Hour. After Our Father, the Kontakion of the forefeast. In the Third 
Hour, the Troparion of the resurrection; Glory ..., of Saint Gregory; Both now ..., the Theotokion 
of the Hour. After Our Father, the Kontakion of the resurrection. And thus also for the other 
Hours: we alternate the Kontakion of the resurrection and the forefeast.  
At Liturgy: On the Beatitudes, 10 Troparia: 6 for the resurrection from the current tone, and 4 
for the forefeast, from Ode m. At the entrance, the Troparia of: the resurrection and the forefeast; 
then that of the temple, if it be dedicated to a saint; then that of Saint Gregory. Kontakia: of the 
resurrection and the temple; Glory ..., of Saint Gregory; Both now ..., of the forefeast. Prokimena, 
epistles, alleluias, Gospels and communion hymns, of the resurrection, then of Saint Gregory. 
using the service for a venerable one.  
The service of the holy hierarch Proclus is then chanted whenever the ecclesiarch desireth. 
Troparion of the Hierarch, in Tone IV: 
O thou who wast made steadfast in the fear of the Lord by a divine beginning. from thence by 

--- PAGE 21 ---
sacred ascents thou didst rise to become a disciple of Chrysostom and didst become worthy of his 
hierarchal throne in the beauty of thy purity, having formed thyself according to the canons of the 
apostles, living not for thyself, but for Christ and thy flock. Wherefore, thou didst abide in life 
incorruptible like an apostle, O hierarch Proclus. Entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.  
 
