--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 27h DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER  
COMMEMORATION OF THE WONDERWORKING ICON OF THE MOST HOLY 
THEOTOKOS KNOWN AS THE KURSK-ROOT ICON OF THE SIGN  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera; five in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O all-hymned Virgin, * immaculate Mother of God the Word, * the astonishment 
of angels, and help of Christians, * be thou unto us an unassailable wall * against the 
assaults of enemies, visible and invisible, * stretching forth unto thy Son thy hands 
which held God, * destroying by thine almighty supplication * the counsels of the 
impious, ** and revealing the sign of thy mercy unto us.  
O Lady Theotokos, our hope unashamed, * bowing the knee of our hearts at this 
time, * we cry to thee in compunction: * The Russian land, which of old was called 
thy home, * do thou snatch from the hands of the devil, * stretching forth unto thy 
Son thy hands which held God, * by thy supplication * consuming all the dominion 
of the enemy, ** and revealing the sign of thy mercy unto us.  
O thou joy of all joys! * Most sweet consolation of those who sorrow! * Surety of 
sinners! * Salvation of the faithful * Lead us to the heavenly Kingdom, * 
compensating for our weaknesses by thine intercession; * intercede for us before the 
dread judgment seat of Christ, * delivering us from everlasting torment, ** and 
revealing the sign of thy mercy unto us.  
O wondrous tidings! * O most glorious sight! * An icon of the Theotokos hid 
within a grove, * and pouring forth a spring of living water * ever flowing to life 
eternal! * Wherefore, having found it, let us form a chorus, * and, clapping our hands 
with gladness, let us cry: * Rejoice, O most blessed one, ** for thou hast come unto 
us who are paupers!  
Sanctified by the wood of the Cross, * the trees of the forest pay homage * to the 
immaculate Mother * of Him Who stretched forth His hands upon the Tree; * for 
they preserved * the image of thy most pure face, * that being wondrously discovered, 
* the Church might be robed in its comeliness, ** and the faithful may be partakers of 
divine grace.  
And these Stichera, in Tone III:  
O all ye generations of the earth, bless Mary the Theotokos: Ye righteous and 
sinners, form one choir for her; ye virgins, hymn the ever-Virgin, the boast of 
virginity; ye mothers, praise the Mother of our Creator and God; ye elders, bow down 
before her who gave flesh to the Ancient of Days; ye babes, glorify her who hath held 
the pre-eternal Infant in her arms; ye poor, magnify her who doth possess a wealth of 
mercy and grace; ye kings, exalt the Queen of heaven and earth; and kissing her 
precious image, let us cry aloud: Rejoice, O inexhaustible joy and salvation of our 
souls!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
O Lady, thy most precious icon hath appeared as a sign of thy good pleasure unto 
us, whereat, bending down as to a life-bearing spring, we draw forth the water of 
immortality, and freely receive divers healings; and worshiping thee, the prototype, we 
cry in faith: O most holy Theotokos, save us!  
O most pure Virgin: the light, joy and protection of our souls, thou art the 
estrangement from sorrows and remission of sins, the fulfillment of humble requests 
and ever-flowing fount of grace, O immaculate one. Wherefore, falling down before 
thee, we pray: Cease not to cry to thy Son and God for us, that being delivered by 
thee from misfortunes, we may obtain great mercy from Christ the Lord.  
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., in Tone I:  
Forming a most festive choir today, come ye, let us hymn the Virgin Theotokos; 
and, kissing her most pure image, let us cry: O most holy Lady, deliver thine 
inheritance from cruel enemies, and strengthen the faithful in the doing of good, 
entreating thy Son and God for all.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the Day. Three Lessons:  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS 
And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran. And he lighted 
upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took 
of the stones of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to 
sleep. And he dreamed, and behold, a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it 
reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it. 
And, behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy 
father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to 
thy seed; and thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth; and thou shalt be spread 
abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee 
and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed. And, behold, I am with 
thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into 
this land; for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee 
of. And Jacob awakened out of his sleep, and he said, surely the Lord is in this place; 
and I knew it not. And he was afraid, and said, how dreadful is this place! This is 
none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL  
And when these days are expired, it shall be, that upon the eighth day, and so 
forward, the priests shall make your burnt offerings upon the altar, and your peace 
offerings: and I will accept you, saith the Lord God. Then he brought me back the 
way of the gate of the outward sanctuary which looketh toward the east; and it was 
shut. Then said the Lord unto me; this gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and 
no man shall enter in by it; because the Lord the God of Israel hath entered in by it, 

--- PAGE 3 ---
therefore it shall be shut. It is for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread 
before the Lord; he shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate, and shall go out 
by the way of the same. Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the 
house; and I looked, and, behold, the glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord; 
and I fell upon my face.  
READING FROM THE PROVERBS (9:1-11)  
Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars: she hath 
killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine; she hath also furnished her table. She 
hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth upon the highest places of the city, Whoso is 
simple, let him turn in hither: as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, 
Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled. Forsake the 
foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding. He that reproveth a scorner 
getteth to himself shame; and he that rebuketh a wicked man getteth himself a blot. 
Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee; rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. 
Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser; teach a just man, and he will 
increase in learning. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and the 
knowledge of the Holy is understanding. For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and 
the years of thy life shall be increased.  
At the Litiya, these Stichera, in Tone I:  
Come, all ye peoples of our native land, let us hasten to the temple of the Lord; let 
us praise the all-hymned Mother of our God, and bow down before her most pure 
image in faith, for it hath now been given to the Russian land as a pledge of salvation. 
Wherefore, radiantly keeping the feast thereof, let us unceasingly cry out to the 
Theotokos: Rejoice, ready help of the world, thou joy and salvation of our souls!  
Laying aside all earthly care, and forsaking the vanity of the world, let us lift up our 
eyes unto the holy hill, from whence cometh our help; for lo! the Queen of heaven, 
standing at the right hand of her Son and God, doth pray without ceasing. Wherefore, 
let us, who have been delivered from misfortune by her intercessions, be glad, and 
say: Rejoice, our fervent helper, thou salvation of our souls!  
In Tone II:  
Let us be filled today with great joy, and giving thanks with compunction let us cry 
out in fear and trembling: Why is this granted to us, that the Mother of our God hath 
come to us? For lo! her healing icon abideth in our midst, and we dare to touch it, to 
bow down before it, to kiss it, and to offer entreaty to its prototype, as to one that is 
truly with us. Wherefore, marveling at her condescension, we cry: Rejoice, O Virgin 
Theotokos, full of grace!  
In Tone VII:  
Come, all ye that labor and are heavy laden; come, ye who weep and mourn; come, 
ye who have lacked patience; come, ye poor and afflicted! Fall down before the icon 

--- PAGE 4 ---
of the most pure Virgin, and receive ye, each according to his need; for lo! the all-
hymned Theotokos giveth all to each abundantly. She is the healing of the infirm, the 
most sweet consolation of those who grieve, the forgiveness of sinners and the salva-
tion of all who have recourse to her in faith.  
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., in Tone VI:  
When the fullness of time shall come; when the trumpet of the archangel shall 
sound; then the thrones of judgment shall be set, and the rivers of fire shall make a 
fearsome noise; the dead will arise and the living shall be caught up, and the sign of 
the Son of man shall appear in heaven, all the inhabitants of the earth shall weep, and 
all the powers of heaven shall be shaken. Then shall the Virgin Theotokos, the 
salvation of sinners and hope of the hopeless, appear, standing at the right hand of 
the Judge, stretching forth her most pure hands to her Son, mercifully bedewing her 
cheeks with tears, and delivering from everlasting torment those who call upon her 
all-hymned name. Therefore, brethren, let us now make haste, and delay not in 
approaching the Theotokos, that she, upon whom we place all our hope, may help us 
at that dreadful hour.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone I:  
Truly thou pourest forth rivers of grace from thine icon, O Theotokos! For lo! 
even at the site of its discovery, a spring of healing water hath appeared. Thou dost 
quench the spiritual thirst of all who have recourse to thee in love, washing away sins, 
and granting us to draw forth joy and gladness.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
At the root of a tree the image of her that budded forth the Tree of life was found. 
Wherefore, on the site of its appearance, a monastery was planted, like a spiritual 
orchard, wherein the all-hymned name of its prototype was glorified, supplications for 
the whole world were ceaselessly offered up, and men worked out their salvation with 
fear. 
 Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
Having the warriors of heaven as aides, and the Virgin Theotokos as an invincible 
commander, let us array ourselves against the enemies of our salvation, armed with 
the precious Cross, crying out to the most blessed one: Deprive us not of thy mighty 
assistance, for we have placed our hope on thee, that we be not put to shame forever.  
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., in Tone V: 
O Virgin Theotokos, how much more powerful than the hands of Moses are thy 
most pure hands, ever raised to God on our behalf? Wherefore, thou dost vanquish 
an enemy more powerful than Amalek, routing the very prince of darkness and his 
minions, granting victory to those who piously war against the passions, and showing 
them forth as heirs of the new promised land, wherein righteousness doth dwell.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Having acquired thee as an unassailable rampart * and a fount of miracles, * we, 
thy servants, set at naught armies of adversaries, * O most pure Theotokos. * 
Wherefore, do we entreat thee: * Grant peace to our native land ** and great mercy 
to our souls!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Having acquired thee as an unassailable rampart * and a fount of miracles, * we, 
thy servants, set at naught armies of adversaries, * O most pure Theotokos. * 
Wherefore, do we entreat thee: * Grant peace to our native land ** and great mercy 
to our souls! (Thrice)  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
We are thy servants, O Theotokos, having abandoned our slavery to sin forever 
and bowed our necks beneath the easy yoke of Christ. Wherefore, we hope to obtain 
the freedom of the children of God by thy fervent intercession for us, that 
unceasingly rejoicing in thee we may cry to thy Son and our God: O our Savior, glory 
be to Thee! 
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., in the same tone: 
Rejoice, thou who art robed with the sun and dost shine ineffably with glory! 
Rejoice, Mother of the Almighty, who hath revealed to the world the pre-eternal 
Word and who most gloriously crushed the head of the serpent, that by thy 
birthgiving the race of Adam hath been freed from corruption! Rejoice, thou who 
alone art ever-Virgin even after giving birth!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
O ye faithful, with one voice let us hymn today her who bestoweth the gifts of her 
mercy abundantly upon all in need, who taketh under her mighty protection all who 
flee unto her, and who in her maternal love doth embrace the wicked as well as the 
good. Wherefore, come, ye monks and layfolk, ye rich and poor, and forming one 
choir, let the Church of heaven and earth celebrate together, crying out with one 
voice to the Theotokos, and exclaiming: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace, the 
Lord is with thee!  
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., the foregoing is repeated..  
After the Polyeleos, this Magnification: Meet it is to magnify thee, O 
Theotokos, more honorable than the cherubim and beyond compare more 
glorious than the seraphim.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: O God, give Thy judgment to the king, and thy righteousness to the son of 
the king.  
Then, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
The most radiant feast of the Theotokos is at hand today, whereon the spiritual 
light of the world hath shone forth in her nativity, and wherein a great treasure hath 
been given to our land in the appearance of the most glorious icon of the Theotokos, 
bowing down before whom with fear we now cry aloud: Rejoice, O Virgin, thou 
salvation of the faithful!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
The Song of Ascents, the first Antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation 
and generation.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
“Let every breath praise the Lord. “  
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (1:39-49, 56)  
And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city 
of Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came 
to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her 
womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost: and she spake out with aloud 
voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 
And whence is this to me that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo!, as 
soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my 
womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of 
those things which were told her from the Lord. And Mary said, My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For he hath regarded 
the low estate of his handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall 
call me blessed. For he that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is his 
name. And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone II: 
Rejoice now, O monastery of Kursk! Adorn thyself and dance, O Russian land! 
For lo! the Queen of heaven herself with a most pure countenance doth dwell in thy 
midst by her grace, pouring forth her mercies abundantly upon the faithful. 
Wherefore, she doth hear from all unceasingly: Rejoice, O Theotokos Mary, thou 
wonder of wonders!  
The Canon to the Theotokos, in Tone IV, with six Troparia, including the Irmos; the 
acrostic whereof is: “I dare to offer thee praise, O Theotokos”:  
ODE I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
Disdain not my lowliness, O Theotokos, and compensate for my weakness; 
sanctify my heart and mind, and open thou my lips, that I may make bold to offer 
thee a hymn.  
With heartfelt faith we honor thy most pure image, and bowing down before it 
with compunction, as though beholding thee, the Theotokos, in very truth, and 
shedding drops of tears, we cry aloud: Rejoice, O Mary, full of grace, blessed Mother 
of God!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Emulating the angelic hosts, let us surround thine image with fear and love, 
magnifying thee, the prototype, together, and calling upon thy most sweet name: 
Rejoice, O all-immaculate Bride of God!  
Come, O ye faithful, and let us kiss the holy icon of the Mother of God with love, 
for she doth pour forth healings therefrom abundantly, and doth work innumerable 
miracles for those who have recourse to it with faith and love. Wherefore we cry out 
to the ever-Virgin: Rejoice!  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
The eyes of our mind rushing headlong into the abyss of the ages, we see there 
thine icon, O most pure one, shining more brightly than the sun with rays of mercy, 
illumining thy home, the Russian land, O Theotokos. Wherefore, we cry unto thee: 
Rejoice, O our protection and defense!  
In its bosom the dark oak of Kursk kept the radiant wonder, the most pure icon of 
the Mother of God, which had been cut in twain by the impious and grew back 
together through the power of God. Wherefore, recovering it like a great treasure, the 
Russian people cried out: Rejoice, O our protection and defense! 
Whence is this, that the most blessed Mother of God cometh unto us? A spring of 
living water sprang forth at the place where the image of the Theotokos abode, 
refreshing the faithful with streams of healing and curing every wound and infirmity. 
Wherefore, we cry aloud to her who is full of grace: Rejoice, thou true life-bearing 
fount!  
At the root of a tree was discovered the icon of her who ineffably gave rise to the 
Tree of life and budded forth for the world the blessed Fruit. Wherefore, now 
celebrating the feast of its appearance, we cry out to the most pure one: O most 
blessed Lady, sever our evil passions at the root, implanting in us good habits, setting 
out a garden of virtues in us, granting us to be partakers of the life of paradise!  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
What feast is more radiant or more beautiful than those of the most pure Mother 
of God? And what name, apart from the name of sweetest Jesus, is more sweet than 
the name of Mary? For lo! surpassing all the choirs of angels in purity and glory, 
resplendent as the Mother of the Almighty, she embraceth the whole world, saving 
sinners and leading the righteous to the heavenly mansions, she casteth down enemies 
and most gloriously crusheth the head of the serpent. Wherefore, we cry out to her: 
Every creature doth rejoice in thee, O thou who art full of grace! Glory be to thee!  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE IV  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Today the Church of Russia doth celebrate, adorned in a godly manner with the 
glory of the newly-revealed icon of the Theotokos; and chanting divinely beauteous 
hymns, it calleth to all the faithful, saying: Come, let us rejoice in the Mother of our 
God, and let us bow down before her precious image, through which the most pure 
Virgin doth richly bestow gifts of grace upon the Christian people who cry aloud: 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
O chosen one of the Mother of God, venerable Father Seraphim, ever-vigilant 
intercessor for the Russian land, thou seest our fervent eagerness, thou hearest the 
entreaties we offer up before the most pure icon, through which, as a grievously 
suffering child, thou wast granted healing. Wherefore, stand thou with us, lifting up 
thy venerable hands, and cry out on our behalf to the Theotokos, that for thy sake 
she may be well pleased to accept our prayers.  
By thy divine power thou didst confound the mad scheme of the impious atheists 
to destroy thine icon, O Lady, and didst preserve it unharmed by any destructive 
action; and while the earth quaked and pillars were cast down, thine icon but turned, 
averting its face from the vile deeds of men. Wherefore, marveling at this most 
glorious wonder, we earnestly entreat thee: Turn not thy most pure face away from 
us, for lo! with contrite hearts we flee to thee and weep, and cry out in compunction: 
Let not our wickedness prevail over thy tender compassion, but have mercy and save 
us!  
Thou didst preserve thy precious icon unharmed by the hands of the evildoers and 
cruel atheists who trampled down the holy things of God, and upon thy people didst 
thou bestow it, which we keep as the apple of our eye. Wherefore, O Lady, do thou 
ever reveal the sign of thy mercy unto us therein.  
ODE V  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Let us radiantly celebrate this light-bearing day, whereon a spiritual ray hath shone 
forth unto the salvation of the world in the nativity of the most pure Bride of God, 
whereon also the icon of the Theotokos, like the morning star, announcing the day of 
deliverance, hath appeared to the land of Russia which languished in the darkness of 
misfortunes and sorrows. Wherefore, we cry to the most blessed one: Rejoice, for 
thou hast lighted a beacon of hope for us which cannot be extinguished! 
  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Where sin increaseth, there doth the grace of God exceedingly abound. Wherefore, 
O Lady, look down upon our weakness, see our boundless abasement, but behold 
also our faith, and hearken to our cry; and hasten thou to assist us who are helpless, 
illumining us with thy mercy.  
Let us not fear the dark powers of Hades, but having put on the armor of light, let 
us manfully stand against them, having the all-hymned Theotokos as commander. For 
lo! she doth mightily war against the enemy, helping the faithful who call upon her 
most pure name.  
We confess thee in truth to be the Theotokos, and we honor the form of thy most 
pure countenance in an Orthodox manner. We turn away from every sin and vile act; 
we pray to be granted to do good, and, humbling our souls, we cry: Most holy 
Theotokos, save us!  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Let despondency depart from us, O brethren, and let the showers of adverse 
thoughts be dispelled by the Spirit of God; for lo! the Mother of God herself doth 
openly dwell amongst us, worshipped in her wonderworking icon, and shining 
brighter than the sun in the miracles that proceed therefrom. Wherefore, we cry out 
from the depths of our hearts: O most holy Lady, ever abide with us in thy grace!  
When temptation doth assail us, when we fall into sorrow and pain, when patience 
doth fail within us and our spirit is troubled, let us make haste to the image of the 
most holy Virgin and, pouring forth tears, cry out to her from our hearts: Stretch 
forth thy hands which held God unto us, and lead us up from the abyss of evil!  
O thou who didst bear the everlasting Joy of the world, thou art the joy of joys 
who hast driven away the grief of sin and dost grant our troubled souls divine relief. 
Cease not thy supplications for the Christian world, for, after God, it is through thee 
that each is saved and led forth from the depths of offenses.  
Lo! the hordes of evil demons that besiege Christians stand far off, watching, not 
daring to approach, fearing the glory of the icon of the Theotokos, which burneth the 
vile demons, but doth mightily aid the faithful, protecting them from all enemies.  
Kontakion, in Tone VI: 
Come, ye faithful, let us radiantly celebrate * the wondrous appearance of the most 
precious image of the Mother of God, * and drawing grace therefrom, * let us cry out 
with compunction: * Rejoice, O Theotokos, ** blessed Mary, Mother of God!  
Ikos: Through thee, O Theotokos, the pre-eternal Word was made flesh; through 
thee men have beheld the Sun of righteousness, upon Whom the angels dare not 

--- PAGE 11 ---
gaze: for in thine arms was borne Him Whom the cherubim bear aloft, and by thy 
most pure hands was held the Almighty Creator of all. O daughter of mortal Adam, 
thou wast called the one who gaveth birth to God. Wherefore, as one who alone hath 
maternal boldness before Him, pause not in thy prayers for the whole world, lifting 
up thy God-pleasing hands to thy Son, and inclining His love for mankind towards 
thy servants who cry out to thee with thankful mouths: Rejoice, O Theotokos, 
blessed Mary, Mother of God!  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
The angels in thy service revere thee, the seraphim glorify thee in fear, O 
Theotokos; and how can we who dwell on earth dare to hymn thee with our impure 
lips? Yet we hope in thy mercy, and through thee unceasingly cry out to the Master 
and Creator of all: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
O Christ, accept Thy most pure Mother whom Thou hast given us as a help and 
who now doth fervently pray for us, that having attained unto life everlasting through 
her intercessions, we may cry aloud with all who have obtained salvation: O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
O Lord, Who callest Thy Mother blessed, be Thou entreated by her intercessions, 
and may the light of Thy countenance be signed upon us, that, rising from the sleep 
of sin, we may piously begin to walk towards the day, unceasingly crying out in our 
hearts: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Emulating the children in Babylon, let us not bow down before the golden image 
of man-pleasing and Mammon, but let us venerate the image of the immaculate 
Mother of our God and, filled with heavenly joy, let us cry out to Christ, the 
Benefactor of all: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
With unceasing voices the seraphim hymn thee, O ever-Virgin; the choirs of the 
saints know not their fill of thy praises; all creation doth glorify thee without ceasing. 
And shall we alone remain silent? Yet, daring to hope on thy mercy, though 
unworthy, we glorify thee throughout all ages.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
All creatures shall in no wise cease to rejoice in thee, O Theotokos; for lo! as the 
Apostle hath said, tongues may cease and knowledge vanish away, but love never 
faileth. Wherefore, throughout all ages they shall chant praises offered to thee in love.  
Tell us, O most pure one, what fitting praise can our infirmity offer thee? With 
what eyes dare we gaze upon thy precious image? Yet, as thou art good, disdain not 
now our hymns, and in the land of our earthly sojourn reveal to us the form of thy 
most radiant countenance, that we may glorify thee throughout all ages.  
Surrounding thine ever-adored image in fear and love, O Sovereign Lady, laying 
aside all earthly cares and raising our spiritual eyes to the heavens, we taste the 
sweetness of paradise aforetime, which do thou grant us to enjoy that, obtaining 
everlasting life and salvation, we may joyfully hymn thee throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
O all-hymned Virgin, accept our hymns as thy Son did the widow’s mite, and grant 
us ever to offer them to thee, guiding our life in the world and granting remission of 
sins, that entering the heavenly mansions through thee, we may magnify thy loving-
kindness.  
Let those who do not confess thee to be the Theotokos and who do not honor 
thine icons be everlastingly put to shame; but let the faithful rejoice in thee. Let the 
Russian land be thine abode as of old; let holy monasteries abound and churches be 
beautifully adorned; and let the people be sanctified, that they may celebrate with 
gladness, magnifying thee.  
O Theotokos, our Queen, standing at the right hand of Christ God in the 
Kingdom of heaven, establish thou a Christian kingdom on earth, setting at naught 
the counsels of the impious and strengthening faith and piety, that all who dwell on 
earth may magnify thee with one mind.  
Have we offered thee a worthy hymn, O Lady? Have we glorified thy precious 
icon as is due? For we know that even hymns a thousand-fold do not suffice for thy 
glorification, O Virgin. For if we hearken to the fervor of our hearts, our hymns 
should only be beginning. What, therefore, shall we do? We are at a loss and are in 
doubt. We glorify the sign of thy mercy, yet with never silent lips and heartfelt love 
we ever hymn and magnify thee.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III:  
O Virgin Theotokos, thou most radiant sun, kindle the inextinguishable beacon of 
the faith of Christ in our land by thy grace, that thereby light may be cast upon 
darkness and the hearts of the faithful may rejoice therein, giving thanks to Christ, the 
Lover of mankind, and granting to all great mercy.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., in the same tone: 
By my sins have I put aside the robe of baptism. How can I enter in unto the 
banquet of the Lord, having no wedding garment, if thou, O Theotokos, dost not 
cover me with thy mantle and utter a word to the King of glory on my behalf, wretch 
that I am? Wherefore, placing my hope on thee alone, I stretch forth my hands to 
thee: Do thou hearken, and protect and help me!  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Bowing the knee of our hearts, and lifting up our eyes to the holy hill, let us fall 
down before the face of the most pure Theotokos, confessing our weakness, asking 
her all-powerful aid, and commending our life to her fervent intercession. For we 
believe that she who hath wiped every tear from the face of the earth will not reject 
our entreaty. (Twice)  
What hymns shall we sing to thee, O Theotokos? What gifts shall we offer thee? 
Thou beholdest our spiritual poverty. Yet accept thou our teardrops as a pearl of 
great price, and our prayer and heartfelt sighing as incense; and turn thou our grief 
into joy, for thou art the most sweet consolation of the faithful!  
All things are possible for thee when thou prayest to thy Son and God, O Lady; 
and none can stand against thy maternal boldness, for there is no sin that doth 
vanquish thy tender compassion. Wherefore, we flee to thy mighty protection, hoping 
on thy most powerful intercession; and, after God, we commend ourselves, each 
other and all our life unto thee.  
Glory ..., Now & ever ..., in Tone V: 
Pray thou fervently for the whole world, O Theotokos, for it is in need of thine 
aid, for the snares of the evil one have spread over the face of all the earth, the 
nations rage and storms of temptations have risen against the Church of God. 
Wherefore, as once in Cana of Galilee, speak thou a word to thy Son, that He 
transform the water of temptations and sorrows into the wine of compunction and 
divine gladness.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia, four each from Odes III and VI of the Canon.  
The eyes of our mind rushing headlong into the abyss of the ages, we see there 
thine icon, O most pure one, shining more brightly than the sun with rays of mercy, 
illumining thy home, the Russian land, O Theotokos. Wherefore, we cry unto thee: 
Rejoice, O our protection and defense!  
In its bosom the dark oak of Kursk kept the radiant wonder, the most pure icon of 
the Mother of God, which had been cut in twain by the impious and grew back 
together through the power of God. Wherefore, recovering it like a great treasure, the 
Russian people cried out: Rejoice, O our protection and defense! 
Whence is this, that the most blessed Mother of God cometh unto us? A spring of 
living water sprang forth at the place where the image of the Theotokos abode, 
refreshing the faithful with streams of healing and curing every wound and infirmity. 
Wherefore, we cry aloud to her who is full of grace: Rejoice, thou true life-bearing 
fount!  
At the root of a tree was discovered the icon of her who ineffably gave rise to the 
Tree of life and budded forth for the world the blessed Fruit. Wherefore, now 
celebrating the feast of its appearance, we cry out to the most pure one: O most 
blessed Lady, sever our evil passions at the root, implanting in us good habits, setting 
out a garden of virtues in us, granting us to be partakers of the life of paradise!  
Let despondency depart from us, O brethren, and let the showers of adverse 
thoughts be dispelled by the Spirit of God; for lo! the Mother of God herself doth 
openly dwell amongst us, worshipped in her wonderworking icon, and shining 
brighter than the sun in the miracles that proceed therefrom. Wherefore, we cry out 
from the depths of our hearts: O most holy Lady, ever abide with us in thy grace!  
When temptation doth assail us, when we fall into sorrow and pain, when patience 
doth fail within us and our spirit is troubled, let us make haste to the image of the 
most holy Virgin and, pouring forth tears, cry out to her from our hearts: Stretch 
forth thy hands which held God unto us, and lead us up from the abyss of evil!  
O thou who didst bear the everlasting Joy of the world, thou art the joy of joys 
who hast driven away the grief of sin and dost grant our troubled souls divine relief. 
Cease not thy supplications for the Christian world, for, after God, it is through thee 
that each is saved and led forth from the depths of offenses.  
Lo! the hordes of evil demons that besiege Christians stand far off, watching, not 
daring to approach, fearing the glory of the icon of the Theotokos, which burneth the 
vile demons, but doth mightily aid the faithful, protecting them from all enemies.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Having acquired thee as an unassailable rampart * and a fount of miracles, * we, 
thy servants, set at naught armies of adversaries, * O most pure Theotokos. * 
Wherefore, do we entreat thee: * Grant peace to our native land ** and great mercy 
to our souls!  
Kontakion, in Tone VI: 
Come, ye faithful, let us radiantly celebrate * the wondrous appearance of the most 
precious image of the Mother of God, * and drawing grace therefrom, * let us cry out 
with compunction: * Rejoice, O Theotokos, ** blessed Mary, Mother of God!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: The hymn of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE HEBREWS (9:1-7)  
Brethren, verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a 
worldly sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candles 
tick, and the table, and the showbread; which is called the sanctuary. And after the 
second veil, the tabernacle which is called the holiest of all; which had the golden 
censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the 
golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the 
covenant; and over it the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy seat; of which we 
cannot now speak particularly . Now when these things were thus ordained, the 
priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But 
into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which 
he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people.  
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (10:38-42; 11:27-28) 
Now it came to pass, as they went, that (Jesus) entered into a certain village: and a 
certain woman named Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister 
called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard his word. But Martha was 
cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care 
that my sister hath left me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me. And 
Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled 

--- PAGE 16 ---
about many things: but one thing is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, 
which shall not be taken away from her. And it came to pass, as he spake these things, 
a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the 
womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked. But he said, Yea, rather, 
blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.  
 
Communion Verse: I shall receive the cup of salvation, and call upon the name 
of the Lord.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
