--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 29th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR PARAMON, COMMEMORATION OF 
THE VENERABLE ACACIUS, WHO IS MENTIONED IN “THE LADDER”  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
Manifestly illumined * with the effulgence of the divine Spirit, * O all-blessed 
Paramon, * thou didst utterly revile * the utter darkness of polytheism, * and, 
receiving a convenient time, O all-blessed one, * with valiant mind thou didst 
approach the sufferings * which lay before thee; * and, revealed to be victorious, * 
thou didst cast down the prideful foe of all mortals, * magnifying Christ. * Him do 
thou entreat, ** that He save and enlighten our souls.  
Having witnessed * a great multitude slaughtered * for the King and God of all, O 
Paramon, * thou didst burn with divine zeal and cry aloud: * “I am ever a true servant 
of Christ! * Understand, ye all-iniquitous tyrants, * for, summoned, lo! I have now 
come * to be slain like an innocent lamb! * Wherefore, be ye not mistaken. * I am 
defenselessly become * an acceptable sacrifice * to Him Who was slain in the flesh ** 
for my sake, of His own will.”  
The honored choir of spiritual athletes, * three hundred seventy in number, * with 
faith cast down the delusion * of the polytheism of the all-iniquitous; * and with them 
thou also wast crowned, * having struggled with valiant mind, * O Paramon, * and, 
rejoicing, didst join * the choirs of the incorporeal ones. * With them do thou pray, * 
that we who honor and ever bless thee * may be delivered ** from all sorrow and 
perils.  
But if Alleluia is to be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we sing first 
the following Stichera of the Theotokos, in the same melody:  
In his condescension and for the salvation of mankind, * God the Son, Who was 
begotten timelessly * from the beginningless Father, * became a man, * that He might 
grant paradise again to the first-formed: * and that all nature may be delivered * from 
the delusion of the serpent, * and, as One easily placated, * He saveth His fallen 
image. * Wherefore, He hath made His Mother * a pure virginal Bride, undefiled. * 
Her do we all bless ** as our anchor and haven.  
In thy womb, O blessed of God, * thou didst bear the Creator of all, * Who, 
becoming incarnate, hath restored mankind * who before had fallen through the 
temptation of the serpent. * For unto us thou ineffably hast given birth * to God in 
the flesh, * and by thy birthgiving, * freed from corruption * our whole nature, which 
hath grown old. * Wherefore, we hymn and glorify thy grace, * O Virgin who knewest 
not wedlock. * Cease thou never to pray, ** that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
That thou mayest disclose to us all * the magnitude of thy mercy * and the 
boundless depths of thy goodness, * wash away all the sins of thy servants; * for, as 
Mother of God, * O all-immaculate one, * thou hast the authority to form, * and thou 
directest all things as thou desirest, * by thy power; * for the grace of the Holy Spirit * 
which dwelt within thee * ever aideth with thee in all things, ** O thou supremely 
blessed one.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The Son who together with the Father and the Spirit * is glorified in the highest by 
the Seraphim, * wishing to refashion the First-formed man, * ineffably emptied His 
entire being into thy womb, * O all-praised Theotokos. * Dawning forth from thee * 
He hath enlightened the whole world * by His Godhead, * delivering it from the 
deception of idolatry, * and by this He hath rendered * the race of mankind divine, * 
having raised it on high to the heavens; ** Christ God the Savior of our souls. 
Stavrotheotokion, in the same melody:  
Stavrotheotokion: “Lament not for Me, O Mother, * beholding Me thy Son and 
God hanging upon the Tree, * Who hath suspended * the earth upon the waters 
unsupported, * and hath fashioned all creation; * for I shall arise and be glorified, * 
and shall crush the kingdoms of Hades with strength; * destroying its power * and 
delivering those in bondage * from its wickedness, * for I am compassionate; * and I 
shall bring them to My Father, ** in that I am the Lover of mankind.”  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT COMPLINE  
Canon of the venerable Acacius, the acrostic whereof is: “With songs do I hymn 
Acacius, the chosen and obedient one”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Clothed in a character of innocence, thou didst acquire the noble beauty of the 
virtues, emulating the willing obedience of Christ even unto death, O all-blessed one.  
By thy guilelessness thou didst put to shame the author of evil, O father, and by 
thine endurance of temptations thou didst humble to the ground his arrogant and 
vaunted malice.  
Having first learned patient asceticism, O venerable one, cutting down the 
beginnings of the passions, thou wast later arrayed in the vesture of dispassion, 
covered with divine grace.  
Having strengthened the state of thy soul with steadfast patience and a valiant 
mind, O all-blessed one, thou didst endure the struggle of martyrdom all thy days, 
and wast shown to be crowned.  
Theotokion: As Isaiah announced prophetically, O most pure one, the God and 
Lord Who for our sake became incarnate and was born from thee, is our creative 
hope and song.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Offering thyself wholly to thy Creator and God, O venerable one, thou didst 
endure tyrannical maltreatment.  
Thou didst lawfully show forth a spiritual athlete's endurance on earth, O ascetic; 
wherefore, heavenly gladness hath been granted thee.  
O most blessed one, thou didst strictly maintain true humility, long-suffering, 
patience, abstinence and obedience.  
Theotokion: The Creator of all Who for our sake took on our form, O most pure 
and most holy Bride of God, received animate flesh from thee.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Having mortified carnal-mindedness, O father Acacius, thou didst enliven thy 
soul, and received a crown of righteousness, crying aloud: Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Undertaking lengthy struggles, O father, thou didst show forth patient opposition 
all thy days; wherefore, after death thou didst cry out like one alive: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  
With steadfast mind thou didst endure tyrannical treatment for Christ, O blessed 
Acacius, mindful of how He was nailed to the Cross for the salvation of our race.  
Theotokion: Thou art more pure than the heavens and the noetic hosts, O most 
pure one, having given birth to their Creator; wherefore, we cry out to thee: Rejoice, 
O all-hymned Theotokos!  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Manfully bearing the infliction of stripes and mightily enduring beatings all thy 
days, O venerable one, thou didst repose in holiness.  
Having finished the good race, O guileless Acacius, thou hast received rest, free of 
toils and sufferings.  
Nourishing thy mind with pure thought, O God-bearing Acacius, thou didst 
hasten well to the Cause of all.  
Theotokion: Neither the mind of an angel nor that of a man can describe thy 
birthgiving; for it transcendeth every rational attainment.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons' * by 
the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 
Thou hast slept a blessed sleep, O blessed father, and after death revealed thyself 
to hearken unto those who queried thee, for thou didst possess undying obedience.  
Having finished thy good struggles, O divinely wise namesake of incorruption, 
thou wast truly deemed worthy of immortality, where, rejoicing, thou hast received 
crowns of victory.  
The divine, goodly and God-pleasing asceticism of thy life, O blessed Acacius, 
maketh many steadfast by fear of God and the expectation of the good things which 
are to come.  
Theotokion: With faith do we glorify thee as the true Theotokos, who didst 
conceive God and hast given birth without knowing wedlock to Him Who of thee 
fashioned a pleasing holy temple.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
By the radiance of faith and active light thou wast truly shown to be angelic on 
earth, O all-wise Acacius, manfully showing forth the strength of thy mind and by 
fasting putting down the assaults of the passions. Wherefore, even after thy repose 
thou wast shown to be like one alive, O invincible one.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Proceeding toward the Master with all thy desire, O venerable one, thou didst 
endure vexation, dishonor and stripes, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of 
Thy glory, O Lord!  
Setting thy thoughts on the sufferings and crucifixion of thy Master, and being 
mindful of death, wounded thou didst chant: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, O Lord!  
Lying in the grave, dead, bereft of breath, according to the law of those who die, in 
a manner transcending nature thou didst answer him who spoke to thee, as though 
thou hadst not died, crying: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: O virgin who hast given birth to our true Life, thou hast restored 
mortals who have been held fast under the law, and who cry: Blessed art thou among 
women, O all-immaculate Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
With mighty abstinence thou didst break the bonds of thy body and lay waste to 
thy flesh, and joined thyself unto God through active vision, O father, crying aloud: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Numbered and enrolled among the martyrs of Christ, O venerable one, thou dost 
hymn the Lover of mankind without ceasing, praying on behalf of us who praise thee 
and cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Having suffered lawfully on earth, O venerable one, thou hast found heavenly rest 
with the saints, finding a share in their gladness and joy, and crying aloud: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: He Who before was incorporeal became incarnate, the Creator hath 
been formed from thee, O all-immaculate one; for the Unapproachable One, entering 
into thy most pure womb, desired to be encompassed by flesh. Wherefore, we all 
bless thee, O Mary, Bride of God.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou didst mercifully pass over to the Benefactor of all, O father, adorned with 
the beauty of innocence and shining with the comeliness of the virtues. Wherefore, 
we all call thee blessed.  
Submitting to the law of the Master, thou didst incline thy neck for the struggle of 
monasticism, O all-blessed father, and as victor attained unto perfect guilelessness.  
Thou wast deemed worthy to send up hymnody to God with the incorporeal ones, 
having preserved their manner of life and purity; and through patience thou hast 
received the glory of the martyrs' feats.  
Accept from us this hymnody which we offer to thee from a pure heart, O God-
bearer, and through thine entreaties grant us remission of offenses and salvation, O 
all-honored one.  
Theotokion: All of us, the faithful, honor thee with praises as the true root of 
incorruption and confirmation, O Virgin; for thou hast given birth for us to the 
hypostatic Immortality.  
Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
By abstinence thou didst mortify carnal-mindedness, * and by fasting and the 
perfection of the virtues * thou didst enliven thy soul. * Wherefore, thou hast truly 
appeared * as one alive even after thy repose; * for death was reckoned as but sleep * 
by thee who hast passed over to God * and placed thy soul in His hands, ** O 
glorious Acacius.  
Thou didst lull to sleep * the desires of the passions, O Acacius, * having acquired 
all-night vigilance in prayer, * obedience and humility, * study of the divine Scriptures, 
* a pure heart and an untroubled mind. * Wherefore, thou didst become a receptacle 
of the Holy Spirit, * shining forth rays of miracles ** upon the ends of the earth.  
Having utterly spurned * the passionate attachments of the world, * thou didst 
become a vessel of dispassion; * and through the active ascent of the love of 
knowledge, * O glorious one, * mounted on high to thine uttermost Desire, * 
beholding with mystic vision * the inconceivable and divine beauties of invisible 
things, ** O all-wise and blessed Acacius.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
From thy pure blood thou gavest flesh * to Him Who is consubstantial with the 
Father * and co-enthroned with the Spirit, * and in a manner past all telling hast given 
birth * to Him Who is truly known * in two active natures and wills. * Him do thou 
entreat, O most holy Virgin, * as thy Son and God, ** that He save those who with 
pure faith call thee blessed.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and that of the holy martyr, with 4 Troparia, the 
acrostic whereof is: “Grant now that I may hymn thy grace, O martyr”, the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
 Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
With the illumining rays of the Spirit enlighten the heart of me who hymn thy 
radiant memory, O martyr Paramon, and strengthen me to abide in the laws of God.  
Thou wast radiantly enriched with martyric glory, having shone forth in the 
beauties of martyrdom and been adorned with beauteous wounds, O Paramon. 
Wherefore, with faith we call thee blessed.  
Full of the life-creating waters of the Spirit, thou didst shed dew upon those 
grievously withering under the burning heat of ungodliness, O glorious one, and didst 
lead them to the water of peace.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth in time to the Timeless One Who became a 
man, O pure one. Him do thou earnestly beseech as thy Son and Lord, that He heal 
the temporal sufferings of my soul, O all-immaculate one.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Having humbled the uprising of the enemy for Christ's sake, thou didst destroy 
him and cut down his legions with the sword of patience.  
Thou didst destroy the counsel of the evil one against our Faith, and suffered 
mightily, O martyred spiritual athlete Paramon.  
As a powerful warrior thou wast strengthened by divine grace, O martyr, 
reckoning cruel tortures to be like a dream.  
Theotokion: Strengthen my mind which is beset by many passions, O most pure 
Mother of God, that I may glorify thee as is meet.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
With the patience called for by the divine precepts thou didst cleanse thy soul of 
defilement and attain to the perfection of spiritual athletes; for thou didst renounce 
sacrifice to false graven images and, emulating Christ, wast slain with a spear. Him do 
thou earnestly entreat on behalf of the world, O all-blessed Paramon.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
O Theotokos, fleeing to thy divine protection after God, * I humbly fall down and 
beseech thee: * Have mercy, O most pure one, * for my sins have submerged my 
being, * and trembling O Lady, I fear the torments to come, * O pure one, entreat thy 
Son, ** that I may be delivered from them.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in the latter days * gave birth in the flesh unto Thee O 
Christ, * Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * upon seeing Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried aloud: * “Woe is me, O Jesus, most beloved Christ! * How is it 
that Thou Who art glorified as God by the angels * dost now consent to be crucified 
by iniquitous men O my Son? ** I hymn Thee, O Thou Long-suffering One!” 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Thy heart, protected by courage and set afire with boldness, O glorious one, 
considered the many and cunning tortures to be like the darts of children, O valiant 
minded martyr.  
Seeing the sufferers slain at the command of the tyrant, the martyr Paramon 
received divine zeal like unto theirs, and went forth to suffering.  
O blessed Paramon, Christ, the Judge of the contest, crowned thee who wast 
mightily lacerated, mercilessly pierced with spears, and who vanquished the wiles of 
the enemy.  
Marveling at the endurance of the martyrs and amazed by their perfection, O 
glorious one, thou didst share in their zeal of faith and their all-honorable suffering.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mary, by thy Life-bearing birthgiving thou hast brought life 
to all mankind slain by disobedience; wherefore, we glorify and in godliness call thee 
blessed.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou hast come, O my Lord, * as a light into the world, * a holy light 
turning from the gloom of ignorance * those who hymn Thee with faith.  
Thou didst offer thyself to thy Creator as a precious gift, having suffered and 
vanquished falsehood, O thou adornment of the martyrs.  
Thou didst demolish graven images and the temples of demons, O wise Paramon, 
having acquired a steadfast resolve on the rock of divine faith.  
Thou didst manfully wound a multitude of the demons with the wounding of thy 
flesh, O valiant-minded spiritual athlete. Wherefore, we call thee blessed.  
Theotokion: The Lord Who is equal in honor with the Father and the Spirit 
became incarnate from thy pure blood, O pure one, becoming a man.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons' * by 
the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 
Thou wast not slothful during thy struggles, but wast surpassingly diligent and 
valiant amid thy divine suffering; wherefore, thou hast received a crown of glory.  
Thou didst join the assembly of the martyrs who reached the end of their lives 
with zeal before thy contest, O ever-memorable one, and with them thou hast been 
deemed worthy to enter the heavenly bridal-chamber.  
Spears made thee an emulator of Christ, for, pierced thereby, O martyr, thou didst 
hasten to Him as one crowned, having slain the foolish with the sword of patience.  
Theotokion: O most immaculate one, from the temptations of life deliver me who 
am held fast in the night of ignorance with unseemly thoughts and am ever darkened 
by the malice of the enemy.  
After ODE VI, the martyricon from the Oktoechos. 
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Splendidly enriched by God with the grace of healings and miracles, O wise 
martyr, thou dost heal those who cry aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, O Lord!  
Placing all thy care in the heavens, O right glorious one, thou didst disdain the 
tortures inflicted upon thee, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, O Lord!  
With the fire of thy blood thou didst consume all the wicked tinder of ungodliness, 
O glorious spiritual athlete; and with the dew of thy miracles bedewest those who are 
in the burning heat of evils, crying aloud, O right glorious one: Blessed art Thou in 
the temple of Thy glory, O Lord!  
Theotokion: Rejoice, thou who alone hast given birth to the Joy of mankind! 
Rejoice, O heaven and throne of the cherubim, most glorious palace of Him Who 
reigneth throughout all ages, O all-immaculate Lady!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
We all have been enriched, having acquired thee as a vigilant guardian of our souls, 
O much suffering one, ever lulling to sleep demonic fantasies and stilling the raging 
waves of the flesh and the storm of evil thoughts of those who cry aloud: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
With the streams of thy sacred blood thou didst dye for thyself a purple robe 
which will never grow old, and, splendidly adorned, thou dwellest in the heavens, O 
blessed one, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
As a pure lamb, as an unblemished sacrifice, as a whole-burnt offering consumed 
by the embers of suffering, O wise martyr, thou didst bring thyself to Christ, the 
Judge of the contest, chanting: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: The shadow of the law and the proclamations of the prophets 
foreordained thee, O pure one full of the grace of God, as her who would ineffably 
become the Mother of our God. To Him do we all chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works 
of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Behold! the splendid memory of the radiant passion-bearer hath shone forth, 
illumining with the divine Spirit the hearts of all the faithful who joyfully join chorus 
and bless him with faith.  
Having joined thyself to the three hundred and seventy invincible martyrs, thy 
body doth lie with them, O martyr of Christ. With them pray thou, that we be saved.  
Having passed through the arena of pain which is full of many and varied 
torments, and overcoming them splendidly with Christ Who conquered the world, ye 
dwell now in the heavens, O crowned martyrs.  
Thou wast taken up from the earth and received honors for thy struggles; and now 
pourest forth rivers of miracles upon us who honor thee and piously celebrate thy 
memory, O Paramon.  
Theotokion: Enlighten the eyes of my soul which have been darkened by the 
blindness of corrupting sin, O most pure Lady, Birthgiver of God; for thou art the 
help and enlightenment of the faithful, O pure one.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
With the wisdom of piety let us hymn the invincible multitude of warriors, the 
divine and unvanquished company of martyrs which hath the wondrous Paramon as 
its leader, who denounced the tyrant and received a crown of glory with all the 
martyrs.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, O palace of God! Rejoice, O mountain overshadowed! Rejoice, O bush 
unburnt! Rejoice, O throne of glory! Rejoice, O divine table! Rejoice, O golden jar! 
Rejoice, O candle-stand all golden! Rejoice, O Mary, Virgin and Mother, thou light 
cloud!  
