--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 24th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
AFTERFEAST OF THE ENTRY OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS  
INTO THE TEMPLE  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY GREAT MARTYR CATHERINE  
OF ALEXANDRIA  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY GREAT MARTYR MERCURIUS  
OF CAESAREA IN CAPPADOCIA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera; 3 of the great-martyr Catherine, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Today the city of Alexandria doth adorn itself, * having thy swaddling clothes, O 
martyr, * most wisely within thy divine temple. * Wherefore, we also piously celebrate 
* thine honored memory, O Catherine, ** Pray thou on behalf of those who honor 
thee.  
Today let us celebrate the memory of Catherine, * for by word and by deed * she 
truly set at naught with might all the powers of the enemy * and the opposition of the 
rhetors. * By her prayers deliver us, O God, ** from the godless foe.  
Rejoice, all-glorious and honored martyr Catherine, * for the mount of Sinai, * 
whereon Moses beheld the bush which burned, yet was not consumed, * doth now 
keep thy God-pleasing body * which Christ transferred thither, ** even until the time 
of His Second Coming.  
And 3 Stichera of the great-martyr Mercurius, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
O passion-bearer Mercurius, * having vanquished the adversary with the help of 
the Spirit, * as an invincible warrior * thou didst cut down myriads of noetic Moors * 
with the sword of faith, * and having brought thy struggle to an end * in accordance 
with the law, * thou didst receive a crown with all the sufferers, ** O most blessed 
great martyr.  
An angel, sent to thee from heaven * at the command of the divine Spirit, * healed 
thy wounds. * Yet, after thy healing, O right glorious one, * thou didst endure to be 
treacherously pierced * with heated goads, * and wast suspended and stretched out, * 
bound to a heavy stone, ** and thy blood was shed everywhere, O martyr.  
Serving as a soldier for an earthly king, O Mercurius, * thou wast commanded by 
him * to sacrifice to demons, * O divinely wise and blessed one. * Thou didst endure 
torments, * fiery immolation and a violent death. * And thou didst ascend, crowned, 
unto Christ * and wast joined to the flocks of the martyrs, ** praying on behalf of the 
world. 
  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
O ye who love the martyrs, let us joyfully make haste to the festival of the divinely 
wise martyr Catherine, and with praises let us crown her as with flowers, crying out to 
her: Rejoice, thou who didst denounce the insolence of the foolish rhetors as replete 
with unlearned thoughts, and led them to the divine Faith! Rejoice, thou that gavest 
thy body over to subtle torments for the love of thy Creator, and wast not destroyed, 
in that thou wast an invincible maiden! Rejoice, thou that hast inherited mansions on 
high as a reward for thy pains, and dost now delight in everlasting glory, which 
desiring, may we who hymn thee not fall away from the hope thereof.  
Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
After thy nativity, O Lady, Bride of God, thou didst go to the Temple of the Lord 
to be raised in the Holy of Holies as a consecrated maiden. Gabriel was then sent to 
thee, the all-immaculate one, bringing food unto thee. All of the heavenly powers 
marveled, beholding the Holy Spirit abiding within thee: Wherefore, O most pure and 
undefiled Mother of God, who art glorified in heaven and on earth, save thou our 
race.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Come, all ye who love the feasts of the Church, * and with hymns let us honor * 
her who alone is the pure Theotokos and Virgin, * for she is led into the Temple of 
God, * to now splendidly dwell therein, the truly most holy temple of Christ, ** and 
mediatress of all joy.  
Verse: The virgins that follow after her shall be brought unto the King, * those 
near her shall be brought unto Thee.  
Throw open the doors, O prophet, * and receive with faith her who is brought 
into the Temple of the Lord, * the boast of all angels and mortals, * their radiant joy, 
* that she may dwell and rejoice within, ** she who is the temple and abode of God.  
Verse: They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing, * they shall be 
brought into the Temple of the King.  
Mary, the Theotokos, is brought into the Temple, * receiving bread from the angel 
* who appeared, crying to her, Rejoice! * without knowing a man thou shalt conceive 
a Son, * O blessed Virgin Theotokos, Bride of God, ** thou good inheritance and 
restoration of mortals.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Having acquired an immaterial life, and having attained unto the godless tribunal, 
thou didst stand, wearing the radiance of God like flowers, arrayed in divine might, O 
victorious and honored Catherine, and thou didst mock the tyrant's command and 
put an end to the audacious discourse of the rhetors, O much-suffering one.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone VIII:  
David foretold thee, O most pure one, foreseeing the sanctification of thine entry 
into the Temple. Therein do the ends of the earth, holding festival today, glorify thee, 
O all-hymned one, for, O Mother of the Word of life, who before giving birth wast 
Virgin and after giving birth remained incorrupt, today Zechariah rejoiceth with 
exceeding gladness in the Temple, accepting thee, O Lady; and the Holy of Holies 
rejoiceth, receiving thee, the wellspring of our life. Wherefore, we also cry out in 
psalms to thee: Beseech thy Son and our God on our behalf, that He grant us great 
mercy.  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr Catherine, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Catherine O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Or this Troparion, in Tone IV: 
With thy virtues, as with the rays of the sun, * thou didst enlighten the unbelieving 
philosophers; * and, like the most radiant moon shining on those who walk at night, * 
thou didst drive away the darkness of unbelief. * Thou didst bring the empress to 
faith * and didst denounce the tyrant, O divinely elect bride. * O blessed Catherine, 
with desire didst thou make haste to the heavenly bridal chamber, * to Christ the 
most comely Bridegroom, * and by Him hast thou been crowned with a royal crown. 
* Standing with the angels before Him, ** pray thou for us who keep thy most 
honored memory.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the holy great-martyr Mercurius, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Mercurius O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the 
Creator's dispensation!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: ** Rejoice, O thou fulfillment of the 
Creator's dispensation! (Once) 
Troparion of the holy great-martyr Catherine, in Tone IV: 
Thy ewe-lamb Catherine O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the holy great-martyr Mercurius, in Tone IV:  
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Mercurius O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Troparion of the feast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”-  
Praise ye, O virgins! Keep festival, ye mothers! Give glory, ye people! Ye priests, 
bless the most pure Mother of God! For she, who before was a little child in the 
flesh, is brought into the Temple as the most holy temple of God. Wherefore, 
celebrating a spiritual feast, we hymn her as an intercessor for the race of mankind.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., and the above is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”: 
Being thyself the Holy of Holies, O Theotokos, thou wast brought to live in the 
Holy of Holies, as is meet, as the animate ark of the Lord and a truly divine habitation 
of the Holy Spirit, O Virgin Mary. Wherefore, thy Son, Who is the only-begotten of 
the Father, and consubstantial with the Holy Spirit, made His abode within thee 
without the aid of a man, deifying all mankind.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., and the above is repeated.  
Canon I of the Feast of the entry of Our Sovereign Lady, in Tone IV, with 6 
Troparia, including the Irmos; and one canon each to the holy great-martyrs, with 8 
Troparia:  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE I 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her entry. 
O most pure one, we know thee to be a treasury of wisdom and an ever-flowing 
fountain of grace; and we pray thee rain down upon us knowledge, that we may praise 
thee forever.  
Being a temple and palace more exalted than the heavens, O most pure one, thou 
wast set apart in the Temple of God to be prepared as a divine dwelling-place for His 
advent.  
Shining with the Light of grace, the Theotokos hath illumined all and assembled us 
to adorn her most splendid festival. Come ye, let us draw nigh to her!  
The glorious portal which surpasseth human thought, having opened the doors of 
the Temple of God, doth now command us who have assembled to delight in her 
divine wonders.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Catherine, the acrostic whereof is: “With hymns do I 
hymn the ever-memorable Catherine,” by Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
By the prayers of the all-wise martyr Catherine, O Christ, enlighten Thou the dark-
ened eye of my soul, granting me a ray of thy splendor, O Master, which destroyeth 
all the gloom of my soul-destroying falls.  
O all-wise one, guided by the divine commandments of the Master and consumed 
with love for Him, thou didst hasten to thy struggles rendering the tormentors 
awestruck with thy knowledge, discourse, wisdom and grace.  
Directed by the mighty hand of Christ, thou didst escape the tempests of idolatry, 
O martyr, voyaging dryshod with the sail of the Cross and the divine winds of the 
Spirit, chanting a hymn unto God.  
Rejoicing in the beauties of virginity, O wise Catherine, and possessed of divine 
knowledge from heaven, thou didst right boldly and courageously put to shame the 
proponents of false knowledge, mightily vanquishing them.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, he Who proclaimeth thee to be the Theotokos 
doth reject every heresy; for thou hast given birth unto the ever-existing Word of 
God, Who immutably assumed flesh, O Birthgiver of God, who art more exalted 
than all creation.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the holy great-martyr Mercurius, the acrostic whereof is:  
“May the might of Mercurius preserve me!” the composition of Joseph the 
Hymnographer, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified! 
Standing joyfully before the Wellspring of blessings with the choirs of heaven, O 
Mercurius, and filled with divine delight, O ever-memorable one, preserve those who 
with love celebrate thy festival, chanting unto the Lord: Gloriously hath He been 
glorified!  
Willingly didst thou enter the arena of torment, O wise one, strengthened with the 
power of Christ, Who for our sakes willingly endured His saving sufferings; and, 
rejoicing, thou didst cry aloud: Let us chant unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He 
been glorified!  
Adorned with the confession of Christ, O blessed one, thou didst openly revile the 
words of the tyrant and, with gladness, endured all manner of pain, O Mercurius, 
crying out to Him Who strengthened thee: Let us chant unto the Lord, for gloriously 
hath He been glorified!  
Theotokion: For our sake didst Thou appear incarnate of the Virgin Maiden, 
becoming a man like unto us; and Thou dost reveal Mercurius, Thy valiant spiritual 
athlete, to be a faithful witness to Thy sufferings, who chanteth mightily unto Thee: 
Let us chant unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
ODE III 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns of praise * of thine honored entry: * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Receiving the pure and undefiled one, who is more splendid than all creation, the 
animate bridal chamber of God, the beautiful Temple and chamber doth appear today 
like a bride adorned for her wedding.  
David, preceding the chorus, doth leap and dance with us, declaring thee, O all-
pure one, to be the queen all-adorned, standing in the Temple before our King and 
God, O most pure one.  
From her, whom transgressions issued forth among the race of mankind, hath her 
correction and incorruption blossomed forth, the Theotokos, who is led today into 
the house of God.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
The angelic armies and the multitudes of all mankind leap for joy, and they 
advance as lamp-bearers before thy countenance, proclaiming thy majesty in the 
house of God.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Catherine  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
Striving voluntarily of thine own will, thou didst go to thy suffering, emulating 
Christ; and, having radiantly vanquished myriads of the princes of this world, thou 
wast revealed to be crucified, O God-pleasing Catherine.  
With strength of mind didst thou denounce the tormentors, who were 
overwhelmed in the abyss of godlessness, O all-praised martyr, plainly expounding 
the dogmas of the knowledge of God, illumined with the wisdom of God.  
He who whispered thoughts of equality with God into the ears of Eve is now trod 
underfoot by a young maiden; for, defended with the sword of the Cross, the martyr 
Catherine hath put him to shame, immeasurably glorying over him.  
Theotokion: O Birthgiver of God, who alone art most pure, raise up my morbid 
mind through the activity of the Life Who, from thee, manifested Himself to the 
world, cleansing the wounds and stripes of my sins.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Mercurius  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
All aflame with divine love, O glorious Mercurius, thou didst regard fire and 
bonds, the sword and torments to be a dream.  
Meeting with grievous wounds, thou didst hymn the Creator, O wise martyr, and 
thereby received healing, O glorious one.  
Strengthened by the divine staff, O right valorous martyr, like a spiritual athlete 
thou didst mightily cast down the audacity of the enemy.  
Theotokion: To prefigure thy birthgiving, which surpasseth understanding, O pure 
one, a bush appeared, burning with fire, yet unconsumed.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up on the Cross ...”:  
The most pure temple of the Savior, * the precious bridal chamber and Virgin, * 
the sacred treasury of the glory of God, * hath been brought into the house of the 
Lord this day, * bringing with her the grace that is in the divine Spirit. * To her do the 
angels of God chant the hymn: ** She is the heavenly tabernacle!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Ikos: Beholding the grace of the ineffable and divine mysteries of God made 
plainly manifest in and filling the Virgin, I rejoice; yet I know not how to understand 
this strange and ineffable image. How hath the pure one alone been shown to be 
above all creation, visible and immaterial? Wherefore, wishing to praise her, I am 
greatly in awe in mind and word; yet, bold, I proclaim and magnify her, saying: She is 
the heavenly tabernacle!  
  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr Mercurius, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Glorifying Mercurius with hymns, * let us bless him as an unvanquished warrior in 
battle, * an unashamed helper amid misfortunes, * and a deliverer from tribulations 
and sorrows, of those ** who celebrate his memory with gladness.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy great-martyr Catherine, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up on the Cross ...”:  
Thou didst love Christ thy Bridegroom, radiantly trimming thy lamp and shining 
forth with virtue, O glorious one. Wherefore, with Him thou hast entered into the 
bridal chamber, receiving a crown of suffering from Him. From misfortunes do thou 
deliver us who keep thy memory, O Catherine.  
Glory ..., the Sessional Hymn of the holy great-martyr Mercurius, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Struggling, the martyr Mercurius put the deceiver to shame and became a mighty 
champion of Christ. Therefore, he hath now been numbered among the choirs of 
heaven, worthily sharing in everlasting glory. Wherefore, we faithfully celebrate his 
sacred memory.  
Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone IV: 
O David, go thou before us into the Temple of God, and, rejoicing, receive thou 
our Queen, and cry out unto her: Enter thou, O Sovereign Lady! Enter thou into the 
Temple of the King! Her glory is understood allegorically, for from her doth Christ 
the Light desire to pour Himself forth upon all!  
ODE IV  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of Thee 
the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the Prophet Habbakuk cried aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
The Temple of God, receiving today the portal through whom none may pass, 
hath ceased to perform any service of the Law, crying: Truly truth hath appeared to 
those who are on earth!  
The mountain overshadowed, which Habbakuk beheld of old, prefigured her who 
hath made her abode in the inaccessible chambers of the Temple, flourishing with 
virtues, for she doth cover the ends of the earth therewith.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
All the earth hath seen most glorious things, things strange and marvelous, for the 
Virgin, receiving food from an angel, doth receive tokens of God's dispensation.  
Revealed as the temple and palace and animate heaven, O divine bride of the 
King, thou art brought today to the Temple of the Law to be kept for Him, O most 
pure one.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Catherine  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
O ever-memorable martyr Catherine, showing the determination of a spiritual 
athlete, with great endurance thou didst set thyself against the hostile one, trampling 
him beneath thy beautiful feet by the power of the Cross, O passion-bearer, thou 
boast of the martyrs.  
O all-blessed Catherine, bride of Christ, thou art luminous with the radiant beams 
of divine beauty, splendid in comeliness. Wherefore, in gladness dost thou chant unto 
the Master: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Thou didst set at naught the audacity of the tyrant by the godly discourse of thy 
wisdom, for thou didst rescue from the abyss of the false worship of demons those 
who were deceived thereby, teaching them to cry aloud to Christ in hymns: Glory to 
Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
O all-praised one, who hast mightily trampled down the audacity of the enemy, the 
right glorious and splendid festival of thy memory hath dawned like the sun, and 
thereon we cry aloud to the Master: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
Theotokion: The might of those who reject the veneration of the icons of thee, O 
pure Maiden, and of Him who, in a manner surpassing understanding, was incarnate 
of thee and enlightened the whole world, and of all the saints, hath now been cast 
down. Enlighten those who honor thee with faith, O thou who alone art all-hymned.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Mercurius 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Thou didst make thyself like unto thy Creator, O divinely wise one, by the 
sufferings of thy divine martyrdom, and from Him hast thou received splendid 
crowns, in that didst remain unconquered, O glorious one.  
Thou hast now been arrayed in a garment woven by the grace of the Most High, 
O martyr, having shed the robe of mortality.  
Having contended, even to the shedding of thy blood, against sin, thou wast 
revealed to be victorious and hast been deemed worthy of the glory of the Most High, 
O Mercurius.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: O Ever-virgin, the saving Word descended upon thee like a shower 
drying up the flood of polytheism.  
ODE V 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst enter into the temple of the Lord; * thyself 
being a most pure temple, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
The most pure Virgin, the glorious sanctity and sacred offering which is brought 
today to the Temple of God, is preserved as a habitation for our one God, the King 
of all, as He Himself knoweth.  
Zachariah, having of old beheld the beauty of thy soul, cried out in faith: Thou art 
the deliverance, thou art the joy of all, thou art our restoration, through whom the 
Uncontainable One shall appear unto me contained.  
O, thy wonders which pass understanding, O all-pure one! Strange is thy 
birthgiving; strange is the manner of thy maturation; strange also, most glorious and 
unutterable by mortals, are all thy wonders, O Bride of God.  
As a most radiant lamp, O Bride of God, hast thou shone forth today in the house 
of the Lord, illumining us with the precious gifts of thy wonders, O pure and all-
hymned Theotokos.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Catherine  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Aflame with the fire of love for thy Master, O all-glorious martyr, and seeking to 
behold His incomprehensible beauty, thou didst willingly give thyself over to wounds, 
radiant with the graces of virginity.  
Having splendidly adorned thyself with most-sacred sufferings, O good virgin 
maiden, thou didst ascend to the heavenly bridal chamber of Christ, and hast now 
been radiantly joined to thy Bridegroom in gladness, O all-blessed one.  
Thou wast revealed to be an all-radiant maiden who having loved Him Whom 
thou didst desire, and having followed in His steps by finishing a most difficult 
struggle, cried aloud unto Him as the fragrance of thy noetic myrrh: I have come, O 
my Bridegroom!  
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be the true Theotokos, and knowing the Word of 
God Who was born from thee, O most pure Lady, we all preach Him Who is known 
in two independent natures and wills, O Mother and Bride of God.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Canon of the holy great-martyr Mercurius  
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
Lacerated, cut with a blade without respite, O Mercurius, thou didst endure, 
strengthened by divine hope.  
Having fortified thy heart with the noetic Stone, O glorious Mercurius, thou didst 
not waver when crushed by a stone.  
Having shared in the sufferings of thy Master, thou didst partake of His glory and 
divine splendor.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, who hast given birth unto the Life which hath slain death: 
Slay thou the sin which liveth within me.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Thou Who hast upheld all things by Thy word hast hearkened to the prayer of the 
righteous ones. Wherefore, Thou hast loosed the infirmity of the barren woman, in 
that Thou art compassionate, and given them her who is the cause of joy.  
Wishing to make His salvation known to the Gentiles, the Lord hath now taken 
from among mankind her who hath not known wedlock, as a sign of reconciliation 
and renewal.  
As a house of grace, wherein treasures of the ineffable dispensation of God are laid 
up, O all-pure one, thou didst share in unfading delight in the Temple.  
Receiving thee as a royal diadem, O Bride of God, the Temple hath been rendered 
splendid and been elevated to better things, beholding in thee the fulfillment of the 
prophecies.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Catherine  
Irmos: The abyss of my sins and the storm of my transgressions * disquieten 
me and thrust me down * into the depths of despondency; * but do Thou 
stretch forth Thy mighty arm, * unto me as Thou didst to Peter, * and save 
me, O my Guide.  
The good and most pure Word, beholding thee all resplendent in the radiance and 
beauty of virginity and empurpled in the blood of thy martyrdom, O maiden, brought 
thee to dwell in the mansions of heaven.  
By the Cross thou didst do away with the dominion of the tyrants, denouncing the 
vanity of earthly wisdom and pouring forth dogmas of divinely inspired teaching, O 
most wise and ever-memorable Catherine.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Mightily enduring the pain of thy wounds, O all-glorious martyr, thou didst cast 
down to the ground him who of old drove Adam from the sweetness of paradise 
through deceit, and thou hast been crowned with the crowns of the kingdom.  
Theotokion: By thy prayers, O Mother, Virgin Theotokos, make thy Son and our 
Judge, Who doth deliver us from evil circumstances, to be merciful unto me on the 
day of Judgment, for in thee alone do I place my trust.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Mercurius  
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
The ever-existent Word beholding thee enduring all manner of torments for His 
sake, O wise martyr, enlivened thee, and by His angel, commanded thee to take heart, 
O Mercurius, and in no wise fear the opposition of the tormentors.  
The serpent of many guises hath been slain and trampled beneath the beautiful 
feet of the spiritual athlete, the valiant warrior, for, willingly striving unto death 
towards the wounds of torture, he was filled with glory.  
To the Master didst thou wholly offer the desire of thy heart, O martyr; and, 
having endured the rack, thou wast crowned by Him as a victor O Mercurius, and 
dost now stand before Him in the heavens with all the martyrs.  
Theotokion: At the angel's cry thou didst conceive the Angel of Great Counsel, O 
Maiden, and gave birth incarnate of thy most pure blood unto Him, Who in His 
unutterable mercy, hath shown to all the ways which lead to life, O all-immaculate 
one.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr Catherine, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest...”: 
O ye who love the martyrs, * raise up an honored chorus in a most godly manner, 
* honoring the all-wise Catherine; * for in the arena she preached Christ and trod 
upon the serpent, ** trampling down the knowledge of the rhetors.  
Ikos: Having received the wisdom of God from childhood, O martyr, thou didst 
also master well all external wisdom; and learning therefrom the movement of the 
elements and creation through discourse and Him that by His word fashioned them 
in the beginning, day and night didst thou render thanksgiving unto Him, setting at 
naught idols and those who worship them, putting down the knowledge of the 
rhetors.  
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
ODE VII 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Lo, today a joyous spring hath dawned upon the ends of the earth, enlightening 
our souls, thoughts and minds with grace: the festival of the Theotokos. Let us 
mystically make festival this day! 
Let all things - heaven and earth, the ranks of angels and the multitudes of 
mankind - bear gifts today unto the Queen and Mother of God; and let them cry 
aloud: Our joy and deliverance is brought into the Temple!  
The Scriptures have come to pass, the Law hath faded like a shadow, and rays of 
grace have shone forth upon thee who hast entered into the Temple of God, O pure 
Virgin Mother wherein thou art blessed.  
Heaven and earth and the netherworld are subject to thine Offspring as Creator 
and God, O most pure one, and every nation of mortals doth confess that the Lord 
and Savior of our souls hath appeared.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Catherine  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God's condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thou art the boast of martyrs and a teacher of piety, leading a multitude of martyrs 
unto Christ, thy radiant Bridegroom. And with them dost thou cry aloud, O all-
praised one, chanting: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Thy most wise discourse brought many out of the madness of idolatry unto 
salvation, and thou didst show them forth as all-radiant martyrs, who cry aloud with 
thee: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Following in Thy footsteps, the maiden was brought to Thee beheaded by the 
sword, emulating Thy most pure Passion, crying aloud unto Thee, our Creator, and 
saying: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: The Holy of Holies dwelt within thee in a hallowed manner, O pure 
Virgin Theotokos, and He became incarnate from thee to save those who cry out in 
faith: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Mercurius  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages'.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Illumined with the light of heavenly enlightenment, O valiant warrior, thou dost 
enlighten those who now hymn thee and chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, 
throughout the ages!  
O blessed one, having hymned the Benefactor of all, and consumed with love for 
Him while burning with material fire; thou didst chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
God, throughout the ages!  
Those who rendered homage to stone, and were thereby stony of heart, O martyr, 
weighted down thy neck with a stone, but thou didst cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God, throughout the ages!  
Having mingled thy precious blood with the blood of the Master and Lover of 
mankind, thou wast revealed to be a participant in His sufferings, O Mercurius, crying 
aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: The ranks of angels stand in awe of the depth of thy mystery, O 
Theotokos; for God appeared incarnate from thee, He to Whom we chant: Blessed 
art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Hearken, O pure Virgin Maiden, * that Gabriel may tell thee the true 
counsel of the Most High of old. * Make ready to receive the Godhead; * for 
through thee the Infinite One hath come to dwell among mankind. * 
Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Anna, once, leading the most pure temple to the house of God, faithfully said unto 
the priest, crying aloud: Now accept thou this child, given me by God; lead her into 
the Temple of the Creator; and, rejoicing, chant unto Him: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord! 
And Zachariah then, beholding them in the Spirit, said unto Anna: Thou dost 
bring hither the true Mother of Life, whom the prophets of God have clearly foretold 
as the Theotokos! How, therefore, can the Temple hold her? Wherefore, marveling, I 
cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The handmaid of God have I been, answered Anna unto him, and I call upon Him 
with faith and prayer to accept the fruit of my birth-pangs, that, having received this 
child, I might bring her that was born unto Him that bestowed her. Wherefore, I cry 
aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Truly this is a matter of the Law, the priest said to her, and strange doth this thing 
seem unto me, beholding her that doth most gloriously surpass the holy ones in grace 
led into the house of God. Wherefore, rejoicing, I cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Canon of the holy great-martyr Catherine  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
The empress, converted by thy teachings, advanced in piety and, mightily enduring 
the infliction of pain, was clearly deemed worthy of the everlasting kingdom of 
heaven, crying out to the Master: Ye priests bless; ye people exalt supremely Christ 
throughout all ages!  
Let the entreaties of the faithful be entrusted to the martyrs, for the passion-bearer 
doth stand before Christ, asking that which is best for all and mediating salvation for 
those who earnestly celebrate her most holy and honored memory and faithfully cry 
aloud: Ye people supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages!  
Opening wide the gateways of paradise, the Bridegroom doth receive thee, O all- 
wise one; and hath made thee a most radiant dwelling place, revealing thee to be one 
who shares in His kingdom and His suffering. And, standing now before Him, 
splendidly adorned, O daughter of the King, forget us not.  
The tyrant tempted thee with alluring words; the cruel one sought to deceive thee 
with persuasions, hoping thereby to weaken thy resolve, O glorious one; but, wishing 
to betroth thyself to Christ, thou didst cry out to the Master: Ye priests hymn; ye 
people, supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Theotokos, thou art more sacred than the supra-
natural ranks of angels, for from thy virginal womb, which kneweth not wedlock, 
thou hast given birth unto their Creator and Lord in two natures, unconfused and 
immutable, God incarnate in a single hypostasis.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Mercurius  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
The choir of passion-bearers accepted as one of their number thee who wast 
adorned and radiant with the precious beauties of thy sufferings and thy pious and 
honorable martyrdom. And now thou dost unceasingly cry aloud: Ye priests bless; ye 
people supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages!  
Piously didst thou finish thy course, O glorious one, valiantly putting the foe to 
shame; and, laying hold of a heavenly trophy as a victor, thou dost now rejoice with 
the angelic choirs, unceasingly crying out with them: Ye priests hymn; ye people su-
premely exalt Christ throughout the ages!  

--- PAGE 16 ---
In meeting thy death by the sword, and receiving the expected end, which thou 
didst desire, O all-blessed one, thou didst irrigate the ground with the outpourings of 
thy blood; whereupon thy blessed and victorious body was shown to be whiter than 
snow, having chanted: Ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Christ throughout 
the ages!  
Theotokion: All we, the faithful, hymn thee, O most pure one, as her who is the 
cause of our restoration; for in a manner beyond reproach thou didst give birth unto 
God, the Cause of all, Who in His tender compassion hath restored His image which 
had been marred by wickedness, O thou who alone art most blessed and joyous.  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: In nowise may the hand of the defiled * touch the animate ark of God; 
* and let the lips of the faithful * never-silently cry out with joy to the 
Theotokos, * chanting the words of the angel: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of 
grace! * The Lord is with thee!  
O pure Theotokos, as thou hast the most radiant beauty of purity of soul and art 
full of the grace of God from heaven, with the ever-existent light thou dost ever 
enlighten those who cry out with joy: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O 
pure Virgin!  
Thy wonder doth surpass the power of words, O pure Theotokos, for in thee I 
perceive a body impervious to the movement of sin. Wherefore, thankfully I cry out 
to thee: Truly thou art more highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!  
Most gloriously did the Law prefigure thee, O pure one, as the tabernacle, the 
divine jar, the awe-some ark, the veil, the staff, the inviolable temple and portal of 
God. Wherefore, all these things teach us to cry to thee: Truly thou art more highly 
exalted than all, O pure Virgin!  
In hymnody David cried out to thee prophetically, calling thee the daughter of the 
King in the comeliness of thy virtues, beholding thee standing, elaborately adorned, at 
the right hand of God. Wherefore, in prophecy he cried out: Truly thou art more 
highly exalted than all, O pure Virgin!  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Catherine  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Adorned with bridal ornaments, thou hast passed on to the splendid bridal 
chambers, holding the lamp of virginity in thy right hand and thy severed head in the 
other. And now, standing before Christ, thy Bridegroom, preserve thou those who 
hymn thee.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Thy prayer was accepted, O divinely wise one, for the Master doth save from 
temptations those who call upon thy name with faith, O honored one, bestowing 
health upon them, and delivering them from divers spiritual and bodily ailments. 
Wherefore, in gladness we bless thee, O Catherine.  
Thou hast now attained unto the calm harbor, O martyr, having easily sailed over 
this world's sea of threefold waves, and in good order, without succumbing to 
temptation, O all-wise virgin; bringing an offering of varied riches unto Christ, a 
multitude of martyrs, O all-blessed Catherine.  
Joining chorus now with the choirs of virgins within the bridal chambers of 
heaven, and illumined with rays of thy sufferings, O all-wise Catherine, thou hast 
loosed the bonds of my falls, earnestly entreating the Benefactor of all, for Whom 
thou didst shed thy blood.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed, O Virgin Mother of God, to have given 
birth in the body, in a manner transcending nature, to the good Word, Whom the 
Father brought forth from His own heart before all ages, in that He is good, and 
Whom we now know to be more exalted than all bodies, even though clad in a body 
Himself.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr Mercurius  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God's ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin's womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
With grace the martyrs now dispel the stench of dung and with ineffable discourse 
they drive away our foul passions, pouring forth waters for the healing of our bones 
and water the souls of those who hymn their wondrous miracles.  
We honor thee in a sacred manner as a great pillar of the Church of Christ, an 
indestructible rampart, a city which cannot be taken captive, a mighty warrior of God 
the King of all, a destroyer of our enemies and a noetic and universal beacon, O 
martyr.  
Thou didst receive an angel of light as a companion before thy suffering, O 
divinely wise one. Wherefore, lacerated, burned with candles and grievously cut 
asunder and beheaded with a sword, thou wast not afraid, O most valiant spiritual 
athlete of Christ.  
Thy divine memorial hath dawned as a day full of enlightenment, gladness and joy 
for us who honor thee, O martyr Mercurius, wherefore remember us who keep thy 
memorial and deliver us from grievous temptations, misfortunes and passions.  
Theotokion: O portal of the Light, enlighten my soul which hath been blinded by 
the passions and darkened by wicked thoughts, and is in danger; and deliver me from 
temptations, misfortunes and sorrows, that I may glorify thee, the hope and 
confirmation of the faithful. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Exapostilarion of the holy great-martyr Catherine:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”:  
Aflame with wisdom, O virgin Catherine, most honorable among women, thou 
glory of passion-bearers, through God thou didst denounce the skill of the 
philosophers as foolishness and fables, having acquired the truly all-immaculate 
Mother of God as thy companion.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast: 
Spec. Mel.: “To the watching disciples ...”:  
The ranks of angels and the choirs of the martyrs celebrate with us today on the 
divine entry of the godly Maiden and Mother of the Lord, together with Joachim and 
Anna, and the steadfast Mercurius and the most glorious Catherine. By their prayers 
may we find the remission of our many offenses, we pray.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Celebrating the most sacred memory * of thine honored suffering, * O all-praised 
Catherine, * with unceasing cries we glorify * Jesus, the Lover of mankind, our Savior 
and Lord, * Who gave thee steadfast patience * and showed thee to be victorious, * 
and granted thee discourse, ** which awed the rhetors. (Twice) 
O willing martyr, * all-glorious Catherine, * thou didst appear earnestly denouncing 
the tyrant * and the wicked madness of polytheism, * setting them at naught by the 
radiance of thy knowledge of God * and by divine grace. * Thus, Christ, the Savior of 
our souls, * hath crowned thee as a martyr ** and an immaculate virgin.  
Upon opening thy mouth, * O all-glorious Catherine, * thou didst receive the 
grace of the Spirit; * and having cleansed thyself * by thy life and patient thought, * 
thou didst trample down the audacity of the tyrant, * and with divine wisdom 
preferred spiritual beauty * to the beauty of the body, ** O adornment of passion-
bearers.  
Glory ..., the composition of Babylas the Monk, in Tone II: 
Having achieved an immaterial life, and having attained unto the godless tribunal, 
thou didst stand, adorned with the radiance of God as with flowers, arrayed in divine 
might, O victorious and honored Catherine, mocking the tyrant's command and 
putting an end to the audacious discourse of the rhetors, O much-suffering one.  
Both now ..., the composition of Sergius of the Holy City, in Tone IV:  
Assembling today, ye councils of the faithful, let us keep spiritual festival, and let 
us piously praise the divine Maiden, the Virgin Theotokos, who is led into the temple 
of the Lord, she who was chosen before out of all generations to be the habitation of 
Christ God, the King of all. Bearing candles, O virgins, go ye on before, doing 

--- PAGE 19 ---
homage to the honored entry of the Ever-virgin! Ye mothers, setting aside all grief, 
follow joyously her who is to become the Mother of God, the mediatress of joy for 
the world! And with the angel let us all joyfully cry out to the joyous one “Rejoice!”, 
for she ever prayeth for our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
The thrice-radiant Light * enkindling thee, O Theotokos, * in the Temple of glory, 
* doth send thee heavenly food, ** magnifying thee.  
Verse: The virgins that follow after her shall be brought unto the King, * those 
near her shall be brought unto Thee.  
From the root of David * didst thou spring forth, O Virgin; * and Gabriel, 
bringing thee joy, * cried aloud: Thou shalt give birth unto God, ** O most pure one.  
Verse: They shall be brought with gladness and rejoicing, * they shall be 
brought into the Temple of the King.  
Good was the sacred * and divine union * of Joachim and Anna, * from whom the 
pure one was born ** who hath now been brought to her Creator.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody:  
O gate of heaven, * accept ye the Virgin Mary * who hath not known a man, * the 
pure Theotokos, ** from whom came forth the deliverance of mankind.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODES VII and VIII of the Canon of the 
Feast, and 4 from ODE VI of the Canon of the holy great-martyr Catherine.  
Lo, today a joyous spring hath dawned upon the ends of the earth, enlightening 
our souls, thoughts and minds with grace: the festival of the Theotokos. Let us 
mystically make festival this day! 
Let all things - heaven and earth, the ranks of angels and the multitudes of 
mankind - bear gifts today unto the Queen and Mother of God; and let them cry 
aloud: Our joy and deliverance is brought into the Temple!  
Anna, once, leading the most pure temple to the house of God, faithfully said unto 
the priest, crying aloud: Now accept thou this child, given me by God; lead her into 
the Temple of the Creator; and, rejoicing, chant unto Him: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord! 
And Zachariah then, beholding them in the Spirit, said unto Anna: Thou dost 
bring hither the true Mother of Life, whom the prophets of God have clearly foretold 
as the Theotokos! How, therefore, can the Temple hold her? Wherefore, marveling, I 
cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The good and most pure Word, beholding thee all resplendent in the radiance and 
beauty of virginity and empurpled in the blood of thy martyrdom, O maiden, brought 
thee to dwell in the mansions of heaven.  
By the Cross thou didst do away with the dominion of the tyrants, denouncing the 
vanity of earthly wisdom and pouring forth dogmas of divinely inspired teaching, O 
most wise and ever-memorable Catherine.  
Mightily enduring the pain of thy wounds, O all-glorious martyr, thou didst cast 
down to the ground him who of old drove Adam from the sweetness of paradise 
through deceit, and thou hast been crowned with the crowns of the kingdom.  
Theotokion: By thy prayers, O Mother, Virgin Theotokos, make thy Son and our 
Judge, Who doth deliver us from evil circumstances, to be merciful unto me on the 
day of Judgment, for in thee alone do I place my trust.  
Troparion of the feast, , in Tone IV: 
Today is the prelude of God's good will * and the proclamation of the salvation of 
mankind. * The Virgin hath manifestly appeared in the temple of God, * proclaiming 
Christ unto all. * To her let us cry aloud: * Rejoice, O thou fulfillment ** of the 
Creator's dispensation!  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr Catherine, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Catherine O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Or this Troparion, in Tone IV: 
With thy virtues, as with the rays of the sun, * thou didst enlighten the unbelieving 
philosophers; * and, like the most radiant moon shining on those who walk at night, * 
thou didst drive away the darkness of unbelief. * Thou didst bring the empress to 
faith * and didst denounce the tyrant, O divinely elect bride. * O blessed Catherine, 
with desire didst thou make haste to the heavenly bridal chamber, * to Christ the 
most comely Bridegroom, * and by Him hast thou been crowned with a royal crown. 
* Standing with the angels before Him, ** pray thou for us who keep thy most 
honored memory.  
Troparion of the Great Martyr Mercurius, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Mercurius O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr Catherine, in Tone II: 
O ye who love the martyrs, * raise up an honored chorus in a most godly manner, 
* honoring the all-wise Catherine; * for in the arena she preached Christ and trod 
upon the serpent, ** trampling down the knowledge of the rhetors.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr Mercurius, in Tone IV: 
Glorifying Mercurius with hymns, * let us bless him as an unvanquished warrior in 
battle, * an unashamed helper amid misfortunes, * and a deliverer from tribulations 
and sorrows, of those ** who celebrate his memory with gladness.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
The most pure temple of the Savior, * the precious bridal chamber and Virgin, * 
the sacred treasury of the glory of God, * hath been brought into the house of the 
Lord this day, * bringing with her the grace that is in the divine Spirit. * To her do the 
angels of God chant the hymn: ** She is the heavenly tabernacle!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: the Song of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the wellsprings of Israel.  
 
THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE EPHESIANS(6:10-17) 
Brethren, be ye strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the 
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For 
we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, 

--- PAGE 22 ---
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high 
places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to 
withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your 
loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your 
feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of 
faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take 
the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God:  
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE(21:12-19) 
The Lord said unto His disciples; men shall lay their hands on you, and persecute 
you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before 
kings and rulers for my name's sake. And it shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it 
therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer: for I will give 
you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor 
resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and 
friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of 
all men for my name's sake. But there shall not a hair of your head perish. In your 
patience possess ye your souls.  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet...” 
Refrain: The angels, beholding the entry of the most pure one, were amazed to 
see the Virgin enter into the Holy of holies.  
Irmos: In nowise may the hand of the defiled * touch the animate ark of God; 
* and let the lips of the faithful * never-silently cry out with joy to the 
Theotokos, * chanting the words of the angel: * Rejoice, O thou who art full of 
grace! * The Lord is with thee!  
 
Communion Verse of the feast: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call 
upon the name of the Lord.  
Communion Verse of the saints: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is 
meet for the upright.  
 
