--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 30th DAY OF THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY AND ALL-PRAISED APOSTLE ANDREW, THE 
FIRST-CALLED  
AT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first Antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
When the hypostatic Effulgence of the Father's glory appeared, prefigured by the 
light of the Forerunner, wishing, in His loving-kindness, to save the human race, then 
wast thou the first to have recourse unto Him, O glorious one, being enlightened in 
mind by the most perfect ray of His divinity, from whence thou didst become a 
preacher and apostle of Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, that He save and en-
lighten our souls. (Thrice)  
When the all-holy Word became incarnate, granting us life, heralded by the voice 
of the Forerunner, announcing the glad tidings of salvation unto those on earth, then 
didst thou most wisely follow Him, surrendering thyself as an all-holy offering, and 
proclaiming Him to be our God to thy kinsman. Him do thou beseech, that He save 
and enlighten our souls. (Thrice)  
Having been the disciple of Him that sprang forth from a barren woman, the 
teacher of piety and chastity, who showed the way to purity, when the Offspring of 
the Virgin shone forth, being thou a most fervent lover of virtue, O blessed Andrew, 
and, thou didst make ascent within thy heart, and wast caught up from glory to the 
ineffable glory of Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, that He save and enlighten 
our souls. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone IV, the composition of Anatolius:  
Leaving behind the netting of fish, O apostle, thou dost catch men with the rod of 
thy preaching, lowering the lure of piety as a hook and drawing forth all the nations 
from the depths of falsehood, O apostle Andrew, who art the blood relation of the 
pre-eminent one. O trumpet-voiced herald of the whole world, fail not in thy prayers 
on behalf of us who with love and faith ever praise thine honored memory.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Dance thou, O Isaiah! Receive the Word of God! Prophesy unto the Maiden Mary: 
The bush shall burn with fire, yet shall not be consumed by the radiance of the 
Godhead! Adorn thyself, O Bethlehem! Open wide thy gates, O Eden! Come, ye 
magi! behold Salvation wrapped and lain in the manger, Whose star hath shone above 
the cave, the Lord and Bestower of life, Who saveth our race.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the Day. Three lessons:  

--- PAGE 2 ---
THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERAL OF PETER (1:1-2:6)  
Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, To the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, 
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, elect according to the foreknowledge of God 
the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the 
blood of Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied. Blessed be the God 
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy hath 
begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 
to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in 
heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready 
to be revealed in the last time. Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if 
need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations: that the trial of your faith, 
being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, 
might be found unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ: 
whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, 
ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory: receiving the end of your faith, even 
the salvation of your souls. Of which salvation the prophets have inquired and 
searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you: 
searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did 
signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should 
follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did 
minister the things, which are now reported unto you by them that have preached the 
gospel unto you with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; which things the 
angels desire to look into. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and 
hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ; as obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts 
in your ignorance: but as he which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner 
of conversation; because it is written, Be ye holy; for I am holy. And if ye call on the 
Father, who without respect of persons judgeth according to every man's work, pass 
the time of your sojourning here in fear: forasmuch as ye know that ye were not 
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation 
received by tradition from your fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a 
lamb without blemish and without spot: who verily was foreordained before the 
foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you, who by him do 
believe in God, that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith 
and hope might be in God. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth 
through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye love one another 
with a pure heart fervently: being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of 
incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever. For all flesh is 
as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the 

--- PAGE 3 ---
flower thereof falleth away: but the word of the Lord endureth for ever. And this is 
the word which by the gospel is preached unto you. Wherefore laying aside all malice, 
and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings, as newborn babes, 
desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby: if so be ye have tasted 
that the Lord is gracious. To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed 
of men, but chosen of God, and precious, ye also, as lively stones, are built up a 
spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God 
by Jesus Christ. Wherefore also it is contained in the Scripture, Behold, I lay in Zion a 
chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on him shall not be 
confounded.  
THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERAL OF ST. PETER (2:21-3:9) 
Beloved, hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an 
example, that ye should follow his steps: who did no sin, neither was guile found in 
his mouth: who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he 
threatened not; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously: who his own 
self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live 
unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were healed. For ye were as sheep gone 
astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls. Likewise, 
ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands; that, if any obey not the word, they 
also may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives; while they 
behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear. Whose adorning, let it not be that 
outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of 
apparel; but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, 
even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great 
price. For after this manner in the old time the holy women also, who trusted in God, 
adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own husbands: even as Sarah 
obeyed Abraham, calling him lord: whose daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and 
are not afraid with any amazement. Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according 
to knowledge, giving honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being 
heirs together of the grace of life; that your prayers be not hindered. Finally, be ye all 
of one mind, having compassion one of another; love as brethren, be pitiful, be 
courteous: not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing; 
knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing.  
THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERAL OF PETER (4:1-11) 
Beloved, inasmuch as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves 
likewise with the same mind: for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from 
sin; that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, 
but to the will of God. For the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought 
the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, 

--- PAGE 4 ---
revelings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries: wherein they think it strange that ye 
run not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you: who shall give 
account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead. For, for this cause was 
the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according 
to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit. But the end of all things is 
at hand: be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. And above all things have 
fervent charity among yourselves: For charity shall cover the multitude of sins. Use 
hospitality one to another without grudging. As every man hath received the gift, even 
so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. 
If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do 
it as of the ability which God giveth; that God in all things may be glorified through 
Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera of the apostle, in Tone I; 
The composition of Andrew of Jerusalem, archbishop of Gortyna in Crete  
The apostle Andrew, O Lord, the first-called disciple and emulator of Thy 
suffering, patterning himself on Thee, led to Thee those who once were deceived in 
the depths of ignorance, drawing them forth with the hook of Thy Cross. Wherefore, 
saved, we, the faithful, cry out to Thee: Through his prayers, O Supremely good One, 
calm Thou our lives and save our souls.  
O ye faithful, let us hymn Andrew, the kinsman of Peter, the disciple of Christ; 
for, once, fishing the sea with nets, he caught fish; but now with the rod of the Cross 
he ensnares the whole world, converting the Gentiles from delusion to baptism. And, 
standing before Christ, he entreateth peace for the world and great mercy for our 
souls.  
The apostle and disciple of Christ, receiving within his heart the noetic Fire which 
illumines thoughts and consumes sins, shining forth in the mystic rays of his 
teachings into the hearts of unenlightened pagans, burnt up their intricate 
contrivances as though they were kindling, for the fire of the Spirit hath such power. 
O strange and fearsome wonder! A tongue of clay, a nature of clay, a body of dust 
receives noetic and immaterial knowledge! Yet, O initiate of ineffable mysteries and 
beholder of heavenly things, pray thou that our souls be enlightened!  
In Tone VIII: Seeing the longed-for God walking upon the earth in the flesh, O 
first-called beholder of God, rejoicing, thou didst cry out to thy blood kinsman: We 
have found the Desired One, O Simon! And to the Savior didst thou cry out with the 
words of David: As the hart panteth after the fountains of water, so panteth my soul 
after Thee, O Christ God! Thence, adding desire to desire, by thy cross thou hast 
passed over to Him Whom thou didst desire, as a true disciple and wise emulator of 
His sufferings on the Cross. Wherefore, being a partaker of His glory, do thou pray 
earnestly on behalf of our souls.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., the composition of Andrew of Jerusalem, or of Anatolius, in Tone VIII:  
Let us praise Andrew, the preacher of the Faith and servant of the Word, for he 
hath drawn forth souls from the abyss, wielding the Cross instead of a rod; and 
lowering a line of power, he leadeth them up from the delusion of the enemy, ever 
offering them unto God as an acceptable gift. Let us praise him, ye faithful, among 
the choir of the disciples of Christ, that he pray with them, that Christ may be 
merciful unto us on the day of judgment.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign Lady, accept the supplication of thy servants, and deliver us from all 
want and grief.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Rejoice, thou noetic heaven which ever declareth the glory of God, thou who 
fervently obeyed Christ Who called thee first, remaining with Him without falling 
away. Enlightened by Him thou didst behold the secondary Light, and, emulating His 
goodness, thou dost illumine those who are in darkness with thy lightning. 
Wherefore, we celebrate thine all-holy festival and joyously venerate the shrine of thy 
relics, whence thou dost pour forth salvation and great mercy upon those who ask.  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  
The first discoverer of the virtues of Him that, in His tender compassion, was clad 
in our nature, O divinely wise Andrew, thou didst join thyself to Him with ardent 
love, crying out to thy blood kinsman: We have found Him Whom the prophets 
proclaimed in the Spirit! Come thou to His comeliness, that we may be rescued in 
soul and in thought, and that, led by the light of His radiance, we may drive away the 
night of delusion and the darkness of unbelief, blessing Christ, Who bestoweth great 
mercy upon the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Thou didst draw forth from the depths of ignorance the Gentiles who knew not 
God, with the net of thy words; and manifestly troubling the salty waves of the sea, 
thou wast revealed to be a most courageous steed of the Master of the seas, O ever-
hymned one, drying up the mortification of impiety, and adding the precious salt of 
thy wisdom, O glorious apostle; and those who shamelessly imbibed wisdom which 
hath lost its savor and know not Christ, Who is the bestower of great mercy upon the 
world, were thereby amazed.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone II: 
In hymns let us honor the apostle Andrew, the kinsman of Peter and disciple of 
Christ, the fisherman and fisher of men; for, having learned all the dogmas from the 
teachings of Jesus, he presented them as a lure to the iniquitous fish of the flesh, and 
ensnared them. By his supplications, O Christ, grant Thou Thy people peace and 
great mercy.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone II: 
Tell us, O Joseph, how is it that thou leadest to Bethlehem the Virgin, great with 
child, whom thou didst receive from the Holy of Holies? Having searched the 
prophets and received the reply of an angel, I am persuaded that Mary doth ineffably 
bear God, and that magi shall come from the East to worship Him, ministering unto 
Him with precious gifts. O Lord, Who wast incarnate for our sake, glory be to Thee!  
At the blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
As thou art the first-called of the apostles * and the brother of the pre-eminent 
one, * entreat thou the Master of all, O Andrew, * that He grant peace to the world 
** and great mercy to our souls. (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Once).  
But if a vigil is not served, then after the Troparion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
As a divine disciple and first-called of all the disciples of Christ, we praise thee with 
love O apostle Andrew, and we cry out to thee with faith: Deliver thy flock, which 
hath been given thee by God, from every sorrow and need, from temptations and 
every affliction. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
O honored one, stretching forth thy hands now in pity, bestow upon us aid from 
the Holy One, and grant that those who glorify thy most holy birthgiving and ascribe 
to thee hope and praise, O Lady and Maiden, may complete this life without 
misfortune.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine faith ...”: 
Christ found thee to be his first-called disciple, a chosen initiate of His mysteries, 
O blessed Andrew, who diligently exalted His precepts before the whole world. And, 
as though on wings, thou didst enlighten the states of the Gentiles. Him do thou 
entreat as God, that He grant us great mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only most pure Virgin Mother, 
* who hast surpassed the angels in purity. * With the divine waters of thy 
supplications cleanse me, * who more than all others am dust and defiled * by carnal 
transgressions, O pure one, ** and grant me great mercy. 
The Polyeleos, and this Magnification: We magnify thee, O Andrew, first-called 
apostle of Christ, and we honor thy pangs and labors, wherewith thou didst 
struggle in the proclamation of the Gospel of Christ.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth the 
work of His hands.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice) 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:  
Let us all praise the apostle as one who himself beheld the Word, a divine preacher 
and a truly spiritual fisher of nations, for we have been brought to knowledge of 
Christ by the divinely eloquent Andrew, our truly great intercessor, and he doth now 
unceasingly pray that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Those who have a steadfast hope in thee, O pure Virgin, * find protection and 
deliverance from a multitude of temptations, * dangers, and wicked circumstances. * 
Do thou intercede together with the apostles, * before thy Son, ** and save all those 
who sing thy praises. 
The Song of Ascents, the first Antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and 
their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (4:18-23) 
At that time; Jesus was walking by the sea of Galilee, and saw two brethren, Simon 
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers. 
And he saith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men. And they 
straightway left their nets, and followed him. And going on from thence, he saw other 
two brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with 
Zebedee their father, mending their nets; and he called them. And they immediately 
left the ship and their father, and followed him. And Jesus went about all Galilee, 
teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all 
manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the people.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VIII: 
Let us praise Andrew, the preacher of the Faith and servant of the Word, for he 
hath drawn forth souls from the abyss, wielding the Cross instead of a rod; and 
lowering a line of power, he leadeth them up from the delusion of the enemy, and 
offering them to God as an acceptable gift. Let us praise him, ye faithful, among the 
choirs of the disciples of Christ, that he may pray with them, that Christ be merciful 
unto us on the day of judgment.  
Three canons: That of the Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and two 
of the holy apostle, with 4 Troparia each.  
ODE I  
Canon of the Theotokos, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
As thou art she who alone hath given birth in time unto the timeless incarnate Son, 
O all-holy and most pure one, heal thou all the temporal passions of my most 
passionate soul.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
The wounds of my soul and the hardness of my heart, the blindness of my 
thought and the distraction of my mind do thou amend by thy prayers, O most pure 
one, as thou art full of pity.  
O most pure one, who hast given birth unto the Light, my Redeemer, deliver me 
from darkness and everlasting torment, that, saved, I may hymn thy mighty works.  
O all-hymned one, by thy light dispel the darkness of my mind, O thou who hast 
given birth unto Him that is Light, in a manner surpassing understanding; and grant 
me, O good one, to behold the Light which hath shone forth upon us from thee.  
Canon I of the holy apostle, by John the Monk, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it shattered 
the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the deep.  
 My soul, which hath been troubled by wicked thoughts and words, do thou 
cleanse with the divine grace which dwelleth within thee, O Andrew, preacher of 
Christ, that I may pour forth a worthy hymn to thee in a pure manner.  
The Forerunner of Christ, who sprang forth from a barren woman, led Andrew, 
rejoicing, the most eminent and honored of his disciples, to Christ the supremely 
glorified One Who was born from the Virgin.  
With desire and unwavering love, beginning the steps of the virtues, ever learning 
to ascend, from weakness thou didst attain unto the most lofty strength, O Andrew.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O wellspring of grace! Rejoice, stairway and portal to heaven! 
Rejoice, golden candlestick and jar, and unquarried mountain, who for the world didst 
give birth unto Christ, the Bestower-of life.  
Canon II of the holy apostle, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Guiding Israel with a pillar of fire and cloud, * as God He divided the 
sea * and engulfed the chariots of Pharaoh in the deep. * Let us chant a hymn 
of victory, * for He alone hath been glorified!  
With the rod of the Gospel didst thou fish, O all-praised Andrew, drawing forth 
souls from the deep of delusion, as Christ promised, Who taught thee to catch them 
as though fish.  
The divinely inspired Andrew, the pillar of the Faith and seat of the true dogmas 
of Christ, doth today summon all the ends of the earth to celebrate his yearly festival. 
Let us therefore make haste, all ye faithful! 
 Having pursued the whale of the sea with nets, with the skill of a fisherman thou 
dost fish for nations, tribes and peoples with the net of the Spirit, most plainly 
disclosing unto us through the Spirit the lofty depths, O most wondrous one. 
  

--- PAGE 10 ---
O thou who solemnly performed the mysteries of heaven, as an eyewitness and 
advocator of the ineffable knowledge of Christ, in that thou that had received the 
Holy Spirit from on high, thou didst discourse, and sit among the nations dispensing 
sacred gifts with fire: pray thou that we be saved.  
Glory ..., Trinitarian: With faith I worship the supra-natural Unity of the 
beginningless Trinity, not dividing the Godhead. For it is of a single kind, simple and 
indivisible. And I unite it by essence faithfully distinguishing the Hypostases.  
Theotokion: God is born an Infant through the Virgin, and He reneweth that 
which, through Adam, had become corrupt; and breaking down the middle-wall of 
partition and the chamber of enmity with His flesh, He came forth from His most 
pure Mother, abolishing the curse of our first mother.  
Katavasia: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet 
ye Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the 
Lord, * and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
ODE III  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 
Dispel all the barrenness of my fruitless thoughts and reveal my soul to be fertile in 
the virtues, O all-holy Theotokos, thou helper of the faithful.  
O all-immaculate one, who for us hast given birth unto the unwaning Light, deliver 
me from all condemnation and from the manifold temptations of the serpent, from 
fire and from darkness.  
I stand all-condemned at the dread tribunal, by the unquenchable fire and stern 
sentence, O pure one. Hasten thou to save me, thy servant, before the end, O good 
one.  
Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, O all-hymned Virgin, for with divine grace thou 
didst, for the sake of His Cross, make those who became corrupt by the fruit of the 
tree partakers of incorruption.  
Canon I of the holy apostle  
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
Not summoned, but of thine own will didst thou run like a thirsting hart to the 
Wellspring of life, and having found Him thou didst preach Him to all; and having 
drunk thereof thou didst drench the parched ends of the earth with the waters of 
incorruption.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Mindful of the laws of nature, O right wondrous Andrew, thou didst take thy kins-
man into partnership, crying out: We have found the Desired One! And to him who 
prepared the way by his birth in the flesh thou didst reveal spiritual knowledge.  
From the depths of delusion hast thou taken the rational fish in the net of the 
Word, O apostle, and brought as pure food to the table of Christ: those who have 
been enlightened by the grace of Him Who appeared in the likeness of the flesh.  
Theotokion: Though thou didst conceive God in thy womb, O Virgin, by the all-
holy Spirit thou wast preserved unconsumed, for to Moses the law-giver the unburnt 
bush manifestly foretold thee, who aflame, received the unbearable Fire.  
Canon II of the holy apostle 
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 
Peter and Andrew straightway followed Christ, Who summoned them, saying, 
Come, follow me! leaving their father, their boat and nets, for they were visionaries of 
faith.  
Transforming pagan temples into churches, O all-honored one, thou didst sanctify 
therein sons of baptism, whom grace hath renewed through the water and the Spirit.  
Thou didst mystically set before the world the pearl of great price which was hid 
within the field of thy heart, O apostle, which the Gentiles, finding, treasured 
faithfully.  
Taking up the Gospel in thy hands as a treasure, O much lauded one, thou didst 
enrich all the earth with thy divine preaching. Wherefore, it doth honor thy memory 
and thy sufferings.  
Glory ..., Trinitarian: Let us all hymn chanting in an Orthodox manner the Trinity, 
the one power of the beginningless, uncreated, consubstantial, co-enthroned, tri-
hypostatic, three-sunned God.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: Every mother that beareth a child can no longer be a 
virgin; but thou, O Virgin Mother, having given birth unto Christ, remained so, 
nourishing our Life with milk and remaining pure.  
Katavasia: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before 
all ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * 
to Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art 
Thou, O Lord. 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy apostle, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
We honor thee as is meet, O apostle Andrew, as the first-called of all the disciples 
and an eyewitness and minister of the Word; for, fervently and with unwavering faith, 
thou didst follow the Lamb that taketh away the sins of the world. And thereafter 
showed thyself to be a sharer in the sufferings of Him Who willingly endured death 
for our sake. Wherefore, we cry to thee: Pray thou to Christ God, that He grant 
remission of sins unto those who, with love, celebrate thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., another Sessional Hymn, in the same melody: 
Setting at naught the audacity of the idols and yearning for the sufferings of Christ, 
thou didst show thyself to be an apostle, O blessed Andrew, raining down wonders 
from heaven, teaching othe nations, O all-blessed one. Wherefore, honoring thy 
memory as is meet, in hymns we glorify and faithfully magnify thee, O apostle of the 
Lord. Pray thou to Christ God, that He grant remission of sins to those who with 
love celebrate thy holy memory.  
Now and ever ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Rejoice, O fiery throne of God! Rejoice, O Maiden, royal seat and lavishly 
furnished couch, chamber hung with gold-embroidered purple, cloak of scarlet, 
temple adorned, chariot of lightning, most radiant candlestick! Rejoice, twelve-walled 
city, gate cast of gold, radiant bridal chamber, magnificently appointed banquet hall 
and divinely embellished tabernacle! Rejoice, glorious Bride, radiant as the sun! 
Rejoice, thou who alone art the splendor of my soul!  
ODE IV  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
O all-holy Virgin, undefiled tabernacle, with the most pure sprinklings of thy 
compassions do thou cleanse me now who have been defiled with iniquities, and 
extend unto me a helping hand, that I may cry aloud: Glory to thee, O pure and 
divinely glorious one!  
Thou hast shown thyself to be the consecrated temple of God, Who, in a manner 
surpassing understanding, made His abode within thee. Him do thou entreat, that He 
cleanse us of the defilement of sin, that we may be known as temples and habitations 
of the Spirit.  
Have mercy on me, O Theotokos, who alone hast given birth unto the Source of 
mercy, and by thy supplications put an end to the cruel pain of my soul and the 
perplexity of my heart, granting me a stream of tears and divine compunction before 
mine end.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
The prophet wrote through the divine Spirit, knowing thee to be the over-
shadowed mountain, O pure one. By thy mediation cleanse those who have been 
consumed by the flame of transgressions, O Virgin, who alone dost set men aright.  
Canon I of the holy apostle 
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain overshadowed 
by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy One of Israel * 
would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and restoration. 
The divine and consuming power of the higher, all-accomplishing and radiant 
Spirit, Who, in a godly manner, made His abode within thee in the form of a tongue 
of fire, O Andrew, showed thee to be a preacher of ineffable things.  
The all-honored Andrew did not take up weapons of the flesh for retribution, even 
to lay low the strong citadels of the enemy, but, protected by Christ, having captured 
the nations, he brought them to obedience.  
Our super-essential God, Who assumed our nature, hath revealed thee, O Andrew, 
to be a mountain pouring forth noetic gladness, destroying the cruel mountains of 
demonic arrogance.  
By thy supplications, O most noetically rich Andrew, never cease to fill with the 
bountiful gifts of Christ, thy Teacher, those who with love celebrate thy memory in 
hymns.  
Theotokion: We hymn thy great and awesome mystery, for He Who is ever 
existing, hiding Himself from the supra-mundane legions, descended upon thee like 
the dew upon the fleece, unto our salvation and restoration, O all-hymned one.  
Canon II of the holy apostle 
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
Having cast aside thy nets and taken up the Cross, thou didst follow after Christ 
Who called thee, and, stretching out the net of the Spirit, thou dost catch souls 
instead of fish. Glory to Him Who gaveth thee the Spirit!  
Having received the flaming tongue of the Spirit, thou didst become a man well-
pleasing unto God, O apostle, going about the beauties of heaven, recognizing the 
noetic comeliness therein, and revealing it to us.  
Thou didst water the parched desert with thy divine words, O wise one, and didst 
show it forth as fertile, bearing fruit, the children of the Church, through the casting 
of the divine seed. Glory be to Him Who gaveth thee the Spirit!  
Perceiving Thine ineffable goodness, O Jesus, Andrew summoned his kinsman, 
saying: O Peter, my blood kinsman, we have found the Messiah, Who was proclaimed 

--- PAGE 14 ---
in the Law and the Prophets! Come, let us truly join ourselves unto Life!  
Glory ..., Trinitarian: O ye faithful, let us hymn the Trinity in Unity: the Father, the 
Son, and the divine Spirit, One in Godhead, Essence and Nature, indivisible, 
inseparable, undivided, for He is One God in three Hypostases.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: Having ineffably conceived One of the Trinity in thy 
womb, thou didst incorruptly give birth unto Him as a Son; yet the Trinity was not at 
any time added to, and as thou wast pure before giving birth, thou wast kept whole, 
O Mother of God.  
Katavasia: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, 
* O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 
ODE V  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, * for we know no other God than 
Thee, * and we call upon Thy Name, * for Thou art the God of the living and 
the dead. 
Open thou the eyes of my heart, O pure one, to see clearly the divine radiance and 
thine ineffable glory, that I may receive mercy and eternal glory.  
O all-immaculate one, thou didst give birth unto One of the honored Trinity, Who 
is one in Hypostasis, two in will. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that we all be saved.  
O most pure one, as thou didst bear our Savior and God, keep thine unprofitable 
servant safe from all sorrow, sickness and affliction.  
Entreat Him Whom thou didst bear in a manner surpassing understanding, O 
Virgin, that He save those who cry to thee with faith: Rejoice, O all-immaculate 
Virgin! Rejoice, O blessed one, intercessor for the world!  
Canon I of the holy apostle 
Irmos: O Hou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O 
Christ, * and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * enlighten with 
the light of thine understanding * the hearts of those who with right worship 
hymn Thee.  
Thou didst receive Him for Whom thou didst long, O apostle Andrew, making 
thine abode with Him in the incorruptible mansions, worthily having harvested the 
sheaves of thy labors. Wherefore, we glorify thee with hymns.  
Thou didst love the Master, and quickly didst thou run after Him, guided in life by 
His footprints and sincerely emulating His sufferings even unto death, O most 
honorable Andrew.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Having drawn thee like a mighty arrow, O blessed one, the Lord loosed thee upon 
the world, wounding the demons and healing souls wounded by impiety.  
Theotokion: The hosts of heaven are gladdened at the sight of thee, and with them 
rejoice assemblies of mankind; for by thy birthgiving, a Virgin Theotokos, they are 
united, glorifying thee as is meet.  
Canon II of the holy apostle 
Irmos: Illumine our minds with the light * of Thy commandments * and with 
the radiant splendor of Thy grace, O God, * granting us Thy mercy O Good 
One, * for Thy precepts are light and peace.  
Having yearned for the Cross, O disciple of Christ, through thy cross thou didst 
obtain the incorruptible kingdom, drawing all the initiates of God thereto by the 
Cross, granting an inheritance unto us, the theologians thereof.  
Thou didst truly search for Christ our Life, and having searched, thou wast first to 
find Him; and having found Him, thou didst mystically embrace Him; and having 
received the Giver Himself, thou didst become a treasury of life incorruptible.  
The utterances of thy divine thundering were poured forth throughout the world 
and traveled from one end of the earth to the other, for they have circled round like a 
wheel; and thy lightnings, as David saith, have appeared to the whole world.  
Remember us who celebrate thy memory and venerate thy relics, O disciple of 
Christ. Pray thou ever earnestly on behalf of the flock whose preserver and salvation 
thou hast been from the beginning.  
Glory ..., Trinitarian: O ye faithful, together let us glorify God: the Father, the Son, 
and the Holy Spirit, the indivisible Trinity, the tri-hypostatic Kingdom, faithfully 
glorifying It with unceasing theology. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou didst give birth to the Light knowing not how, O 
thou who hast borne the lamp of the Light of the Sun; the new tabernacle of divine 
light, emitting rays of divine knowledge upon the whole world.  
Katavasia: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou 
hast sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * 
Wherefore guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching 
by night we glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
ODE VI  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Defiled by many sins, I pray to thee who art good, the undefiled tabernacle: 
Cleanse me of all pollution by thy mediation!  
O pure one, be thou a pilot for me who am ever tossed about upon the abyss of 
evils by the temptations of life, and guiding me to the haven of salvation, do thou 
save me.  
Threefold waves of evil thoughts, assaults of the passions and the abyss of sin 
bestorm my wretched soul. Help me, O holy Lady!  
Christ ever wrought great things for thee. Him do thou ever beseech, that He 
magnify in me His great mercy, O thou that art full of grace divine.  
Canon I of the holy apostle 
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to deliver 
us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save Thy people 
O our God, * for Thou art the strength and restoration of the weak. 
Sailing the sea of life in the vessel of thy body, thou didst discover Christ, the 
Steersman Who guideth all things, O all-blessed one, and thou didst stand before 
Him rejoicing, O most honored Andrew.  
Evil spirits are cast out at thy word, infirmities take flight, a multitude of spiritual 
passions are driven far away from the afflicted by the grace given thee by God, O 
Andrew.  
Like a calm wave, moved by a meek spirit, O blessed one, with divine streams 
didst thou drain the sea of wicked polytheism and didst pour forth rivers of divine 
knowledge for all.  
Theotokion: O most pure Virgin, the ancestors of our race are gladdened on thine 
account, having received through thee Eden, which they had lost through 
transgression, for thou art pure both before and after giving birth.  
Canon II of the holy apostle 
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
He that was led away from Bethsaida doth summon us to hold festival, having set 
before us the solemnity of the commemoration of his struggles.  
By trade a fisherman, by faith a disciple, plumbing the depths of the heart of the 
faithful, he doth lower the hook of the word and doth catch us.  
Spreading the fire of the love of Christ within thy heart, O disciple, thou didst cry 
out to the Gentiles: Your flame doth burn for Christ, Who hath truly appeared!  
Having seasoned your minds with the salt of Christ, your wages have sweetened 
the heavenly dogmas of unwaning delight for us.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Glory ..., Trinitarian: The Father, the Son, and the right Spirit, the tri-hypostatic 
Essence, indivisible, let us worship, O ye faithful, crying out: Glory to God in Trinity!  
Both now ..., Theotokion: At the good pleasure of the Father and through the 
Holy Spirit was the Son incarnate in thy womb, O pure Birthgiver of God, and 
manifestly did He save that which was formerly in His image.  
Katavasia: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a 
babe from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken 
flesh, * came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not 
subject to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “In supplications ...”:  
The divinely eloquent namesake of manliness, * the eminent follower of the 
Church, * the kinsman of Peter, let us praise, * for as of old he was called, so now he 
calleth us: ** Come ye, we have found the Desired One!  
Ikos: Of old David constrained a sinner like me to declare the precepts of God 
honorably. And again he teacheth and with many tears doth proclaim: Today, if ye 
will hear His voice, harden not your hearts as Israel once embittered themselves! And 
he leadeth the rest in psalmody: Come ye, hymn the Lord, all ye lands, for we have 
found the Desired One!  
ODE VII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither touched 
nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a single mouth * 
Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * 'O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou.' 
Hallow thou my soul, defiled by the passions, for I am ever thy servant, O pure 
one, and quickly put an end to the grievous captivity of my mind, the hardness of my 
heart and the assaults of the demons.  
O all-immaculate one, enliven my mind which hath been slain by the passions of 
the flesh, and strengthen me to do that which is pleasing unto God, that I may 
magnify thee and ever glorify thy loving-kindness.  
Cleansing me of the grievous defilement of my lowly soul, O Virgin, from the 
pursuit of the invisible foe do thou deliver and save me who have been slain by carnal 
passions, O pure Sovereign Lady.  
Before thee, O all-holy, undefiled and pure one, do we, thy servants, ever fall 
down, day and night, praying with contrition of heart, that by thy supplications we 
may obtain deliverance from sins by thee.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Canon I of the holy apostle 
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; * 
for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so hath He 
wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou praised and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Truly and manifestly hath Thy promise been fulfilled, O Christ, for Thy most 
divine disciple, rebuking the tempest with a word, transformed it in to a peaceful 
calm. Praised art Thou and supremely glorious, O God of our fathers!  
Commanded to ascend the mountain of the noetic Zion, O apostle, and having 
passed over death to divine life, rejoicing, thou dost bestow the cup of salvation of 
the praised and supremely glorious God of our fathers, having received it within 
thyself.  
The divine Water of life showed thee forth, O blessed one, as a noetic river drying 
up the rivers of delusion with the streams of teaching, and watering those who cry 
aloud: Praised and supremely glorious art Thou, O God of our fathers!  
Though a mortal, O apostle, thou dost supra-naturally work wonders, for, 
undergoing suffering with love, thou didst follow after Christ Who loved thee, 
chanting: Praised and supremely glorious is our God!  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, Jacob prophetically understood thee to be a ladder, for 
through thee the supremely exalted One appeared and dwelt among mankind on 
earth, as he was well-pleased so to do. Praised and supremely glorious is the God of 
our fathers!  
Canon II of the holy apostle 
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither touched 
nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a single mouth * 
Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * 'O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou.' 
O apostle of Christ, the fire of the all-holy Spirit descended from on high, and 
commanded thee to proclaim His mighty works upon the ends of the earth in new 
languages which thou hadst never spoken before.  
The proclamation which ye trumpeted forth throughout the earth astounded every 
mind, O initiates of the mysteries of Christ and beholders of lofty things, for as the 
twelve ye have enlightened the darkness covering the earth.  
O Master Christ, wondrous was Thy grace in Thy divinely wise disciples who, as 
simple and humble men, traversed the whole earth from one end thereof even unto 
all its ends.  
Who instructed thee to speak thus, O apostle? Who enlightened thy mind to 
behold clearly the radiance of the unapproachable glory which shineth forth the light 
of truth in our hearts?  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Glory ..., Trinitarian: Let us hymn the Trinity, O ye faithful, glorifying the 
beginningless Father, and the Son, and the righteous Spirit, the single Essence; and let 
us chant threefold hymns, singing: Holy, holy, holy art Thou throughout the ages! 
Amen.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: O Christ, we glorify Thee as One of the Trinity, for, 
having become incarnate from the Virgin without undergoing change, Thou didst 
bear all things as a man without departing from the Father's essence, O Jesus, even 
though Thou wast united unto us.  
Katavasia: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children 
brought up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing 
in the midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
In a godly manner the Incorporeal One became incarnate from thee, O most pure 
one. Him do thou entreat that the passions of my soul be slain, and that it be 
enlivened, for of old it was slain by most wicked sins.  
In giving birth unto our Savior and God, thou didst remedy the affliction of 
Adam, who was fashioned from dust. Him do thou beseech to heal the wounds of my 
soul, which is incurably afflicted.  
Raise me up who lie in the depths of evil, and vanquish now the enemies that war 
against me. Disdain not my soul which hath been wounded with wicked passions, O 
pure one, but take pity and save me.  
O pure one, who hast given birth unto the Physician of all, heal thou the suffering 
of my heart, and beseech Christ to show me forth as one that hath a share in the 
portion of the righteous, O Virgin.  
Canon I of the holy apostle 
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone more 
brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed: Bless 
the Lord all ye works of the Lord, * hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
O Andrew, apostle of Christ, thy divine memory doth emanate with radiant and 
gladdening rays of healing upon us who cry aloud: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Possessed of human nature, thou didst transcend the laws thereof and pass on to 
the habitations of the angels, O apostle Andrew; crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
The inspiration of the Spirit of God, which before illumined thee with fire from 
on high, O divinely eloquent apostle, hath revealed thee to be a zealous orator who 
crieth out to thy Christ: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him 
supremely throughout all ages!  
Thou didst flash forth like lightning, like a radiant light unto the Gentiles, 
dispelling the darkness of ignorance and illumining the faithful, who cry aloud: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages!  
Theotokion: Rejoice, thou throne of the glory of God! Rejoice, rampart of the 
faithful through which Christ hath shone forth, the Light of those who are in 
darkness, who bless thee and cry aloud: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon II of the holy apostle 
Irmos: The bush which burnt on Sinai * was preserved unconsumed, * 
likewise the children in the midst of the burning flame * were delivered by 
God, * hymn ye, bless and supremely exalt Him * throughout the ages!  
With the craft of fishing thou didst draw fish from the sea, O all-wise one, and 
now, with faith, thou dost draw forth souls for Christ, from the delusion of the 
enemy. For such deception was once an abyss which drowned the nations in the 
storm of impiety.  
With faith in Christ thou didst navigate the noetic abyss of life without capsizing, 
O apostle, propelled by the sail of the Spirit. Wherefore, thou hast attained unto the 
harbor of life rejoicing throughout all ages.  
When the noetic Sun willingly set upon the Tree, the great Andrew, the lamp of 
the Church, the beacon of the Sun, seeking to end his life with Christ and to set in 
Him, was hung upon the wood of a cross.  
O disciple and beloved friend of Christ, and one of His apostles: when the Judge 
sitteth upon His throne with you, His twelve, to render judgment as He hath 
promised, be ye then a rampart of love for mankind and for us.  
We bless the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the Lord:  
Trinitarian: Let us glorify the thrice-radiant Unity, the equally-enthroned Trinity, 
not separating it, but uniting It consubstantially as truly One Essence, united without 
commingling in three Hypostases.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: Having conceived, thou didst give birth unto one of the 
Trinity, Who, incarnate from thee, renewed the laws of nature by thy birthgiving, O 
pure one. Cease not to ever beseech Him as God on our behalf, O Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Katavasia: The furnace moist with dew showed forth an image * of a wonder 
past nature, * for it burned not the youths whom it had received; * neither did 
the fire of the Godhead consume the Virgin * when it descended into her 
womb. * Wherefore, chanting, we sing: * Let all creation bless the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
ODE IX  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of all 
descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom He was 
incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as the pure 
Mother of God.  
Sin-loving, I remain indifferent, O pure one, yet I tremble at the impartial 
judgment, at which do thou preserve me uncondemned by thy holy prayers, that I 
may ever bless thee, mine intercessor, O Bride of God.  
Having done shameful things on earth, I fear the judgment and the inexorable 
gaze of thy Son, O Virgin; wherefore, I cry to thee: O all-tenderly compassionate 
Lady, help me, and rescue me from want at that time, and save me, O pure one!  
How fearful is the day of judgment, O Maiden! How dreadful is the sentence! 
How grievous my shame! Who can withstand the rest, O most pure Lady? Have 
mercy on my suffering soul, and grant me remission before the end, O pure one!  
O all-immaculate one, who hast given birth unto the divine Light, illumine me who 
am darkened by the assaults of the wicked one and who have angered God with all 
manner of evils; and lead me to do good works, for thou art the cause of all good 
things.  
Canon I of the holy apostle 
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy pure 
birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * quench the 
raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may unceasingly 
magnify Thee. 
As a most excellent disciple, following even thy Master unto death, Who was 
crucified of His own will upon the Cross, thou didst ascend the heights of thy cross 
rejoicing, and passed on to the heavens, O blessed Andrew.  
The gates of Eden were opened unto thee, and the ladder of heaven was set up for 
thee. The mansions of heaven received thee and thou didst stand, rejoicing, before 
Christ, the Bestower of life, O apostle, most eminent intercessor for the world.  
Thou wast glorified by sufferings like unto those of thy Teacher, O blessed and all-
wise Andrew; for thou didst receive thine end through a cross and wast deified 
through communion. Wherefore, we beseech thee: Ever pray thou on our behalf.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Rejoice, most excellent pair, having now inherited citizenship in the heavens! Ye 
have transcended the desire for crowds; having conquered the power thereof, and ye 
illumine us with the radiance of divine gifts.  
Theotokion: Thou didst spring forth from the root of David, the Prophet and 
forefather of God, O Virgin; but thou hast glorified David, for thou hast given birth 
unto the Lord of glory, Whom he prophesied. Hymning Him, we magnify thee as is 
meet.  
Canon II of the holy apostle 
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of all 
descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom He was 
incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as the pure 
Mother of God.  
O holy one, who spread out the net of the mystic knowledge of God, and who 
ensnared fish therein with the beauties of heavenly thoughts: Entreat the Holy Trinity 
to pour forth cleansing upon us.  
The nations enlightened by thee and led up from earth to the heavens by thee give 
thanks, for, wrested from the service of the enemy, they have become co-dwellers 
with the holy angels, and partakers of the glory of the Lord.  
O ye apostles, witnesses of ineffable things and ministers of the Word, performers 
of the mysteries and beholders of inscrutable things: Pray ye that we become heirs to 
the Kingdom of Christ and partakers in His divinity.  
Having received from Christ the power to bind and to loose, loose ye us all from 
the bonds of our many transgressions when Christ shall come and all ye twelve will be 
seated upon thrones to judge the tribes of Israel.  
Glory ..., Trinitarian: Unceasingly we glorify in heaven and on earth the 
incomprehensible Trinity, the tri-hypostatic Essence, the indivisible Glory which is 
hymned in one Godhead, piously worshipping the Father, the Son and the Holy 
Spirit.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: We flee with faith to thy tender compassion, piously 
worshipping thy Son, O Virgin Birthgiver of God. Him do thou entreat as the God 
and Lord of all the world, that He deliver us from corruption, misfortune and every 
temptation.  
Katavasia: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is 
heaven; * the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in 
which Christ God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and 
magnify. 
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Exapostilarion of the holy apostle:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”:  
Finding thee, the beginningless Word revealed thee to be the first-called of all the 
apostles, O all-blessed and ever-memorable Andrew; and having followed in His 
footsteps, thou didst show thyself to be a guide for those who are astray, leading 
them to the divine and heavenly path.  
Glory ..., Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
Most gloriously let us praise the apostle Andrew, the brother of Peter, the first of 
all the disciples, the beholder and servant of Him Who is the Word, for he hath 
enlightened the nations and, crucified, met his end as a disciple of the Master.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: O all-immaculate Virgin, with Andrew the first-called 
entreat God, to Whom thou hast given birth, on behalf of all who piously honor thee, 
that we may receive the splendor of thy Son and a place to stand with the elect and all 
the saints; for what thou dost wish, thou canst do.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Be glad now, O Bethsaida, * for the most fragrant lilies, Peter and Andrew, * have 
blossomed forth in thee from the vale of their mother, * perfuming the whole world * 
with the preaching of the Faith by the grace of Christ; ** and they have shared also in 
His sufferings.  
Rejoice and make glad, O Andrew, * for, clearly, in the radiance of the Word, * 
thou hast received Christ, the Sun of glory, the Bestower of life, * cleaving to Him 
with faith, thou didst preach Him. * Him do thou unceasingly entreat ** on behalf of 
us who hymn thee with faith.  
Andrew, the beholder of God, * the teacher of the mysteries of the divine 
dispensation of Christ, * elect among the first to be disciples of the Word, * 
beholding Peter, his brother, crying aloud, said: * We have found the Messiah ** 
Whom the Scriptures and the prophets have foretold!  
Thankfully honoring thee, * the city of Patras hath acquired thee as its pastor, * a 
divine protector, * a deliverer from all manner of misfortunes, and its preserver. * 
Unceasingly pray thou for it, ** that it be kept unharmed.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Let us praise Andrew, the preacher of the Faith and servant of the Word, for he 
hath drawn forth men from the abyss, wielding the Cross instead of a rod; and 
lowering a line of power, he leadeth up souls from the deception of the enemy, and 
doth ever offer them to God as an acceptable gift. Let us praise him, ye faithful, 
among the choirs of the Disciples of Christ, that he may pray with them, that Christ 
be merciful unto us on the day of Judgment.  
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
 
Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Receive thou, O Bethlehem, the Mother of God, for the unapproachable Light 
cometh to be born in thee. O ye angels, marvel in heaven. O mankind, give glory on 
earth. O ye Magi from Persia, bring ye your most glorious threefold gifts. Ye 
shepherds abiding in the fields, chant ye the thrice-holy hymn: Let every breath praise 
the Maker of all.  
Great Doxology. Troparia. Litinies. Dismissal. First Hour 

--- PAGE 25 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I of the holy apostle, 
and 4 from ODE VI of Canon II of the holy apostle.  
Not summoned, but of thine own will didst thou run like a thirsting hart to the 
Wellspring of life, and having found Him thou didst preach Him to all; and having 
drunk thereof thou didst drench the parched ends of the earth with the waters of 
incorruption. (Twice) 
Mindful of the laws of nature, O right wondrous Andrew, thou didst take thy kins-
man into partnership, crying out: We have found the Desired One! And to him who 
prepared the way by his birth in the flesh thou didst reveal spiritual knowledge.  
From the depths of delusion hast thou taken the rational fish in the net of the 
Word, O apostle, and brought as pure food to the table of Christ: those who have 
been enlightened by the grace of Him Who appeared in the likeness of the flesh.  
He that was led away from Bethsaida doth summon us to hold festival, having set 
before us the solemnity of the commemoration of his struggles.  
By trade a fisherman, by faith a disciple, plumbing the depths of the heart of the 
faithful, he doth lower the hook of the word and doth catch us.  
Glory ..., Trinitarian: The Father, the Son, and the right Spirit, the tri-hypostatic 
Essence, indivisible, let us worship, O ye faithful, crying out: Glory to God in Trinity!  
Both now ..., Theotokion: At the good pleasure of the Father and through the 
Holy Spirit was the Son incarnate in thy womb, O pure Birthgiver of God, and 
manifestly did He save that which was formerly in His image.  
Troparion of the holy apostle, in Tone IV:  
As thou art the first-called of the apostles * and the brother of the pre-eminent 
one, * entreat thou the Master of all, O Andrew, * that He grant peace to the world 
** and great mercy to our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy apostle, in Tone II: 
The divinely eloquent namesake of manliness, * the eminent follower of the 
Church, * the kinsman of Peter, let us praise, * for as of old he was called, so now he 
calleth us: ** Come ye, we have found the Desired One!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * 
and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands.  
 

--- PAGE 26 ---
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS(4:9-16) 
Brethren: God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed to death: for 
we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. We are fools for 
Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are 
honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and 
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place; and labor, 
working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: 
being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the off 
scouring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as my 
beloved sons I warn you. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet 
have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel. 
Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy 
truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
READING FROM THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN(1:35-51) 
At that time: John stood, and two of his disciples; and looking upon Jesus as he 
walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God! And the two disciples heard him speak, 
and they followed Jesus. Then Jesus turned, and saw them following, and saith unto 
them, What seek ye? They said unto him, Rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted, 
Master,) where dwellest thou? He saith unto them, Come and see. They came and saw 
where he dwelt, and abode with him that day: for it was about the tenth hour. One of 
the two which heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's 
brother. He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto him: We have found 
the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ. And he brought him to Jesus. 
And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art Simon the son of Jona: thou shalt be 
called Cephas, which is by interpretation, a stone. The day following Jesus would go 
forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip, and saith unto him: Follow me. Now Philip was 
of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto 
him: We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, 
Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any 
good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and see. Jesus saw 
Nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no 
guile! Nathanael saith unto him: Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered and said 
unto him: Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw 
thee. Nathanael answered and saith unto him: Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou 
art the King of Israel. Jesus answered and said unto him: Because I said unto thee, I 

--- PAGE 27 ---
saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou? Thou shalt see greater things than these. 
And he saith unto him: Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see heaven 
open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.  
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
