--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 4th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY GREAT-MARTYR BARBARA  
& OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER JOHN OF DAMASCUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
When at the dreadful tribunal, * the all-blessed Juliana, * beholding the glorious 
martyr Barbara, * who was covered with wounds, * her whole body lacerated by 
divers tortures, * cried out with fervent tears: * “O Word of God Who lovest 
mankind, * grant that I may now share ** in her torments!”  
The holy Barbara and Juliana, * possessed of a single yearning * towards piety, * 
contended against the enemy, * and, having mightily vanquished him, * they were 
deemed worthy of glory * by Christ God. * Wherefore, having done away with 
destructive passions, ** they bestow healings upon all the faithful.  
When sweet death was pronounced upon thee, * O most honored martyr Barbara, 
* thou didst quickly end thy course, rejoicing; * and thou wast slaughtered by * the 
all-iniquitous hands of thine ungodly father, * offering thyself up to God as comely 
fruit. * Wherefore, truly joining chorus with the wise virgins, * thou dost behold the 
effulgence ** of Christ thy Bridegroom.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O all-wise father John, * thou hast adorned the Church of Christ with thy hymns, * 
sweetly chanting things most divine * through the activity of the Spirit, * O all-
glorious father, * striking thy harp * and emulating all the musical modes of David. * 
And causing it to sound, ** thou hast drawn all to thee with divine hymns.  
O glorious father John, * having forsaken, the tumultuous turmoil of the world, * 
thou didst hasten to the tranquility of Christ, * O venerable one, * and wast truly 
enriched * with divine visions and acts * and manifest most noetically rich splendors. 
* These hast thou imparted to the faithful, ** O most blessed one, resplendent in thy 
godly life.  
Come, O ye earthborn, * and with hymns let us piously hymn today * the sacred 
and honorable festival * of the venerable John; * for he was truly deemed worthy * to 
receive divine illumination. * O Thine ineffable compassion, O Lord, * whereby we 
have come to know ** how to glorify Thee, the Supremely good One!  
Glory ..., of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VI:  
Forsaking homeland, birthright and possessions, O Barbara, * and spurning thine 
ungodly father, * thou didst come to love God, * to Whom thou didst betroth thyself; 
* and thou didst become known as a great merchant. * Him do thou entreat, ** that 
our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure Virgin Mother, * beholding the most iniquitous 
people * who unjustly nailed Thee to the Tree, ** was wounded within, as Symeon 
foretold.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Oktoechos, and  
Glory ..., of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
O venerable father, report of thy corrections hath gone forth into all the earth. 
Wherefore, thou hast received the reward of thy labors in the heavens, and having 
destroyed hordes of the demons, thou hast attained unto the ranks of the angels, 
whose life thou didst blamelessly emulate. As thou hast boldness before Christ God, 
ask thou peace for our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI:  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth birth to 
Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son How is it 
that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Let us honor the holy Barbara; for the most honored one * broke the snares of the 
enemy and was delivered from them like a bird, ** with the help and aid of the Cross.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Teacher of Orthodoxy, instructor of piety and chastity, * luminary of the Church, 
God-inspired nourishment of monastics, * O supremely wise John, thou spiritual 
flute illumining all, ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Let us honor the holy Barbara; for the most honored one * broke the snares of the 
enemy and was delivered from them like a bird, ** with the help and aid of the Cross. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., that of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Teacher of Orthodoxy, instructor of piety and chastity, * luminary of the Church, 
God-inspired nourishment of monastics, * O supremely wise John, thou spiritual 
flute illumining all, ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  
One canon from the Oktoechos, with 6 Troparia; and one canon for each of the 
saints, each with 4 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II:  
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh's whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
O most blessed and honored Trinity Who givest gifts to Thy servants which are 
beyond understanding, breathe Thou a ray of splendor into my darkened mind, that I 
may praise the ever-memorable martyr Barbara. (Twice)  
The glory of Thy martyrs hath truly passed every bound of praise, O Lover of 
mankind; yet, accepting the praise we offer thee with faith according to our measure, 
O Master, send down upon us rich rewards.  
A most beauteous rose sprang forth from a thorny root and hath perfumed the 
Church of Christ: the glorious Barbara, who dyed her vesture in the blood of her 
suffering. Her do we hymn as is meet.  
Canon of the venerable one, in Tone II: 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh's whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
To me who desires to begin thy praises, grant me now thy honeyed voice, O 
venerable one, wherewith thou didst with hymns illumine the Orthodox Church 
which honoreth thy memory, O father John. (Twice)  
Perceiving the nature of things most excellently, as a wise judge keen of intellect, 
thou didst prefer eternal things to those which do not last; for thou didst trade 
transitory things for those which are abiding, O John, where Christ hath now glorified 
thee.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to surpass all creation, visible and invisible, O 
pure Ever-virgin; for thou gayest birth to the Creator, in that it was His good pleasure 
to become incarnate in thy womb. Him do thou entreat with boldness, that He save 
those who hymn thee.  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy great-martyr  
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a lily * 
at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established. 
Wounded by the love of Thee, her Bridegroom, O Master, the passion-bearer 
Barbara rejected all the ungodliness of her father with unrestrained vehemence.  
Neither the sweet beauty and comeliness of flowers, nor riches, nor yet the 
sweetness of youth satisfied thee, O goodly virgin, glorious Barbara, who had become 
the bride of Christ.  
Neither the hindrance of a feminine nature or youthful stature impeded the 
martyr's perfect struggles, O Christ; for she was fortified by Thine invisible power.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a lily * 
at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established. 
Thou didst distribute thy wealth, thereby giving it back to God; wherefore, the 
kingdom in the heavens hath been prepared for thee, and thou hast now received 
abundant rewards, O John.  
Receiving a talant of wisdom, O John, thou didst adorn the Church of Christ, 
adorning it with thy deeds; and, departing this life, thou hast increased it exceedingly.  
Theotokion: The ranks of angels were astonished, O most pure one, and the 
hearts of mortals were filled with awe at thy birthgiving. Wherefore, we honor thee, 
the Theotokos, with faith.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up upon the Cross ...”: 
Let us hymn John, the honored and divinely eloquent speaker and hymnographer, 
* the instructor and teacher of the Church, * the opponent of the enemy; * for taking 
up the Cross of the Lord as a sword, * he hath cut down all the falsehood of heresies, 
* and as a fervent intercessor before God ** he bestoweth forgiveness of 
transgressions upon all.  
Ikos: Together let us cry out to the instructor, teacher and priest of the Church, as 
an initiate of ineffable mysteries: By thy supplications to God open our mouths and 
grant that we may speak the words of thy doctrines; for thou didst appear in the 
world as one who shares in the Trinity, shining forth in too world like another sun, 
illumining all with thy miracles and teachings, like Moses ever instructing in the law of 
the Lord. And thou wast a luminary in word and deed, praying unceasingly, that 
forgiveness of transgressions be given to all.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy great-martyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
In thy suffering thou didst amaze all, for thou didst endure the wounding, bonds, 
tortures and imprisonment inflicted upon thee by the tormenters, O all-famed 
Barbara. Wherefore, Christ hath given thee a crown in heaven, and it is to Him that 
thou didst flee, desiring Him earnestly. He hath imparted grace to thee, O martyr, to 
pour forth healings upon all.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone III:  
Thou hast been shown to us to be a melodious and sanctified trumpet, O most 
sacred one, sounding forth in hymnody the teachings of the Lord and Savior to the 
ends of the earth; and by thy words thou hast illumined the earth, O venerable John, 
entreat Christ God, that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only most pure Virgin Mother, 
* who hast surpassed the angels in purity. * With the divine waters of thy 
supplications cleanse me, * who more than all others am dust and defiled * by carnal 
transgressions, O pure one, ** and grant me great mercy. 
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished ewe-lamb of the Word, * the incorrupt Virgin 
Mother, * beholding Him Who sprang forth from her without pain * suspended upon 
the Cross, cried out, maternally lamenting: * “Woe is me, O my Child! * How is it that 
Thou dost suffer willingly, * desiring to redeem mankind ** from the indignity of the 
passions?” 
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, Thou hast given to virgin maidens the 
boldness to cast down the deceiver. Wherefore, the right victorious Barbara put his 
arrogance to shame 
Our first mother, led astray of old by the machinations of the deceiver, wast driven 
from the food of paradise; but Barbara, putting him to shame, hath now made her 
abode in the bridal-chamber of heaven.  
Thou didst destroy the power of death by Thy Cross; wherefore, the maiden 
Barbara, sparing not her body, most valiantly endured wounding with steadfast mind.  
Canon of the Venerable One  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Submitting to the command of Christ, thou didst forsake the beauty, wealth, 
sweetness and splendor of the world; and taking up thy cross for His sake, O wise 
John, thou didst follow after Him.  
Impoverishing thyself for Christ Who impoverished Himself for the sake of our 
salvation, thou wast glorified with Him as He promised, and dost now reign with 
Him Who reigneth forever, O John.  
Theotokion: All of us, the faithful, know thee to be the haven of salvation and an 
invincible rampart, O Lady Theotokos; for by thy supplications thou dost deliver our 
souls from tribulations.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: O Christ God Thou art a mediator between God and man; * for by 
Thee, O Master, * we have been led from the night of ignorance, * to Thy 
Father, the Source of light.  
Commanding that the bath-house be lighted by three windows, O Barbara, thou 
didst mystically describe baptism, which, through the light of the Trinity, is the 
radiant cleansing of thy soul. (Twice) 
Aflame with zeal for God, the all-praised maiden Barbara spat upon the vile faces 
of the false deities, putting to shame the prince of this world.  
Opening for Barbara, who was fleeing the savagery of her cruel father, the 
mountain straightway received her, like the ever-memorable protomartyr Thecla of 
old, Christ having wrought a miracle.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: O Christ God Thou art a mediator between God and man; * for by 
Thee, O Master, * we have been led from the night of ignorance, * to Thy 
Father, the Source of light.  
Made steadfast in the divine life by the fear of Christ, O father John, thou didst 
subject all thy carnal mind to thy spirit, cleansing thy senses.  
Having assiduously purified body, mind and soul of all defilement, O divinely wise 
one, thou didst receive the splendor of the threefold Sun, Who hath enriched thee 
with radiant gifts.  
Theotokion: Entreat thy Son and Lord, O pure Virgin; that He grant deliverance 
from the assaults of the adversary to all captives and peace to those who place their 
hope on thee.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: I am held fast in the depths of sin O Savior, * and am overwhelmed by 
the sea of life, * but as Jonah was delivered from the sea-monster, * so also 
deliver me from the passions, * and save me.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
As Thou didst promise to give divinely inspired wisdom to those who stand before 
the tyrants' tribunals for Thy sake, the martyr Barbara was filled therewith. (Twice) 
With divinely wise words thou didst denounce the falsehood of the ungodly, O 
glorious Barbara, and in enduring the deeds of the torments thou didst astonish the 
wise.  
The blameless spiritual athlete gave her body over to be pitilessly afflicted with 
wounds and to be scraped thoroughly with rags of horse-hair, for the sake of Christ.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: I am held fast in the depths of sin O Savior, * and am overwhelmed by 
the sea of life, * but as Jonah was delivered from the sea-monster, * so also 
deliver me from the passions, * and save me.  
Illumined by the grace of the Spirit, and clearly enriched by the knowledge of 
secular things, thou didst generously give thy wealth to the needy, O John. 
Like the choirs of heaven didst thou adorn the Church in Orthodox manner, 
intoning divine harmonious hymns to the Trinity.  
Theotokion: Thou gavest birth without knowing a man, O Virgin, and remainest 
eternally virgin, revealing the true Godhead of thy Son and God in images.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up upon the Cross ...”: 
Following God Who is piously hymned in Trinity, * thou didst dim the pagan 
temples O spiritual athlete; * and suffering amid thy contest, * O Barbara of manly 
mind, * thou wast not afraid of the threats of the tyrants, * ever chanting aloud: ** “I 
worship the Trinity, the One God!”  
Ikos: Assembling, let us honor, as is meet, Barbara, who made herself the bride of 
Christ through martyrdom; for delivered from soul-corrupting danger, destruction 
and earthquake through her supplications, we lead our life in peace, and are granted 
Thy mercies, O Savior, with all the saints who have pleased Thee from ages past, to 
walk in the light and to chant with them. And Thou hast astonished all those who 
confess with faith: We worship the Trinity, the One God!  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
The tyrant who rageth in vain to destroy the earth and annihilate the sea lieth like a 
plaything beneath the feet of the maiden Barbara; for Christ, having trampled Him 
down, hath bound him like a vile bird. (Twice) 

--- PAGE 8 ---
When thy whole body was wracked with unbearable wounds and empurpled with 
the drops of thy blood, O all-praised glorious martyr Barbara, thou didst yet endure 
scorching of thy sides by candles.  
O the inhuman and pitiless savagery and exceeding ungodliness of the torments! 
For with swords they cruelly severed the breasts of the martyr as though in a 
butcher's shop, but her mind was set steadfastly on Christ, the Judge of the contest.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He is 
blessed and supremely exalted. 
Afire with zeal, thou didst strike down all the false knowledge of God-opposing 
heresies with thy splendid writings, O John, manifestly making clear what had been 
sown of old by the wise and written carefully.  
With the discourses and the dogmas compiled by thee, thou didst fervently de-
nounce the blasphemous impiety of the abominable disciples of Manes, who strove to 
infect the Church of Christ, O John.  
Theotokion: O undefiled Virgin, Mother unwedded, we know thee to be more 
holy than the saints, in that thou alone hast given birth to the immutable God; for 
thou hast poured forth incorruption upon all the faithful by thy divine birth giving.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Christ appeared to thee in prison, O Barbara, surrounded by unapproachable light, 
commanding thee to be of good cheer, healing thy wounds and granting thee joy; 
wherefore, thou hast lovingly taken wing to thy Bridegroom. 
 Manifestly hath Thy prophecy been fulfilled, O Christ; for the father gave his own 
child over to death, the wretched parent having become the instigator of Thy martyr's 
slaughter. Wherefore, he was destroyed by fire from heaven.  
An angel of light arrayed thee like a bride in brilliant vesture, O Barbara, who wast 
stripped naked for Christ's sake and wast subjected to suffering; for thou didst shed 
thy garments, receiving divine transformation.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, who 
chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Thou didst openly denounce the division of Nestorius, the confusion of Severus 
and the monothelite foolishness, O thrice-blessed John, shining forth the radiance of 
Orthodoxy upon all the ends of the earth in the one true Faith.  
The enemy abundantly sowed the tares of heresy in the Church of Christ, that the 
worship of Christ in His precious icons might be eliminated; but he did not find thee 
sleeping, O all-blessed John, who uprooted every seed of evil.  
Theotokion: Without seed didst thou conceive Him Who is inseparable from the 
Father and dwelt in thy womb as God and man, and thou hast given birth to Him 
ineffably, O most pure Birthgiver of God. Wherefore, we confess thee to be the 
salvation of us all.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Meeting the glorious end of thy martyrdom under the sword, O Barbara, and 
deemed worthy of a crown of martyrdom with Juliana, thou didst hear the voice of 
God, which filled thee with power.  
United now with Christ thy Bridegroom, shining with the glory of the divine light 
in the mansions of heaven, O Barbara, look down upon those who hymn thee, 
lightening our sufferings and leading us to the living God.  
Christ, fulfilling thy request, O Barbara, granteth healings to those who with faith 
keep thine annual memorial. For truly thy right glorious miracles have surpassed the 
sands of the sea in number.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Thou hast taught all the children of the Church to hymn in an Orthodox fashion 
the adored Unity in Trinity, and to clearly theologize concerning the divine 
incarnation of the Word, O John, explaining those things which many find difficult to 
understand in the sacred Scriptures.  
Having hymned the ranks of the saints, the pure Theotokos, the forerunner of 
Christ, the apostles, the prophets, fasters and wise teachers, the righteous and the 
martyrs, O John, thou dost now abide in their mansions.  
Theotokion: In a manner beyond understanding, O Virgin Birthgiver of God, thou 
didst become the bridal-chamber of the incarnation of the Word, arrayed and 
embroidered with the glory of the virtues. Wherefore, we proclaim thee to be the 
Theotokos, O all-immaculate one.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Exapostilarion of the Oktoechos, and that of the holy great-martyr: 
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Like a most beautiful rose, dyed with the blood of thy sacred suffering, thou didst 
spring forth from a thorny root, O virgin martyr Barbara, do thou now lovingly save 
from misfortunes those who keep thy divine memory.  
Glory ..., that of the venerable one: 
Thou didst shine forth like a divine light upon the Church, O father, illumining it 
with the splendor of thy hymns and the radiance of thy character, whereby thou hast 
been revealed adorned by the dogmas of Christ, to Whom do thou never cease to 
pray for us, O John.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Saved by thee, we confess thee to be the true Theotokos, O Lady; for thou didst 
ineffably give birth to God Who destroyed death by His Cross and drew to Himself 
the assemblies of the venerable, with whom we praise thee, O Virgin.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the holy great-martyr:  
In Tone I, the composition of Anatolius: Disdaining the sweetness of earthly food 
and the riches of thy father, and despising glory as well, thou didst love the heavenly 
Bridegroom, O all-glorious Barbara; for, beheaded by the sword, thou didst enter 
unto Christ the Bridegroom with the wise virgins. Wherefore, dispelling the deadly 
plague, thou dost heal the faithful by the activity of the Holy Spirit, praying 
unceasingly for our souls.  
In Tone II, the composition of Byzantius: The wicked enemy who lured our first-
mother into sin, hath been put to shame, vanquished by a woman; for Christ, the 
Word of the Father who became incarnate from the Virgin without change or 
commingling, as He Himself knew, lifted the curse from Eve and Adam, and He 
crowned the martyr Barbara as is meet, granting the world cleansing and great mercy 
for her sake.  
The divinely called martyr Barbara, suffering in the tribunal, said: “Cruel are my 
present torments, O ye torturers, but joyful will it be to receive everlasting life! I shall 
never prefer earthly things to those of heaven! Wherefore, cut ye and lacerate my 
flesh, and give me over the fire, that, rejoicing, I may depart unto Christ my 
Bridegroom!” Through her supplications, O Christ God, send down Thy mercies and 
save us who with faith celebrate her sufferings.  
Come, ye people, let us hymn the festival of the spiritual athlete Barbara today; for 
neither sword, nor fire, nor any torment, nor the crafty snares of Belial was able to 
triumph over her. To her do we cry out with faith: Entreat Christ, O good and all- 
glorious martyr, that He grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VI:  
Treading the path of suffering, O most honored Barbara, thou didst avoid the 
counsel of thy father. Bearing a lamp like a wise virgin, thou didst enter into the 
courts of thy Lord, and as a manly-wise martyr thou hast received the grace to heal 
carnal passions. Deliver us all, who hymn thee, from spiritual sickness by thy prayers 
unto God.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VI: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee hanging upon the Cross * the all-pure one 
weeping, cried aloud with a mother’s grief: * ‘O my Son and my God, O my sweetest 
Child, ** how dost Thou endure this shameful suffering?’ 
On the Aposticha, Stichera from the Oktoechos: 
 And Glory ..., of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
We, the multitude of monks , honor thee, our instructor, O John our father; for by 
thy footsteps we have truly learned to walk the straight path. Blessed art thou who, 
laboring for Christ, didst denounce the power of the enemy, O converser with angels, 
companion of the venerable and the righteous. With them pray thou to the Lord, that 
our souls find mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: 'I cannot bear O my child, to behold Thee, * Who dost grant 
life and health unto all, * hung upon the Tree; * for of old those who were lulled into 
the sleep of death * by the fruit of the transgression * have been awakened * and 
granted divine and salvific life and health by Thee', * thus said the Virgin weeping, ** 
whom we magnify. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the holy great-
martyr, and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the venerable one.  
Wounded by the love of Thee, her Bridegroom, O Master, the passion-bearer 
Barbara rejected all the ungodliness of her father with unrestrained vehemence. 
(Twice) 
Neither the sweet beauty and comeliness of flowers, nor riches, nor yet the 
sweetness of youth satisfied thee, O goodly virgin, glorious Barbara, who had become 
the bride of Christ.  
Neither the hindrance of a feminine nature or youthful stature impeded the 
martyr's perfect struggles, O Christ; for she was fortified by Thine invisible power.  
Illumined by the grace of the Spirit, and clearly enriched by the knowledge of 
secular things, thou didst generously give thy wealth to the needy, O John. (Twice) 
Like the choirs of heaven didst thou adorn the Church in Orthodox manner, 
intoning divine harmonious hymns to the Trinity.  
Theotokion: Thou gavest birth without knowing a man, O Virgin, and remainest 
eternally virgin, revealing the true Godhead of thy Son and God in images.  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Let us honor the holy Barbara; for the most honored one * broke the snares of the 
enemy and was delivered from them like a bird, ** with the help and aid of the Cross.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Teacher of Orthodoxy, instructor of piety and chastity, * luminary of the Church, 
God-inspired nourishment of monastics, * O supremely wise John, thou spiritual 
flute illumining all, ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Let us hymn John, the honored and divinely eloquent speaker and hymnographer, 
* the instructor and teacher of the Church, * the opponent of the enemy; * for taking 
up the Cross of the Lord as a sword, * he hath cut down all the falsehood of heresies, 
* and as a fervent intercessor before God ** he bestoweth forgiveness of 
transgressions upon all.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Following God Who is piously hymned in Trinity, * thou didst dim the pagan 
temples O spiritual athlete; * and suffering amid thy contest, * O Barbara of manly 
mind, * thou wast not afraid of the threats of the tyrants, * ever chanting aloud: ** “I 
worship the Trinity, the One God!”  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, §208 (3: 23-29)  
Brethren: But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith 
which should afterward be revealed. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to 
bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, 
we are no longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are all the children of God by faith in 
Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on 
Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither 
male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's then are ye 
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was 
attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Verse: And He brought me up out of the pit of misery, and from the mire of 
clay.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, §21 (5:24-34) 
At that time, many people followed Jesus, and thronged Him. And a certain 
woman, which had an issue of blood twelve years, And had suffered many things of 
many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather 
grew worse, When she had heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched his 
garment. For she said: If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole. And 
straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in her body that she 
was healed of that plague. And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue had 
gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and said: Who touched my clothes? 
And his disciples said unto him, Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest 
thou: Who touched me? And he looked round about to see her that had done this 
thing. But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came 
and fell down before him, and told him all the truth. And he said unto her, Daughter, 
thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
 
