--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 7th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS, AMBROSE,  
BISHOP OF MILAN  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Adorning the seat of government with thy virtues, * thou didst likewise receive the 
hierarchal office * through divine inspiration, * wherefore, having been a faithful 
steward * of grace in both, O Ambrose, ** thou didst inherit a twofold crown.  
In abstinence and sorrow, * in many vigils and in lengthy prayers, * thou didst 
cleanse soul and body, O divinely wise one; * henceforth manifest as a chosen vessel 
of Christ God, * equal to the apostles, ** thou didst receive heavenly gifts.  
As Nathan reproved David, * so didst thou boldly reprove the pious emperor who 
once had sinned, * O all-blessed Ambrose, * and thou didst openly cut him off from 
the Church; * and having chastised him in godly manner with a penance, ** thou 
didst number him again amongst thy flock.  
But if Alleluia be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant the 
following Stichera of the Theotokos before the foregoing, in the same melody: 
O pure Birthgiver of God, * with the staff of thine intercession * drive thou the 
bestial passions * from my wretched soul; * and, peacefully guiding me to life, ** 
number me among the holy flock of thy chosen sheep.  
As thou art the helper of helpless men, * as thou art the hope of all the hopeless, * 
O Theotokos, be thou my release and aid amid evils, * O most pure one, * delivering 
me from sins and tribulations, ** in that thou art merciful.  
With divine dew and by the rain of thy will, * quench the fiery urgings * of my 
most pernicious passions O Virgin, * that even I, like the youths, * may render thanks 
unto God Who was born from thee, ** and glorify and bless thy grace, O Lady.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Having stumbled headlong through my corrupt character, * I lay prostrate, O 
Virgin, yet I flee to thy serenity. * Deliver me from the storm of the adversary * and 
from multifarious temptations, * that I may unceasingly hymn thy grace, ** O ever-
virgin Mother and Theotokos.  
Stavrotheotokion: Standing at the foot of the Cross of thy Son and God, * and 
looking upon His long-suffering, * O pure Mother, weeping, thou didst say: * “Woe 
is me, O my sweetest Child! * How is it that Thou sufferest these things unjustly, O 
Word of God, ** that Thou mayest save mankind?”  
The Aposticha from the Oktoechos.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Ambrose our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and the canon of the saint, with 4 Troparia, the 
acrostic whereof is: “I praise Ambrose most great,” in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness. 
O venerable one, radiant with divine splendors, by thy prayers illumine those who 
piously honor thy radiant, light-bearing and holy repose.  
The Word of God gave thee the discourse of wisdom adorned with true 
knowledge, O hierarch Ambrose, dispelling the irrational and malicious thought of 
the heretics.  
Having cleansed the vision of thy mind of the darkness of the passions, most 
noetically rich hierarch, thou didst render it receptive to the pure effulgence of the 
most holy Spirit, O all-blessed one.  
Having by thine all-wise and sacred dogmas, as a pastor fended off the destruction 
of those who were of like mind with Arias, O all-wise one, with faith thou didst 
shepherd thy rational sheep in the meadows of Orthodoxy. 
Theotokion: By the Father's will and through the divine Spirit of God, thou didst, 
seedlessly conceive and give birth in the flesh unto the Son Who, for our sake, was 
begotten of the Father without mother and was born of thee without father.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Having received of God an abundance of grace and power, O father Ambrose, by 
thy tangible touch thou didst heal the divers passions of those who had recourse to 
thee.  
O venerable one, having learned all the knowledge of the Scriptures, in that thou 
wast a godly hierarch, thou didst manifestly make plain to the ignorant things difficult 
to understand, O father Ambrose.  
With the sentence of God thou didst instantly strike dead the vile woman who 
audaciously and senselessly strove to draw nigh unto thee, who shone forth with 
spiritual wisdom.  
Theotokion: Thou alone hast renewed the human race, having given birth unto the 
Creator and Lord of our nature. Wherefore, we glorify thee, O divinely joyous one.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Zealously emulating Elijah the Prophet, and likewise John the Baptist, thou didst 
manfully denounce the iniquitous emperor, O hierarch; in a godly manner adorning 
thy see, and enriching the world with a multitude of miracles. Wherefore, learned in 
the divine Scriptures, thou didst establish the faithful therein, and convert the unbe-
lieving. O hierarch Ambrose, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of 
transgressions unto those who, with love, celebrate thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Having fallen with wicked thoughts, * I have sunk into the abyss of sin, * and, 
groaning, I cry to thee with all my heart, O all-pure one: * Show forth upon me the 
wonder of thy rich mercy, * the unfathomable depth of thy tender compassion * and 
the immeasurable wealth of thy compassions, * and grant me repentance and 
forgiveness of transgressions, * that I may cry unto thee with love: * Entreat Christ 
God, that He grant remission of sins unto me, ** for thee do I, thy servant, have as 
my hope.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: For the sake of love for Thine image, * O compassionate One, * Thou 
didst ascend the cross * and the nations melted away. * For Thou, O Lover of 
mankind, * art my strength and my praise. 
Having been anointed with the chrism of the priesthood, thou wast shown forth 
as a hierarch, ordaining priests and granting the cleansing of salvation unto all.  
Thou didst protect thy flock from all the harm of the adversaries, O blessed one, 
and didst blind the delusion of Arius with the radiance of thy words.  
Invested with the power of the Spirit, thou didst dispel the evil spirits of malice, 
who could not endure thy rebuke, O all-blessed one.  
Theotokion: He that wrought all things by His will is Himself wrought of thy pure 
blood, saving those who acknowledge thee to be the pure Mother of God.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Having attained a mind resplendent with immaterial light, O blessed Ambrose, 
thou hast emitted rays of healing and miracles.  
Thou didst raise thyself up as a sacred dwelling place of the Spirit, O divinely 
inspired Ambrose, destroying the temples of idolatry.  
Emperors were put to shame by thee, shining with the effulgence of the greatest 
of virtues, and their restrictions did not cause thy tongue to falter.  
Theotokion: He that wrought all things in wisdom through His will, desiring to 
renew mankind, O Virgin, made His abode within thy womb.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons' * by 
the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 
Amazed, Rome faithfully praiseth thine honored deeds; for, like a radiant star, O 
hierarch, thou dost shed the rays of thy wonders everywhere.  
Having risen at dawn for Christ, thou hast been richly illumined with splendors 
and filled with divine light; enlightening those who ever faithfully honor thee.  
Having sanctified body and soul, O father, thou didst render thy heart, which ever 
attendeth unto sweet desire, receptive to the gifts of grace.  
Theotokion: Heal thou the wounds of my soul, O Virgin, by thy divine 
overshadowing, and enlighten my mind, which hath been darkened by slothfulness 
and by the malice of the adverse foe.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine faith ...”: 
Shining with divine dogmas, thou didst darken the deception of Arius, * O 
Ambrose, pastor and teacher of the mysteries. * And working wonders through the 
power of the Spirit, * thou didst manifestly heal divers passions, O venerable father. 
** Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Like lightning, the divine proclamations of thy dogmas have flashed throughout all 
the earth, O all-wise father; shoning forth as light with the revelations of miracles, and 
enlightening hearts that were in darkness.  
Following the command of the Savior, O father, thou didst, like a blessed servant, 
diligently increase manifold the talent given thee, and hast been deemed worthy of the 
Master's joy.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having deepened thy theological mind, like a river thou didst put forth streams of 
sacred dogmas, giving drink unto the fullness of the faithful, O father Ambrose, 
teacher of the mysteries.  
Theotokion: Behold, O Virgin, thou didst conceive within thy womb the Word 
Who is co-beginningless with the Father, and hast given birth in the flesh unto Him 
Who granteth restoration unto all who from Adam have fallen, O all-immaculate one.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Having mortified thy members and slain the wisdom of the flesh, thou didst 
impart life unto thy soul and poured forth a fountain of miracles upon those who had 
been slain by the passions, O venerable one, granting life unto those who cry: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thou wast informed of thine approaching repose in the body by the Spirit of God, 
O wise one; for thou didst say so prophetically unto those who were with thee, and 
didst pass over to the heavens crying out with joy: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord!  
Having rid thy body, mind and heart of the turbulence of the passions, O 
Ambrose, thou didst receive a fiery ray of light from on high, crying out like the 
divine disciples: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to be more exalted than the heavens, O 
most pure one, having given birth unto the God of heaven, Who hath united those of 
earth with those of the heavens, and Who granteth knowledge of Himself unto all 
who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
In ecstasy thou didst behold the everlasting honors which are being laid up for the 
saints, O father; and having passed over to them, rejoicing, thou hast received the 
reward of thy labors, O glorious one.  
Like a ripe cluster of grapes wast thou gathered into the vats of heaven, pouring 
forth the wine of immortality and gifts of healing upon those who piously have 
recourse to thee, as is meet, O divinely wise Ambrose.  
With a mighty voice we bless thee, O father, the golden candlestick of the divine 
Spirit, which putteth forth the light of pious teachings and the radiance of healings, 
enlightening the faithful.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
The Church, O all-blessed one, having acquired thee as a daystar, doth escape all 
the deception of darkness, and, illumined with the splendors of thy sacred dogmas, 
she doth bless thee.  
Theotokion: With joy we utter unto thee the salutation of the archangel, O Virgin: 
Rejoice, thou abolition of the curse! Rejoice, deliverance from all evils, O thou who, 
in a manner beyond understanding, hath deified mortals by thy birthgiving!  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Ambrose our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Shining with divine dogmas, thou didst darken the deception of Arius, * O 
Ambrose, pastor and teacher of the mysteries. * And working wonders through the 
power of the Spirit, * thou didst manifestly heal divers passions, O venerable father. 
** Entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
 
