--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE MIRACULOUS ICON OF THE MOTHER OF GOD  
KNOWN AS “UNEXPECTED JOY”  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the Theotokos, in Tone II: 
O Lady, thou dost intercede for all who with faith flee to thy mighty protection; 
for, weighed down by many sins we sinners have no other sure deliverance amid 
misfortunes mid tribulations. O most pure one, Mother of God Most High, hasten 
thou to help thy servants. (Twice)  
When a certain iniquitous man fell down before thy most wondrous image, 
offering the angelic salutation unto thee, who alone art most pure and most blessed, 
thou didst turn him away from the path of destruction and gave him the unexpected 
joy of salvation, peace and great mercy.  
Desiring to pour forth the abundant riches of grace upon His faithful, the Savior 
scattered the icons of His Mother like stars shining among the Orthodox lands, 
pouring forth the grace of miracles and bestowing healings, peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
The most glorious and most pure Theotokos, * the true Mother of God, * Let us 
piously venerate with praises rejoicing, * greeting her as did the Angel: * Rejoice! holy 
Mother of the incarnate Son of God; * Rejoice! habitation of the Holy Spirit, ** ever 
interceding on our behalf that our souls be saved. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V:  
Let heaven and earth join chorus; for, lo! the Mother standeth before her Son, 
earnestly entreating forgiveness of sins for a great sinner. The angels rejoice over this; 
and with them let us also join chorus, magnifying the Theotokos with hymns.  
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation.  
With the priestly ranks let all of us, the generations of the faithful, rejoice, 
celebrating the festival of the Mother of God, who in her wonder-working image hath 
been revealed to us as an ever-flowing well-:spring, granting unto all the abundant 
gifts of goodness.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
The angels of heaven and men on earth bless thee as the one who gave birth to the 
God of all, for thou prayest for the faithful people, protecting by thy mercy those 
who celebrate thy festival.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign lady, * accept the supplications of thy servants, ** and deliver us from 
all want and grief. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Troparion of the holy icon, in Tone IV: 
O ye faithful people, let us celebrate in spirit today, * glorifying the fervent helper 
of the Christian race; * and, hastening to her most pure image, let us cry aloud: * O 
most merciful Lady Theotokos, * grant unexpected joy * unto us who are weighed 
down by sins and many sorrows, * and deliver us from all evil, * entreating thy Son, 
Christ our God, ** that He save our souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, in Tone II: 
Come, let us sing unto the Lord Who hath given us great joy in the miraculous 
icon of His Mother; and, gazing thereat, let us all sing: O all-wondrous Lady and 
Theotokos, save this city and thy people, who with faith and love bow down before 
thy most precious icon! (Twice)  
He who speaketh of Thy power, O Lord, maketh all Thy praises heard; for Thou 
hast given Thy most pure Mother to the Christian race as a bold mediatress who 
leadeth sinners to Thee, who granteth unexpected joy to them, and asketh peace and 
great mercy for us. (Twice)  
O most pure Mother of God Most High, thou art the helper of all the sorrowful 
and oppressed, the feeder of the starving, the comfort of travelers, the haven of the 
tempest-tossed, the visitation of the sick, the protection of the weak, the support of 
the elderly: hasten thou to help thy servants. (Twice)  
  
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
  
All the noetic ranks rejoice with us beholding the Queen and Lady of all glorified 
with many names by the faithful; and the souls of the righteous rejoice also, seeing the 
Mother of God extending her most honored hands toward her Son on behalf of the 
sinful people, and asking for them remission of sins, peace and great mercy.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM GENESIS  
Jacob went forth from the well of the oath, and departed into Haran. And came to 
a certain place and slept there, for the sun had gone down; and he took one of the 
stones of the place and put it at his head, and lay down to sleep ~ that place, and 
dreamed; and behold! a ladder fixed on the earth, whose top reached to heaven and 
the angels of God ascended and descended on it. And the Lord stood upon it, and 
said, “I am the God of thy father Abraham, and the God of Isaac: fear not. The land 
on which thou Hest to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And thy seed shall be as the 
sand of the earth; and it shall spread abroad to the sea, and the south, and the north, 
and to the east; and in thee and in thy seed shall all the tribes of the earth be blessed. 
And behold, I am with thee to preserve thee in all the ways wherein thou shalt go; 
and I will bring thee back to this land; for I will not desert thee until I have done all 
that I have said to thee.” And Jacob awaked out of his sleep and said: “The Lord is in 
this place, and I know it not. And he was afraid, and said “How fearful is this place! 
This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.”  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF EZEKIEL 
 Thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass from the eighth day and onward, that 
the priests shall offer your wholeburnt-offerings on the altar, and your peace-
offerings; and I will accept you, saith the Lord. Then He brought me back by the way 
of the outer gate of the sanctuary that looketh eastward; and it was shut. And the 
Lord said to me, “This gate shall be shut. It shall not be opened, and no one shall 
pass through it; for the Lord God of Israel shall enter by it, and it shall be shut. For 
the Prince, He shall sit in it, to eat bread before the Lord; He shall go in by the way of 
the porch of the gate, and shall go forth by the way of the same.” And He brought 
me in by the way of the gate that looketh northward, in front of the house: and I 
looked, and, behold! the house was full of the glory of the Lord; and I fell upon my 
face. 
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
Wisdom hath built a house for herself, and set up seven pillars. She hath killed her 
beasts; she hath mingled her wine in a bowl, and prepared her table. She hath sent 
forth her servants calling with a loud proclamation to the feast: saying, “Whoso is 
foolish, let him turn aside to me.” And to them that want understanding she saith, 
“Come, eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you.” Leave folly, 
that ye may reign forever; and seek wisdom and improve understanding by 
knowledge. He that reproveth evil men shall get dishonor to himself; and he that 
rebuketh an ungodly man shall disgrace himself. Rebuke not evil men, lest they 
should hate thee; rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. Give an opportunity to a 
wise man, and he will be wiser; instruct a just man. and he will receive more 
instruction. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the counsel of 
saints is understanding, for to know the law is the character of a sound mind. For in 
this way thou shalt live long, and years of thy life shall be added to thee.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and this Sticheron, in Tone II:  
Having cleansed our mind and understanding, we hold festival with the angels, 
chanting with splendor the hymn of David to the Bride and Maiden, the Mother of 
Christ our God the King of all, saying: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark 
of Thy holiness! For Thou hast adorned her like a beautiful palace, O Master, to 
protect and save the faithful by Thy mighty power.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
Come, ye faithful, let us hymn the helper of the Christian race, who brought 
herself to make supplication unto her Son and God on behalf of an iniquitous man 
who had angered the Son of God by his sinful life, and thereby crucified Him anew; 
and let us cry out to her from the depths of our souls: O most merciful mediatress, 
forsake us not, making right acceptable supplications to thy Son on our behalf!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Thy miraculous icon hath shone forth upon us like the most radiant sun, O Lady, 
pouring forth the rays of thy goodness in abundance: health for the sick, consolation 
for the sorrowful, and for our souls deliverance from misfortunes, peace and great 
mercy.  
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation.  
O ye people, let us chant the hymn of David to the Maiden Bride of God, the 
Mother of Christ, the King of all: The Queen stood at Thy right hand, O Master, 
arrayed in a vesture of gold and adorned with divine majesty; for, having adorned her, 
as chosen from all women, and above all the earth, He was well-pleased to be born of 
her in His great mercy, and hath given her, who alone is blessed, as a helper for His 
people, and a protector of His servants.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
Inclining thine ear to the glad tidings of the archangel, O pure one, thou didst take 
into thy womb Him Who bowed down the heavens and descended to earth for our 
salvation, Who now inclineth His ear to thy right acceptable supplications on behalf 
of all who honor thee with faith and love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VII: 
Having recourse unto thy protection, O Lady, * all we born of earth cry aloud to 
thee: * O Theotokos, our hope, deliver us * from our countless transgressions, ** and 
save thou our souls. 
At the blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the holy icon, in Tone IV:  
O ye faithful people, let us celebrate in spirit today, * glorifying the fervent helper 
of the Christian race; * and, hastening to her most pure image, let us cry aloud: * O 
most merciful Lady Theotokos, * grant unexpected joy * unto us who are weighed 
down by sins and many sorrows, * and deliver us from all evil, * entreating thy Son, 
Christ our God, ** that He save our souls. (Twice) 
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...,” (Once) 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy icon, in Tone IV:  
O ye faithful people, let us celebrate in spirit today, * glorifying the fervent helper 
of the Christian race; * and, hastening to her most pure image, let us cry aloud: * O 
most merciful Lady Theotokos, * grant unexpected joy * unto us who are weighed 
down by sins and many sorrows, * and deliver us from all evil, * entreating thy Son, 
Christ our God, ** that He save our souls. (Thrice) 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Surrounded by the divine effulgence of the angelic armies, and graciously 
receiving, as the Mother of God, the ministry of the ranks of the prophets and 
apostles, visit us, thy servants, entreating Christ our God to grant us great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI:  
O Mother of God, thou art truly the strength of the helpless, the protection of all, 
and our mediatress before God.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O most holy Virgin, 
divinely elect Maiden, and we honor thy holy image, whereby thou pourest 
forth healings upon all who have recourse to it.  
Selected Psalm Verse: 
A: Remember, O Lord, David and all his meekness.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone Il-  
A great and most glorious mountain art thou, greater than Mount Sinai; for then, 
unable to bear the descent of the glory of God in images and shadows, it burned with 
fire, and thunder and lightning smote it; but, having received within thee the divine 
Fire, the Word of God, without being consumed thou didst bear Him Who beareth 
all things in His hand. As thou hast maternal boldness before Him, O Lady, help 
those who honor thee with faith, for thou hast received from God the gift of ordering 
and protecting the Christian flock, thy servants.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation 
and generation.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 4 (LK. 1: 39-49, 56)  
In those days, Mary arose, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of 
Judah; and entered into the house of Zechariah, and saluted Elisabeth. And it came to 
pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; 
and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit: and she spake out with a loud voice, and 
said: “Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And 
whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For, lo! as 
soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my 
womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of 
those things which were told her from the Lord.” And Mary said: “My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior. For He hath re-
garded the low estate of His handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all 
generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; 
and holy is His name.” And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned 
to her own house.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
All the noetic ranks rejoice with us, beholding the Queen and Lady of all glorified 
with many names by the faithful; and the souls of the righteous rejoice also, seeing the 
Mother of God extending her all-honored hands toward her Son on behalf of the 
sinful people, and asking for them remission of sins, peace and great mercy.  
Two canons of the Theotokos: Canon I, with 6 Troparia, including its Irmos, and 
Canon II, with 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon I  
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O thou who opened the portals of God's tender compassion when the archangel 
offered thee his salutation, close not off His love for mankind from us who hymn 
thee.  
Wondrous was thy life on earth, O most glorious Virgin Mother, yet even more 
wondrous is thy dwelling in heaven; for thou dost unceasingly reveal the wonders of 
thy maternal loving-kindness toward those who hymn thee.  
The Son, Who was timelessly begotten of the Father before all ages, didst thou in 
latter times conceive through the overshadowing of the Holy Spirit, giving birth to 
eternal joy for the world.  
Rejoice, O sea which drowned the devil, the noetic pharaoh! Rejoice, O stone 
which gave drink to those thirsting for the life of the Spirit! For thou hast given to the 
human race the Redeemer of those held captive and the Guide of those who are lost.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: Taking up the Song of Moses, O my soul, * cry aloud: * 'A helper and a 
protector hath become unto me salvation. * My God, * whom I will glorify'. 
Thou hast delivered the whole human race from slavery to the enemy, having 
given birth to the Savior of all the world. Him do thou beseech, that He save us from 
the assaults of the evil one.  
O most holy Virgin, in the midst of our perils be thou a mediatress and intercessor 
for us before thy Son, that, delivered from them, we may glorify Him with the Father 
and the Holy Spirit.  
O thou who art more exalted than the angels and archangels, and higher in honor 
than all creation, thou art the great intercessor of the Christian race.  
Katavasia: Christ is born ...,  
ODE III 
 Canon I  
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
Confirm in the virtuous life those who fervently hymn thee, and earnestly entreat 
Him Who was born from thee, that we not be deprived of crowns of glory due to our 
sins.  
In our life we have angered thy Son by our sins more than any of the iniquitous; 
yet be thou our mediatress, O loving Mother.  
May Jesus Who is the Lover of mankind, Who was born of thee and hast the 
authority to forgive men their sins, grant unto us crowns of glory in His divine glory.  
Rejoice, O virgin who contained the infinite God within thy womb, who carried 
Him as a babe and fed Him at thy breast!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Establish me, O Lord my God, * that mine enemy may not boast 
concerning me; * for Thou, O Lord, art my confirmation, * my refuge and my 
power.  
Hearken unto our prayers, O Virgin Mother, and give ear unto our sighs; and 
make supplication to thy Son on our behalf.  
In that thou art full of tender compassion, give ear to our supplications, and grant 
us deliverance from grievous and evil circumstances and sorrows.  
Still thou the tempest of the threefold waves of life, and drive away our evil 
passions, O most pure one, that we may glorify thee in peace and dispassion.  
Come, ye people of God, let us now praise the Queen of heaven, who gazeth 
down upon us from her holy heaven and leadeth us up to the heavens.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
O fervent and invincible intercessor, * diligent and unashamed hope, * rampart, 
protection and haven * of those who have recourse to thee, * O pure Ever-virgin do 
thou, together with the angels, * entreat thy Son and God, ** that He grant peace, 
salvation and great mercy to the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
ODE IV 
 Canon I  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
O Mother who hast given birth to the Savior, do thou thyself save from the 
misfortunes and the grief of life those who confess thee to be the Theotokos.  
O Mother of the Son and Redeemer Who lifted up our sins upon the Cross, heal 
all our grievous and incurable sicknesses.  
God the Word, the hypostatic Wisdom, chose thee to be His dwelling-place. Him 
do thou earnestly entreat, that He save us by the judgments which He knoweth.  
Rejoice, O all-comely, beauteous Bride! Rejoice, O pure turtledove! Rejoice, O 
Mother of Emmanuel, ever-virgin Theotokos!  
Canon II  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly Merciful One.  
Even though our tongue is at a loss how to praise thee worthily, yet, moved by 
love for thee, with all our heart and all our mind we glorify and praise thee, the 
mediatress of all good things.  
Who can plumb the depths of the sea? And who is “able to number the great 
mercies and compassions which thou hast for us?  
O Father and Lord of heaven and earth, what thanks shall we offer Thee? For 
thou hast given to the Christian race a good and powerful mediatress.  
Stretching forth thy hands toward Him Who was born of thee, O all-loving 
Mother, cease not to make supplication for us, that by thine entreaties we may be 
counted worthy of earthly and heavenly gifts.  
ODE V 
 Canon I  
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Heaven and earth are amazed, beholding thy tender compassion toward the 
Christian race, O most glorious Virgin Mother, for thou dost condescend even to 
those sinners who have fallen the most, O most good one.  
Save thy servants from evils and tribulations, O Theotokos, and grant unto those 
who hymn thee the peace of God which transcendeth any earthly peace.  
Thou hast given birth unto Him Who hath reconciled those above with those 
below, Who descended to earth for this purpose, yet hath not separated Himself from 
the Father and the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice, O Queen of heaven and earth! Rejoice, thou who dost surpass the angels 
and archangels! Rejoice, for through thee the Reconciler foretold to us by Jacob hath 
come down!  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
From the spheres of the celestial lights the Archangel Gabriel brought to thee the 
joy of the annunciation; and obeying that ineffable counsel of God, O thou who art 
wondrous among women, thou thyself dost bring joy unto all who hymn thee with 
faith.  
Thou hast truly given unexpected joy to the whole universe - the world below and 
the world above, for He Who issued forth from thee hath brought peace and united 
those above with those below. Him do thou now beseech, that we be delivered from 
malice and misfortunes.  
The poison of sin hath penetrated the whole human race through our ancient 
forefather, but He Who was born of thee hath cleansed, hallowed and saved all. Him 
do thou now beseech, that we be delivered from sinful and unseemly passions.  
Thy compassions are beyond number and are like unto the goodness of the Word 
thy Son. This we know, and know well. Yet what shall we render unto thee for them, 
O supremely compassionate Virgin Mother?  
ODE VI 
 Canon I  
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O ye 
divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Spiritually celebrating a sacred festival now, O ye who love the feasts of the 
Church, come, let us hymn the Mother of God with songs, glorifying her Son, Who 
hath bestowed such grace upon His Mother.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Look upon the hymnody of thy servants, O Birthgiver of God, casting down the 
conceited pride of our enemies, visible and invisible, and pouring forth thine exalted 
mercies upon the humble.  
Thou art the root from whence Christ, the Rod of Jesse, sprang forth: a Man from 
the house of David, and God Who is co-eternal with the Father and the Spirit.  
Rejoice, O joyous Mother! Rejoice, O thou who dost surpass all the daughters of 
mankind in beauty! Rejoice, O noble scion of the divinely chosen race of David!  
Canon II  
Irmos: I am held fast in the depths of sin O Savior, * and am 
overwhelmed by the sea of life, * but as Jonah was delivered from the 
sea-monster, * so also deliver me from the passions, * and save me.  
By thy birthgiving thou hast saved the human race from Hades, death and 
corruption; wherefore, as is meet, all the ranks of heaven and earth bless thee as the 
Mother of the Destroyer of Hades, and our Liberator from death.  
Turn not away from us because of our sins, O most holy Virgin, but by thy 
supplications mediate for us liberation from Hades and everlasting death.  
O the slothfulness, O the indifference toward our salvation, wherein we have 
wasted our whole life! What torment, what flames lie before us! Yet by the grace 
given thee, O Mother, save us!  
Thou didst bear Christ, the divine Fire, in thine arms without being consumed; 
wherefore, standing now before the fiery throne of His glory, pray thou, that He 
enflame us with the desire to do good.  
Kontakion of the holy icon, in Tone VI: 
We have none other help, we have none other hope but thee, O Lady. * Do thou 
help us! * In thee do we trust, and in thee do we boast; ** for we are thy servants. Let 
us not be put to shame.  
Ikos: Entrust me not to the intercession of men, O most holy Lady, but accept the 
prayer of thy servant; for I am held fast by sorrow and cannot endure the arrows of 
the demons. I have no protection, neither have I any place to flee, wretched as I am. 
Ever vanquished, I have no consolation save thee, O Lady of the world. O hope and 
intercession of the faithful, disdain not mine entreaty, but render it profitable.  
ODE VII  
Canon I  
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Thou didst spurn all the beautiful things of this world, O pure one, desiring to 
serve God alone; and to Him thou didst chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  

--- PAGE 12 ---
O Lady, to the one God do thou guide us who have failed utterly to follow the 
pious children, but have instead cleaved unto creation instead of the Creator; and 
teach us to chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
With noetic eyes, O Christ, Daniel foresaw Thee as the Stone uncut by human 
hands, destroying the vain kingdoms of mankind, for the salvation of those who 
hymn Thee, and the Father and the Spirit: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Rejoice, O mountain overshadowed by the grace of God, from whence Christ was 
quarried, the Stone set by God the Father as the Cornerstone of His Church, to 
Whom we chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon II  
Irmos: The bush which burned with fire on the mountain * and the dew-
bearing furnace of the Chaldeans * clearly prefigured thee, O Bride of God; * 
for, without being consumed, * thou didst receive the divine and immaterial 
Fire * within thy material womb. * Wherefore, we chant unto Him Who was 
born of thee: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou! 
God the Word, the Creator and Fashioner of all, in latter times made His abode 
within thy womb, O most glorious divine Maiden, and hath taught all to chant: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Sorrows, tribulations, and sicknesses have, because of the great multitude of our 
sins, brought our souls down in the abyss like the waves of the sea; yet setting our 
hope on thine aid, O Mother of God, we do not despair, but cry aloud to thy Son: O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Who in heaven can describe thy power, which He Who issued forth from thee 
hath given thee? And who on earth can render audible all the praises made to thy 
great protection and thine assistance to mortals, who chant: “O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!”?  
O pure Maiden who knewest not wedlock, cleanse our minds of vain thoughts and 
our hearts of wicked lusts, that with pure souls and undefiled lips we may chant unto 
thy Son: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII 
 Canon I  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Hearken, O pure Virgin Maiden, unto the words announced to thee by Gabriel: 
Thou shalt bear a Son Who doth save those who chant: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
He Who issued forth from thee in the flesh saved from fire the children who 
gazed upon Him with faith. Him do thou beg, that He save us also who burn with the 
flame of the passions and sing to Him, thy Son: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
O Christ, Thou wast seen in the Babylonian furnace as a radiant Angel like in 
appearance unto the Son of God. Unto Thee, with the Father and the Spirit, do we 
chant: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Rejoice, O bush seen by Moses, who in latter times sprang forth from the root of 
David and hast given birth ineffably to the Savior of all, to Whom we chant: Hymn 
the Lord, O ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Canon II  
Irmos: The three holy children were not obedient * to the decree of the tyrant; 
* and cast into the furnace they confessed God, singing: * O all ye Works of 
the Lord, bless ye the Lord. 
The fleece wet with dew, which Gideon beheld, mystically prefigured thee, the 
Virgin Mother, who without knowing a man hast given birth to God the Word by the 
overshadowing of the Holy Spirit. To Him do we chant: Bless the Lord, O ye works 
of the Lord!  
The mindless rage of the tyrant cast the pious children into the furnace kindled 
with fire, but thy Son quenched the power of the flame with mystic dew. Him do 
thou entreat, O most holy one, that He deliver us from everlasting fire and deprive us 
not of the dew-bearing kingdom, that we may chant there: Bless the Lord, O ye 
works of the Lord!  
Thou didst serve the ineffable mystery of the incarnation of Christ, loving Him 
with all a mother's love, and didst maternally lament Him as He hung upon the Cross. 
Him do thou entreat, that He not reject even the most hardened of sinners, that they 
may chant: Bless the Lord, O ye works of the Lord!  
We glorify and hymn thee as is meet, O most compassionately merciful Mother; 
for thou art the great helper of the Christian race, our supremely good and speedy aid.  
ODE IX 
 Canon I  
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
God, Who became incarnate from thee and hath come unto us, rendered thy 
womb more spacious than the heavens. O wondrous marvel! The Infinite is 
contained in the Virgin's womb, that we may hymn her throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Entreat Him Who was ineffably conceived by thee in latter times, O Virgin 
Theotokos, that He transform all our grief into joy and grant us His never-waning 
light, that we may hymn thee throughout all ages.  
Thou art the throne of the glory of God which Ezekiel mystically beheld, for thou 
didst receive into thy most pure womb the Son of God Who is co-enthroned with the 
Father and the Spirit, and didst hold Him in thy maternal arms.  
Rejoice, O animate temple wherein God dwelt in the flesh! Rejoice, O ark 
overshadowed by the glory of the Son of God! Rejoice, O all-blessed and pure Ever-
virgin Theotokos!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Thou didst contain within thy Womb * the God whom nothing can 
contain, * and hast brought forth joy to the world, * wherefore we sing thy 
praises, * O Virgin Theotokos. 
Thou hast given to the world the good Shepherd Who sought the lost sheep, and 
with Him thou dost now reign. Lead unto Him all the sheep that have gone astray.  
The Father, Who passeth all understanding in His love for those who have fallen 
in Adam, hath through thee revealed the Lamb Who taketh away the sins of the 
whole world. Cease thou never to make supplication before Him, that by the Blood 
of His Son we may be sanctified and cleansed.  
O Son of God Who art equally glorified with the Father and the Spirit, by the 
supplications of her who gave birth to Thee forsake us not who are perishing. 
He Who was incarnate and became a man through thee hath set thee higher than 
all the angelic ranks. Standing there, lead us also up to the heights of heaven, taking 
away our every sin.  
Exapostilarion of the holy icon:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having fallen asleep in the flesh ...”: 
The Dayspring from on high hath visited us, O Theotokos, and amid sorrowful 
circumstances hath given thee to us as a beam of surpassing radiance, a Mediatress 
for sinners, imparting unexpected joy unto us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Let heaven and earth join chorus; for, lo! the Mother standeth before her Son, 
earnestly entreating forgiveness of sins for a certain sinful man. At this the angels 
rejoice. With them let us also spiritually rejoice, magnifying the Theotokos with 
hymns. (Twice)  
O ye people, let us chant the hymn of David to the Maiden Bride of God, the 
Mother of Christ, the King of all: The Queen stood at Thy right hand, O Master, 
arrayed in vesture of gold and adorned with divine majesty; for, having adorned her, 
chosen from all women, above all the earth, He was well-pleased to be born of her in 
His great mercy, and hath given her, who alone is blessed, as a helper to His people, 
and a protector of His servants. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
All the noetic ranks rejoice with us, beholding the Queen and Lady of all glorified 
with many names by the faithful; and the souls of the righteous rejoice also, seeing the 
Mother of God extending her all-honored hands toward her Son on behalf of the 
sinful people, and asking for them remission of sins, peace and great mercy.  
Great Doxology and the Troparion, in Tone IV:  
O ye faithful people, let us celebrate in spirit today, * glorifying the fervent helper 
of the Christian race; * and, hastening to her most pure image, let us cry aloud: * O 
most merciful Lady Theotokos, * grant unexpected joy * unto us who are weighed 
down by sins and many sorrows, * and deliver us from all evil, * entreating thy Son, 
Christ our God, ** that He save our souls.  
Litanies and dismissal. First Hour.  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I, and 4 from ODE 
VI of Canon II. 
Confirm in the virtuous life those who fervently hymn thee, and earnestly entreat 
Him Who was born from thee, that we not be deprived of crowns of glory on 
account of our sins.  
In our life we have angered thy Son by our sins more than any of the iniquitous; 
yet be thou our mediatress, O loving Mother.  
May Jesus Who is the Lover of mankind, Who was born of thee and hast the 
authority to forgive men their sins, grant unto us crowns of glory in His divine glory.  
Rejoice, O virgin who contained the infinite God within thy womb, who carried 
Him as a babe and fed Him at thy breast!  
By thy birthgiving thou hast saved the human race from Hades, death and 
corruption; wherefore, as is meet, all the ranks of heaven and earth bless thee as the 
Mother of the Destroyer of Hades, and our Liberator from death.  
Turn not away from us because of our sins, O most holy Virgin, but by thy 
supplications mediate for us liberation from Hades and everlasting death.  
O the slothfulness, O the indifference toward our salvation, wherein we have 
wasted our whole life! What torment, what flames lie before us! Yet by the grace 
given thee, O Mother, save us!  
Thou didst bear Christ, the divine Fire, in thine arms without being consumed; 
wherefore, standing now before the fiery throne of His glory, pray thou, that He 
enflame us with the desire to do good.  
After the Entrance: Troparion of the holy icon, in Tone IV:  
O ye faithful people, let us celebrate in spirit today, * glorifying the fervent helper 
of the Christian race; * and, hastening to her most pure image, let us cry aloud: * O 
most merciful Lady Theotokos, * grant unexpected joy * unto us who are weighed 
down by sins and many sorrows, * and deliver us from all evil, * entreating thy Son, 
Christ our God, ** that He save our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Kontakion of the holy icon, in Tone VI: 
We have none other help, we have none other hope but thee, O Lady. * Do thou 
help us! * In thee do we trust, and in thee do we boast; ** for we are thy servants. Let 
us not be put to shame.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: the Song of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 320 (HEB. 9: 1-7)  
Brethren: the first covenant had ordinances of divine service, and a worldly sanctu-
ary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the 
table, and the showbread; which is called the sanctuary. And after the second veil, the 
tabernacle which is called the holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the ark 
of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had 
manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it the 
cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy seat; of which we cannot now speak particu-
larly. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first 
tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the high 
priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for 
the errors of the people.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of thy 
holiness.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, and He will not annul it.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, § 54 (LK. 10: 38-42,11: 27-28)  
Now it came to pass, as they went, that He entered into a certain village; and a 
certain woman named Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister 
called Mary, which also sat at Jesus' feet, and heard His word. But Martha was 
cumbered about much serving, and came to Him, and said, Lord, dost Thou not care 
that my sister hath left me to serve alone? Bid her therefore that she help me. And 
Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled 
about many things: but one thing is needful; and Mary hath chosen that good part, 
which shall not be taken away from her. And it came to pass, as He spoke these 
things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto Him, 
Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the paps which Thou hast sucked. But He 
said, Yea, rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
 
 
 
 
 
