--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER  
(AND THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF JUNE)  
COMMEMORATION OF THE VENERABLE 
JOHN, HERACLEMON, ANDREW AND THEOPHILUS OF EGYPT 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable fathers, in Tone VIII,  
Spec. Mel: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Oh, wondrous the life! * Oh, great the endurance! * The right fruitful trees of 
paradise * flourished in the desert, * springing forth from a single root * were grafted 
onto the one true Vine, * O John, Heraclemon, Andrew and Theophilus, * fill ye with 
the sweetness of spiritual fruit ** us who honor and hymn thee.  
Enduring the noonday sun in the desert, * ye freed yourselves from the burning 
heat of the passions, * and by your thirst for salvation * overcoming natural thirst, * 
ye discovered a fountain overflowing unto eternal life * and gave drink to your souls 
with the streams thereof. * Wherefore, by your prayers * bedew our desiccated souls, 
** granting us to bring forth the fruits of the virtues.  
Emulators of the Forerunner * and imitators of the feats of Elijah, * offspring of 
the desert, * glory and adornment of fasters, * by your life ye amazed the bodiless 
ones. * Wherefore, ye have become fellow citizens with the incorporeal ones; * and 
now, therefore, from heaven watch ye over those who struggle spiritually * and show 
them speedy aid, ** guiding them to the eternal mansions.  
Glory ..., in Tone VII:  
Laying aside today all the cares of life, come ye, let us make haste to the temple of 
the Lord, celebrating the radiant memory of the venerable ones; and having been well 
instructed in their life, let us purify our senses and sanctify our lips with prayer; and 
sighing over our offenses from the depths of our hearts, let us cry out to our Savior, 
Jesus most sweet: By their prayers, O Christ God, have mercy upon us!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion:  
On the Aposticha, Glory ..., in Tone V:  
With what praises shall we honor you, O venerable ones? What hymns shall we 
sing to you, who from your youth gave your life over to Christ, emulating the feats of 
him who is the greatest of those who born of woman? The mind is not able, and 
every tongue that speaketh boastful words falls silent, yet our hearts are inflamed all 
the more with eagerness; wherefore, we entreat you, instead of hymns accept our faith 
and love.  
Troparion of the venerable fathers, in Tone IV:  
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
AT MATINS  
The Canon of the venerable fathers, the acrostic whereof is: “We glorify your holy 
memory, O venerable ones,” in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Behold now, what is so good or so joyous as for brethren to dwell together in 
unity? Attentive to this divinely inspired word, and working out your salvation 
together, ye persisted in prayers and labors in singleness of mind, chanting with one 
mouth and one heart unto the consubstantial and undivided Trinity.  
Purchasing that which is eternal with that which is transient and corruptible, ye 
brought about a blessed exchange in your earthly life; for, lo! ye labored and 
struggled, that ye might obtain heavenly rest, and loved the desert, that ye might 
delight in the garden of paradise; ye bore the burning heat of noonday, that ye might 
abide eternally in a place of refreshment; and endured hunger and thirst, that ye might 
give drink to your souls with the streams of immortality, nourishing yourselves with 
the most sweet sight of the countenance of God, and chanting with the angels a new 
hymn unto Him.  
Departing from this sin-loving world as did the chosen people from Egypt, and 
delivered from the demonic hordes as from the warriors of Pharaoh, ye reached the 
Thebaid, strengthened by the right hand of God; and laboring there ascetically, ye 
made your abode in the wilderness. Wherefore, delighting now, not in an earthly 
promised land, but in heaven, ye chant to Christ God a hymn of victory.  
Theotokion: Thou art an aid to those who travel the narrow way, O Theotokos, 
for by thee are the afflicted strengthened and in thee do the weak become strong; in 
thee do the saints boast and by thee are sinners saved. We hymn thine ineffable 
tender compassion.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 
O venerable ones, establish us in the love of Christ, wherein ye were established by 
God, that having loved our neighbor as ourselves and forgiving the trespasses of 
those who trespass against us, we may obtain forgiveness of our sins. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 Ye were revealed to be young in years, but elders in understanding, O venerable 
ones, when, forsaking all the beauties of this world and looking toward the end of all 
things, ye made your abode in the desert; that there following after Christ with 
diligence, ye might, by the narrow and exceedingly sorrowful path, rather than by the 
most opportune one, enter in unto the Kingdom of heaven. Wherefore, ye now abide 
in the mansions of paradise.  
Taught by faith and the fear of God, protected by the grace of the Holy Spirit, 
having Christ alone as Instructor after the repose of your abba, ye acquired sure 
salvation, and amazed the angels with your great patience. Wherefore, be ye now our 
instructors, and teach us to fulfill the commandments of the Lord.  
Theotokion: Thou art the unceasing amazement of the angels, and the never-
ending routing of demons, and the salvation of mankind, O all-immaculate Virgin. In 
thee do we confidently boast. With thee do we lay low our adversaries, and through 
thee do we hope to obtain eternal life.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable fathers, in Tone VII:  
Traversing the desert of the virtues, and tormented by spiritual thirst, we have 
found you to be like the four rivers of paradise, O venerable ones; for upon all who 
follow your life ye abundantly pour forth streams of grace, and bedew withered hearts 
by your prayers, and with joy ye give drink to the souls of the faithful. Now 
celebrating your most glorious memory, we humbly entreat you, O blessed ones, that 
by your fervent supplications ye rain down upon us the mercy of God.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
Wishing to flee the wide path that leadeth to destruction, O venerable ones, ye 
chose the desert as a habitation for yourselves and adopted voluntary poverty, laying 
up spiritual treasure in heaven. Wherefore, ye discovered Christ, the priceless Pearl, 
and ye glorified His most wondrous economy for you.  
The ranks of angels were amazed, beholding mortal men who took upon 
themselves the ministry of the angels, and were nourished most wondrously with the 
most pure Body and Blood of Christ; and with awe cried out to God: Glory to Thy 
loving-kindness, O Lover of mankind! Glory to Thy condescension, O Christ! Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
O Christ, Thou didst glorify Thy servants, bestowing strength upon them to 
confront the demons, ever strengthening them for their struggles, and especially, 
sending them an angel, mystically granting them the divine communion of Thy Body 
and Blood. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: Thou art truly the daughter of mortal Adam, and the Mother of God, 
O Theotokos, for thou hast given birth ineffably to thy Creator and Lord, Who hath 
redeemed the generation of Adam from corruption. Glory to the ineffable counsel of 
God!  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Contemplating the ineffable light of Tabor with noetic eyes, dwelling on earth in 
the flesh, but in spirit with the angels, ye truly became citizens of heaven, O venerable 
ones. Wherefore, from an angel ye received the holy Mysteries of Christ. Honored, 
therefore, on earth by God with such a concern for you, what glories have ye now 
been deemed worthy of in heaven? But having boldness before the Holy Trinity, pray 
ye unceasingly for us sinners, that He enlighten and save our souls.  
In the firmament of heaven four noetic stars have been revealed unto us, shining 
brightly with rays of the virtues, driving away the oppressive gloom of sin: our vener-
able and God-bearing fathers John, Heraclemon, Andrew and Theophilus. 
Wherefore, by their supplications, O Christ God, grant us cleansing from our sins, for 
Thou art compassionate.  
Driving away the dark forms of the evil spirits with the Name of Christ, and 
striking them with the precious Cross as with a sword of fire, ye were revealed to be 
conquerors of temptations and deception. Wherefore, having shone forth like the sun 
with the righteous in the Kingdom of heaven, ye delight in the vision of the most 
radiant countenance of God. Beseech Christ God, O venerable ones, that He grant us 
might against all the power of the enemy and save us, for He is the Lover of 
mankind.  
Theotokion: Enlighten our hearts which have been darkened by evil passions, O 
all-hymned one, for thou art the Mother of the Sun of righteousness and Mother of 
the never-waning Light, that, illumined by His rays and shining with the radiance of 
undimmed glory, we may put on the bright vesture of salvation.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Pondering your life, which equaled that of the angels, O venerable ones, we are 
beset by fear and trembling. How did ye survive in the impassable desert? How did ye 
endure burning heat and cold, hunger and thirst? How did ye put to shame demonic 
assaults? We hymn your struggles, we honor your repose, and we beseech you to ask 
of Christ the forgiveness of our sins.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Bound by bonds of natural love, ye were united by the most mighty bonds of 
divine love; brethren in the flesh, ye became brethren in Christ, and with one mouth 
ye offered up prayer to the Triune God; wherefore, inseparable, ye dwell in the 
heavens. Pray ye now for us sinners, O venerable ones, that having eternally put aside 
all evil, we may learn unfeigned brotherly love, and thus fulfill the foremost 
commandment of the Lord.  
In Christ-like fashion ye crucified your flesh with its passions and lusts, O 
venerable ones; wherefore, having ascended to the heights of dispassion, ye have 
become citizens of heaven. And now, dwelling with the bodiless ones, pray ye boldly, 
O holy ones, that having lifted up our mind which hath fallen, and having raised up 
our earthly eyes from this earthly vale, we may cry out to God from the depths of our 
degradation.  
Theotokion: From the foul pit of vile passions and vain imaginings lead us up, O 
all-immaculate Virgin, for thou art an inexhaustible treasury of purity and an abyss of 
tender compassion. Through thee strength against the demons is bestowed; through 
thee victory over the passions is granted; through thee do we who call upon thy most 
pure name hope to be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable fathers, in Tone VIII: 
Come ye, let us hymn those who were brethren in the flesh, yet more so in spirit: * 
the glorious John with the faithful Heraclemon, wondrous Andrew, and Theophilus, 
beloved of God. * For, lo! loving the cruel life of the desert, they attained unto the 
longed-for heavenly homeland; ** where, abiding now in blessedness, they pray with 
boldness for our souls.  
Ikos: Tell us, O venerable ones, what is the sweetness of the desert? What is the 
joy of a life of silence? What is the consolation of labors day and night? For we 
behold you as having a radiant countenance, resplendent with exceeding great joy. 
Wherefore, ye teach us to walk the narrow path, and lead us to the mansions of 
eternal repose, where with you all those who have been pleasing to Christ now pray 
with boldness for our souls.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God's condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Truly ye were virgins, desert-dwellers, fasters, ascetics, earthly angels and heavenly 
men, O venerable ones, instructed by the grace of the Holy Spirit, to Whom we now 
cry out, honoring your memory: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Consuming the passions, like a dry branch, with the fire of prayer, and moistening 
your hearts with the dew of tears, tried like gold in the furnace of patience, ye shone 
forth with rays of the virtues, O venerable ones. Amazed thereby, we cry out to the 
Maker of all, Whom ye glorified by your life: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
A brother helped by a brother is like a strong city, thus, O venerable ones, bearing 
one another's burdens, and struggling in unity of mind, offering prayer to God with 
one mouth, delivered from the gaping jaws of hell as from the lions' jaws, like the 
children saved of old in the furnace, ye cried aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, who remained unconsumed by the fire of the Divinity 
and quenched the furnace of deception in the world, who bore in thy womb Him that 
is borne upon high by the cherubim: With the dew of thy prayers quench thou the 
flame of the passions, that saved by thee we may unceasingly cry out to thy Son: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Emulating John, the Forerunner of the Lord, ye took up your abode in the desert, 
learning true repentance in silence, and cutting the tares of the passions down to the 
root with the sickle of the fear of God, that ye be not cast into everlasting fire like a 
dry branch. Hence, like fruitful olive trees ye flourished, and full of good works, 
transplanted from this earthly and burdensome life, ye praise God for ever in the 
paradise of sweetness.  
Following Elijah of the fiery chariot in your life, abiding in the desert, more than 
he were ye nourished most gloriously. For a raven brought him tangible food, but an 
angel of the Lord placed before you the true Body and Blood of Christ. Oh, strange 
mystery! Oh, the good will of God! May His Name be blessed throughout all ages!  
Your prayer was like unto a pillar of fire, reaching from the earth to the heavens, 
O venerable ones. For, lo! it was offered from hearts consumed by divine fire, with 
oneness of soul and unity of mind. Wherefore, instruct us in prayer, O holy ones, that 
having acquired boldness before God, we may glorify the Father, and the Son, and 
the Holy Spirit throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Our hearts are inflamed with the fire of divine love for thee, O 
Virgin, yet we know not the fullness of thy praise, O all-hymned one; for every 
tongue that speaketh boastful words doth fail, desiring to make known thy greatness, 
O Queen. Yet, O most good one, with silent mouths and yet more silent hearts may 
we be acceptable unto thee.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Having acquired the-guilelessness of Abel and the chastity of Joseph, the faith of 
Abraham, and the meekness of David, O venerable ones, ye have been rightfully 
numbered among the choir of the righteous. But knowing that you live even after 
death and yet more, are concerned for our salvation, we magnify you with heartfelt 
love.  
Glorifying your most festive memory, and faithfully hymning your ascetic 
struggles, may we not be forgotten by you, O holy ones. Be ye mindful of us sinners 
when ye raise your venerable hands on high to God, praying for the whole world; 
that, deemed worthy of divine gifts through your mediation, we may unceasingly 
magnify God Who is wondrous in His saints.  
With love we honor your memory, O venerable ones, and with faith we venerate 
your ascetic feats; with fear we praise your great patience. Wherefore, we earnestly 
pray: Remember us, O blessed ones, who stand at the throne of the King of glory, 
fulfilling our humble requests which are of benefit, that we may magnify your aid and 
God's love for mankind.  
Theotokion: Thou didst name for Thyself a Mother, O Savior, to whom Thou 
didst give the human race by adoption. Be Thou well pleased to obey her, O Christ, 
when, praying for us sinners, she boldly stretcheth forth her most pure hands to 
Thee, our God; and save us, for the sake of the Theotokos, that with joy and love we 
may magnify her intercession.  
After the Exapostilarion, Glory:  
Desert-loving doves, swallows of heaven, announcing the spring of the Spirit in 
the world, taking flight from the winter of sin to the summer of dispassion, ever 
borne up on the wings of divine desire, taking shelter from the burning noonday heat 
of the passions beneath the shadow of the Tree of the Cross, ye thereby avoided the 
talons of the cruel hawk; wherefore, abiding now in the heavenly garden, ye praise 
God, the Creator of all, for ever.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable fathers, in Tone IV:  
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * Take not 
Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our life in peace.  
Kontakion of the venerable fathers, in Tone VIII: 
Come ye, let us hymn those who were brethren in the flesh, yet more so in spirit: * 
the glorious John with the faithful Heraclemon, wondrous Andrew, and Theophilus, 
beloved of God. * For, lo! loving the cruel life of the desert, they attained unto the 
longed-for heavenly homeland; ** where, abiding now in blessedness, they pray with 
boldness for our souls.  
 
