--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 9th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE CONCEPTION OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS BY 
SAINT ANNA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the conception, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
The barren woman who, * in a manner past hope, beareth as fruit * her who will 
give birth to God in the flesh, * is made radiant with joy * and danceth, rejoicing * 
and crying aloud: * Let all the tribes of Israel rejoice with me! * For, lo! I have 
conceived in my womb * and put away the disgrace of barrenness: * for thus hath the 
Creator been well pleased, * and, hearkening unto my prayer * in those things which I 
have desired, ** He hath healed the pain of my heart. (Twice)  
He Who poured forth water * from the dry stone, * granteth fruit to thy womb, O 
Anna: * the Ever-virgin Theotokos, * from whom the water of salvation will issue 
forth. * No longer shalt thou remain on earth * like barren ground; * thou hast put 
away thy disgrace. * For, thou givest rise to the fertile ground * which will bear the 
Grain of life Who taketh away the disgrace of all men, * for He hath been well 
pleased in the loving-kindness of His mercy ** to form Himself in what is alien to 
Him. (Twice)  
The sayings of the prophets * are now fulfilled: * for the holy mountain * is rooted 
in Anna's womb; * the divine ladder is set up; * the great throne of the King is made 
ready; * the place wherein God will enter is adorned; * the unburnt bush * beginneth 
to sprout forth; * the phial of holiness already poureth forth, * spreading abroad in 
rivers the fruitfulness * of the divinely wise Anna, ** whom with faith we call blessed. 
(Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone II: 
The most glorious great mystery hidden from the beginning of time, which was 
unknown to angels and mortals, is manifest today: Mary, the divine maiden, 
becometh a child in the womb of the chaste Anna, and is prepared as a dwelling-place 
for the King of all ages, unto the restoration of our race. Her do we entreat with pure 
conscience, crying out to her: Beseech thy Son and God, in that thou art the 
intercessor of us Christians, that He save our souls!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Once Anna, the divinely favored one, praying for a child, cried out to God the 
Creator of all: “O Adonai Sabaoth, Thou knowest the disgrace of my barrenness! Do 
Thou Thyself relieve the pain of my heart: open the flood-gates of my womb and 
show me forth, who am barren, to be fertile; that, in thanksgiving, we may offer Thee 
the gift which is born, chanting and glorifying with oneness of mind Thy compassion, 
whereby great mercy is given to the world.”  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, * and He will not annul it.  
Of old, the chaste-minded Anna, entreating and beseeching God, heard an angelic 
voice which announced to her the divine fulfillment of her petitions. With her one of 
the incorporeal ones manifestly conversed, saying: “Thy supplication hath come 
before the Lord. Be not downcast, neither weep, for thou shalt be a fruitful olive-tree, 
putting forth as a branch the comely Virgin Who shall give rise in the flesh to a 
Flower: Christ Who granteth great mercy to the world!”  
Verse: Of the fruit of thy loins * will I set upon thy throne.  
The honorable couple beareth as fruit the divine heifer, from whom the Bullock 
will come forth, Who is truly fattened by His ineffable word and Who will be 
slaughtered for the whole world. Therefore, rejoicing, in compunction they offer 
unceasing confession to the Lord and will conceive her who will benefit all things. 
Wherefore, let us call them blessed and let us dance with faith at their divine 
conceiving of the Mother who will give birth to our God, and through whom great 
mercy is richly given.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II:  
Today the mystic flower beginneth to grow out of Jesse, the robe of royal purple 
sprouteth forth from the root of David, wherein Christ our God shall spring forth, 
saving our souls.  
Troparion of the conception, in Tone IV: 
Today, the bonds of barrenness are loosed, * for God, hearkening unto Joachim 
and Anna, * doth manifestly promise unto them who, beyond all expectation, * will 
give birth to the divine Maiden, * from whom the Infinite One Himself, becoming a 
man, shall be born. * And He commandeth the angels to cry unto her: ** Rejoice, 
thou who art full of grace, the Lord is with thee!  
This Troparion is chanted without a Theotokion.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the conception, in Tone IV: 
Today, the bonds of barrenness are loosed, * for God, hearkening unto Joachim 
and Anna, * doth manifestly promise unto them who, beyond all expectation, * will 
give birth to the divine Maiden, * from whom the Infinite One Himself, becoming a 
man, shall be born. * And He commandeth the angels to cry unto her: ** Rejoice, 
thou who art full of grace, the Lord is with thee! (Thrice)  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of angels ...”: 
A new heaven is fashioned in the womb of Anna by the command of God the 
Creator of all, from which the never-setting Sun shall shine forth, illumining the 
whole world with rays of divinity in the superabundance of His tender compassion, in 
that He alone is the Lover of mankind.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in the same melody:  
Of old, the choir of prophets proclaimed the pure and immaculate divine maiden 
and Virgin, whom Anna doth conceive, being barren and childless. Her do we bless 
today with gladness of heart, having been saved for her sake, who alone is pure and 
immaculate.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Two canons of the righteous Anna: the first with 8 Troparia, including its Irmos; and 
the second with 6 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon I, composition of Andrew, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
O divinely wise Anna, we celebrate thy conception today, for, loosed of the bonds 
of barrenness, thou didst conceive her who contained Him Who is in nowise 
contained.  
Thou didst hearken to the supplication of the righteous ones, didst fulfill the vow 
of Thy holy forebears, O Lord, and didst give them a fruit: the pure one who gave 
Thee birth.  
The glorious Anna now conceiveth the pure one who conceived the supremely 
good, incorporeal Lord, and who will give birth in the flesh unto Christ.  
From a corruptible womb didst thou shine forth, O Virgin, for in thine incorrupt 
womb thou didst bear the Sun of glory Who became as we are, save for change and 
confusion.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Canon II, the acrostic whereof is the alphabet, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye 
Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the Lord, * 
and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
Anna, receiving in her womb the pure Virgin and divine Maiden who will become 
the Mother of the Creator, cried out with joy: “All ye tribes of Israel, rejoice with me! 
For, behold! I have conceived!”  
Anna, holding in her womb the book which the prophet foretold, which was 
sealed by the divine Spirit, cried out to all: “All the scriptures proclaim her! I am 
magnified, putting her forth this day!”  
The temple of the divine Savior is contained and formed in her mother's womb. 
The ladder is set up which leadeth all men on high, whose conception we celebrate 
with faith.  
Katavasia: Christ is born ..., 
ODE III 
Canon I  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 
Anna cried to the Lord: “If Thou wilt grant fruit to my womb, I shall be magnified, 
and will offer it to Thee.” Therefore, she conceived the pure Mother of God.  
Having observed the provisions of the law and served God blamelessly, O most 
honorable Anna, thou truly bearest in thy womb her who wilt give birth unto the 
Giver of the law. Wherefore, we, the faithful, call thee blessed.  
When thou didst pray in the garden, thou didst hear the voice of the Most High, O 
divinely wise Anna; and He gaveth fruit to thy womb: the portal which by grace shall 
open paradise.  
Theotokion: Dispel all the barrenness of my fruitless mind, and show forth my 
soul to be fruitful in the virtues, O all-holy Theotokos, thou help of the faithful.  
Canon II  
Irmos: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before all 
ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * to 
Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art Thou, 
O Lord. 
Entreating the Lord, Joachim receiveth from on high the message he desired when 
an angel appeared before him and said: “Depart, O righteous man, for the God of all 
hath fulfilled thy petitions.”  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Calling upon the God of all, Anna once, standing in the garden, beheld an angel, 
who appeared before her, saying: “Be thou not downcast, for thou shalt become the 
mother of the Mother of God!”  
When thou, O Anna, full of zeal, didst offer up supplications to God, thou didst 
conceive in thy womb the pure one who without seed hast received the infinite Word, 
and thou hast imparted grace to us all in thy fertility.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “O Thou Who wast lifted up upon the Cross ...”:  
The sacred Joachim and Anna offered a gift to the priests of old, but it was not 
accepted, for they were barren; but they made entreaty to the Giver of all things, and, 
hearkening to their prayer, He granteth them the Tree of Life, whose holy conception 
we honor.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
The divinely adorned Mary, the unblemished ewe-lamb and most pure bridal-
chamber, now most gloriously beginneth to issue forth from the righteous ones, O ye 
faithful. Be glad henceforth, O heaven and earth; and all ye born on earth, exult! For 
this day hath God wrought most glorious things, showing forth in the womb the one 
Virgin, the fruit of a barren woman. Her do we hymn with faith.  
ODE IV 
Canon I  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
“O the divine proclamation! O the strange report, if I shall conceive!” Anna cried 
out, amazed, to the angel who was sent to her. “Glory be to my God, Who hath 
wrought marvelous things!”  
“Rejoice with me, all ye tribes of Israel! I have conceived in my womb a new 
heaven, from which Jesus, the Bestower of life, shall in time shine forth!” Anna cried, 
rejoicing.  
God hearkened to the sighs of Anna; the Lord attended to her supplication and, 
dispelling the cloud of her childlessness, He most gloriously illumineth her with the 
light of fertility. Wherefore, she conceiveth her who alone is pure.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, undefiled tabernacle, with the most pure 
sprinkling of the compassions cleanse me now who have been defiled by 
transgressions, and grant me a helping hand, that I may cry: glory to thee, O pure and 
divinely glorious one!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, * 
O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 
Thy womb, which before bore no children, hath been opened, O Anna, and 
receiveth the heavenly cloud, from whence the radiant Sun, shining forth upon us, 
hath illumined all with the light of truth and driven away the profound darkness of 
ungodliness.  
The fiery throne of God hath been set up in thy womb, O blessed Anna, 
acceptable to God, and, seated thereon, He hath rested and taken away the labors of 
all the pious; and He hath planted the pure knowledge of God on earth.  
Behold, thou hast received in thy womb the bower which Solomon described 
beforehand, most truly preserved for the true King, for the divine restoration and 
conversion of the human race. Wherefore, O Anna, we bless thee with joy.  
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, * for we know no other God than 
Thee, * and we call upon Thy Name, * for Thou art the God of the living and 
the dead. 
Springing forth from the root of Jesse and David, Anna now beginneth to put 
forth the divine shoot which shall give rise to Christ, the mystic Flower, the Creator 
of all.  
“The people look upon me who am become a mother, and marvel;” Anna cried, 
“for, lo! I shall give birth, as is the good pleasure of Him Who loosed the bonds of 
my barrenness!”  
“The voices of the prophets proclaimed from afar the Maiden whom I have 
conceived, to be the mountain and the impassable gate!” Anna cried out most joyfully 
to those who came to her.  
Theotokion: O pure Virgin Mother, we know thee to be the cloud, paradise and 
portal of light, the fleece, the jar bearing Manna within, the sweetness of the world.  
Canon II  
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Joachim descended from the mountain, not receiving tablets of the law, but her 
whom the law prefigured and whom all the sayings of the prophets revealed the 
Mother of God. And, dancing, he cried aloud: “My heart hath been magnified!”  
When Anna felt in her womb the divinely fruitful branch which had been planted 
there, from whom the ripe Cluster would blossom forth which abundantly poureth 
forth upon us the wine of immortality, she exclaimed: “What shall I render unto 
Thee, O compassionate Lord?”  
Joachim, unable to endure the sight of creation bereft of piety, prayed that the 
barrenness of Anna might pass, and that she would conceive that Maiden to whom a 
Son would be given; the Most Exalted One Who bringeth about the adoption of all to 
His Father.  
ODE VI 
Canon I  
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
How can she who contained God in her womb be contained? How can she who 
gave birth unto Christ in the flesh be born? How can she who nourished the Creator 
with milk take nourishment at a woman's breast?  
Hearkening unto your entreaty, O all-praised Joachim and Anna, God this day 
doth now grant you fertile fruit.  
Having conceived the pure dove in her womb, Anna was truly filled with spiritual 
joy, offering hymns of thanksgiving unto God.  
Theotokion: The threefold waves of wicked thoughts, the assaults of the passions 
and the abyss of sins bestorm my wretched soul. Help me, O holy Lady!  
Canon II  
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
“The shadows of the law are manifestly transcended; for, lo! the ray of divine grace 
is shown forth: the cloud who is the Virgin, from whence the radiant Sun of the 
Godhead shall truly shine forth!” Anna cried out, rejoicing and magnifying the God 
of Israel.  
“A strange sight will it be if I, who before was barren and childless, conceive,” 
Anna said when she heard the angel announce that she would give birth to a child; 
and she cried aloud: “Better than any good report will be the fulfillment of thy 
words!”  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Let the mountains and hills, the fields and the sea, the multitude of the angels and 
all human nature be glad; for Anna received the divine temple of the Master, the 
beginning of our reconciliation. And when she sensed that she had conceived, she 
cried aloud.  
Kontakion of the conception, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”: 
Today the whole world doth celebrate Anna's conceiving, * which was brought 
about by God; ** for she gave birth unto her who ineffably gave birth unto the Word.  
Ikos: The wondrous Joachim and the divinely wise Anna, living together in all piety 
according to the law of Moses, were childless; and they prayed to God with all their 
heart, saying: “O supremely good Lord of hosts, Thou help of all: Thou knowest the 
pain, reproach and grief of childlessness. Wherefore, grant us fruit of the womb, and 
Ye will bring to Thy temple as a; sacred gift and perfect offering her who ineffably 
giveth birth unto the Word!”  
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither touched 
nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a single mouth * 
Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * 'O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou.' 
Anna entreated the Master of all, that she might escape the reproach of 
childlessness; and, hearkening unto her pitiful cry, He granted her as fruit her who 
gave birth to Him, as was His good pleasure.  
O Anna, the weaving of a robe of royal purple beginneth in thy womb, wherewith 
God, the King of all, having clothed Himself, appeareth unto men and layeth low the 
enemies which war against us.  
In thy womb, O Anna, didst thou conceive the fragrant myrrh who, in a manner 
transcending nature, received the Master, the Myrrh of life, Who perfumeth our 
thoughts with the wafted scents of grace.  
Theotokion: We glorify Thee as One of the Trinity, O Christ; for, incarnate of the 
Virgin without change, Thou didst assume full humanity, without separation from the 
Father's nature, though Thou didst unite Thyself to us.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children brought 
up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing in the 
midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
The fire-bearing bush of old, which Moses beheld upon Sinai, hath Anna 
conceived in her childless womb, and it consumeth the fire as impiety, for those who 
chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
A drop, O Anna, hath now been most gloriously poured into thy womb, which 
hath contained all the Water of life within it, bedewing those who cry out with faith 
thereto: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
As thou didst behold the bird's nest, thou wast furnished with wings by the Spirit 
and prayer; and thou didst receive the unblemished turtle-dove who beareth Christ, 
the olive branch Who freeth us from the noetic deluge, O Anna.  
ODE VIII 
Canon I  
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
“Behold! I receive in my womb the Queen whom David foretold,” cried Anna; 
“and I shall give birth unto the intercessor for all the faithful, who will give birth unto 
Christ the King!”  
The land in which the Creator of earth made His abode, the holy scepter, the new 
ark, the jar of Manna who gave birth to Him, beginneth to bud forth in her mother's 
womb.  
The unburnt bush, the golden candle-stand, the animate bridal-chamber of the 
Lord God, the precious staff who gave birth to Him, beginneth to bud forth in her 
mother's womb.  
Theotokion: Raise me up who lie in the abyss of evils, and vanquish the enemies 
that now engage me in battle. Disdain me not who am wounded by countless 
pleasures, O good and pure one, but take pity and save me.  
Canon II  
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew showed forth an image * of a wonder past 
nature, * for it burned not the youths whom it had received; * neither did the 
fire of the Godhead consume the Virgin * when it descended into her womb. * 
Wherefore, chanting, we sing: * Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
As Thou didst foretell through the prophets, O Master, Anna once cried out: 
“What hast Thou done for my childless womb and my withered breasts? Loose Thou 
the disgrace of my childlessness and grant me a fruit with whom I may cry aloud: Let 
all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!”  
O Anna, the lamp-stand hath entered thy womb, she who mystically contained the 
divine Lamp Who illumineth every creature with the effulgence of the knowledge of 
God. Wherefore, rejoicing, thou didst cry aloud: “Let all creation bless the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!” 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Joachim and Anna, as a most comely husband and wife, bring forth the divine 
heifer, from whom the beautiful Bullock will shine forth, Who was slaughtered for all, 
and they chant: “Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!”  
ODE IX 
Canon I  
Irmos: The ever-flowing wellspring of life, * light-bearing candlestick of grace, 
* the animate temple, and most pure cloud, * wider than the heavens and the 
earth, * the Theotokos do we the faithful magnify. 
Conceiving the Life-receiving well-spring, O divinely wise Anna, receive joy now, 
taking the holy temple into thy womb, magnifying her who is radiant with the light of 
the Creator's righteousness.  
Let Joachim and Anna be honored: the honorable and most glorious twain, the 
forebears of the pre-eternal Son, the renowned observers of the law, who gave birth 
to the first-fruits of joy.  
Let us hymn the Virgin Theotokos, whom Daniel beheld as a great mountain, 
whom Joel saw as a holy land, whom Isaiah perceived as an impassable gate, and 
another prophet foretold as a sealed fountain and divine fleece.  
Theotokion: Let the Virgin Theotokos be glorified: the purple which dyed the 
fleece of the ineffable incarnation of the Word, the golden lamp-stand, the table on 
which Christ, the Bread of life, was set forth.  
Canon II  
Irmos: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is heaven; * 
the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in which Christ 
God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and magnify. 
Dance ye all and leap up! Now hath the earth been prepared which, without being 
ploughed, will produce the life-bearing Grain, eating of which those who magnify His 
goodness will hunger no more.  
O David, take up thy psaltery and harp and chant! Behold, the ark of God hath 
appeared which thou didst foretell would be for our edification. Thereby have we 
arisen from our fall into sin.  
Like two magnificent stars ye bore forth the most radiant beam who shineth forth 
the great Sun upon the world. Wherefore, we praise and glorify you, O Joachim and 
Anna, as divinely wise.  
Exapostilarion of the conception: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O Light immutable ...”: 
Her who gave birth unto the Light which illumineth all creation doth Anna begin 
to bring forth today from her barren womb. Wherefore, let us all make haste, for our 
redemption from the condemnation of Eve hath come.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., The foregoing is repeated.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Human nature, which before was sterile, * trusting in God, * putteth forth the 
Virgin, the first-fruits of piety, * in whom the fertility of the good is proclaimed * in 
her conception on earth, ** to serve for the advent of Christ. (Twice)  
The impassable gate of Christ the King, * by the counsel of God, * receiveth 
conception in a barren womb. * When she appeareth on earth, * the portals of heaven 
are opened ** and permit the entry of mortals.  
The conception of the pure and godly maiden, * the first-fruits of faith, hath ap-
peared, * which before the ages * was ineffably proclaimed by God * in His divine 
and dread mysteries. ** Through her are the works of darkness and the passions 
brought to an end.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Malax, in Tone VIII:  
Come, ye of every rank and age, and together with the choirs of angels let us joy-
ously celebrate today with splendor, the most glorious conception of the Theotokos. 
Ye patriarchs, praise the Mother of the King of all! Ye prophets, praise her whom ye 
preached! Ye forefathers, honor the Mother of God who is descended from you! Ye 
elders, acclaim the forebears of God! Ye ancestors of God, bless the divine Maiden! 
Ye virgins, honor the Ever virgin! Ye faithful, exalt the root of faith! Ye priests, 
magnify the most sacred temple of God! Ye choirs of all the saints, acknowledge the 
cause of your assembling! Ye armies of angels, pay homage to her who gave birth to 
the Master of all creation, the Savior of our souls!  
Great Doxology. The Troparion, once. Litanies and dismissal.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the first canon, and 4 from 
ODE VI of the second canon of the righteous Anna.  
Anna cried to the Lord: “If Thou wilt grant fruit to my womb, I shall be magnified, 
and will offer it to Thee.” Therefore, she conceived the pure Mother of God. (Twice) 
Having observed the provisions of the law and served God blamelessly, O most 
honorable Anna, thou truly bearest in thy womb her who wilt give birth unto the 
Giver of the law. Wherefore, we, the faithful, call thee blessed.  
When thou didst pray in the garden, thou didst hear the voice of the Most High, O 
divinely wise Anna; and He gaveth fruit to thy womb: the portal which by grace shall 
open paradise.  
“The shadows of the law are manifestly transcended; for, lo! the ray of divine grace 
is shown forth: the cloud who is the Virgin, from whence the radiant Sun of the 
Godhead shall truly shine forth!” Anna cried out, rejoicing and magnifying the God 
of Israel. (Twice) 
“A strange sight will it be if I, who before was barren and childless, conceive,” 
Anna said when she heard the angel announce that she would give birth to a child; 
and she cried aloud: “Better than any good report will be the fulfillment of thy 
words!”  
Let the mountains and hills, the fields and the sea, the multitude of the angels and 
all human nature be glad; for Anna received the divine temple of the Master, the 
beginning of our reconciliation. And when she sensed that she had conceived, she 
cried aloud.  
Troparion of the conception, in Tone IV: 
Today, the bonds of barrenness are loosed, * for God, hearkening unto Joachim 
and Anna, * doth manifestly promise unto them who, * beyond all expectation, will 
give birth to the divine Maiden, * from whom the Infinite One Himself, becoming a 
man, shall be born. * And He commandeth the angels to cry unto her: ** Rejoice, 
thou who art full of grace, the Lord is with thee!  
Kontakion of the conception, in Tone IV: 
Today the whole world doth celebrate Anna's conceiving, * which was brought 
about by God; ** for she gave birth unto her who ineffably gave birth unto the Word.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, § 210 (4: 22-31)  
Brethren: Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a free 
woman. But he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; but he of the 
free woman was by promise. Which things are an allegory: for these are the two 
covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is 
Hagar. For this Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem which 
now is, and is in bondage with her children. But Jerusalem which is above is free, 
which is the mother of us all For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; 
break forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desolate hath many more children 
than she which hath a husband. Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of 
promise. But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born 
after the Spirit, even so it is now. Nevertheless what saith the Scripture? Cast out the 
bondwoman and her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the 
son of the free woman. So then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, 
but of the free.  
 Alleluia, in Tone I: The salvation of the righteous is from the Lord, and He is 
their defender in a time of affliction.  
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, * and incline thine ear.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, § 36 (8: 16-21)  
The Lord said: No man, when he hath lighted a candle, covereth it with a vessel, 
or putteth it under a bed; but setteth it on a candlestick, that they which enter in may 
see the light. For nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest; neither any thing 
hid, that shall not be known and come abroad. Take heed therefore how ye hear: for 
whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he seemeth to have. 
Then came to him His mother and His brethren, and could not come at Him for the 
press. And it was told Him by certain which said, Thy mother and Thy brethren stand 
without, desiring to see Thee. And He answered and said unto them, My mother and 
My brethren are these which hear the word of God, and do it.  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
Another: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the name of the 
Lord.  
 
 
