--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 6th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS NICHOLAS, 
ARCHBISHOP OF MYRA  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
The grace of God the Spirit * having anointed thee with divine myrrh * set thee to 
preside as bishop for the people of Myra, * and perfumed with the myrrh of thy 
virtues * the ends of the world, O most sacred one, * for by thy sweetly spiritual 
prayers * thou dost ever drive away the fetid passions. * Wherefore, we praise thee 
with faith ** and celebrate thy most sacred memory, O Nicholas.  
Fittingly do we bless thee, O Nicholas, * as a never-waning luminary, * a universal 
beacon * shining forth brightly * in the firmament of the Church, * illumining the 
world, * driving away the darkness of grievous misfortunes, * dispelling the winter of 
grief ** and instilling profound tranquility.  
Being here, and appearing in dreams, O Nicholas, * thou didst save those who 
were about to be unjustly put to death, * in that thou art compassionate, * as one 
right loving, * as a most fervent deliverer, as a true intercessor * for those who with 
faith ask of thee defense, * O most sacred father, * thou fellow citizen with the 
angels, ** peer of the apostles and prophets.  
Thy most glorious life * hath ever shown thee to be most wondrous, * O divinely 
wise and most sacred father, * thou majesty of holy hierarchs, * adornment of the 
venerable. * And, spreading forth thy rays upon the earth, * like the sun thou hast 
illumined the hearts of the faithful * who celebrate thy radiant and divine memorial, 
** O all-blessed Nicholas.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Thy memory, O holy hierarch, hath shone forth like the sun, noetically illumining 
the hearts of the faithful; and celebrating it today with splendor, we cry out to thee in 
prayer: Rejoice, O might of chastity who, armed with the shield of abstinence, didst 
preserve the estate of thy soul intact! Rejoice, O pastor and teacher of thy Christian 
people! Rejoice, adornment of the Church, beauty of hierarchs, boast of monastics! O 
all-blessed and most sacred father Nicholas, unceasingly entreat Christ God, that He 
grant peace to the whole world and save our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
No one that fleeth unto thee, O most pure Virgin Theotokos, * departeth from 
thee ashamed; * for those that asketh grace of thee, ** ever receiveth a gift for their 
profitable petition.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
O blessed Nicholas, have pity on me who fall down before thee, I pray, and 
enlighten the eyes of my soul, O most wise one, that in purity I may gaze upon the 
compassionate Bestower of light.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
As thou hast boldness before God, O blessed hierarch Nicholas, rescue me from 
the enemies who seek to do me evil, and save me from men of blood, O holy one.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
O hierarch, we, the faithful, have acquired thee as a calm haven, an impregnable 
rampart, a tower of confirmation and a portal of repentance, a guide and champion of 
our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Zealous in his opposition to thy flock, O most pure one, every day the wicked 
adversary seeketh to devour it. But rescue us from his harm, O Theotokos.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Nicholas our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera of the holy hierarch: 4 in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
Dwelling bodily in Myra, * thou wast truly shown to be myrrh, * having been 
anointed with noetic chrism, * O holy Nicholas, hierarch of Christ, * thou dost 
perfume the faces of those * who with faith and love ever celebrate * thine all-
glorious memory, * freeing them from misfortunes, perils and sorrows ** by thy 
prayers to God, O father.  
As a true namesake of victory, * to the faithful people * thou hast been revealed to 
be mighty amid perils, * O holy Nicholas, hierarch of Christ; * for whenever thou art 
invoked, * thou dost quickly hasten to those who with love * have recourse to thy 
protection. * For, appearing to the faithful by day and at night, ** thou dost save 
them from dangers and evil circumstances.  
In a dream thou didst appear * to the Emperor Constantine and to Ablavius, * and 
instilling fear in them, * thou didst speak to them thus: * “Quickly release those 
whom ye hold bound in prison, * for they are undeserving of a lawless execution. * 
But if thou wilt disobey me, * I will petition the Lord and King against thee ** when I 
pray!”  
For those of us who find ourselves * amid misfortunes as we journey * by land or 
sail the seas, * for those of us who are nearby or afar off, * thou art a great and 
fervent advocate, * an exceeding merciful and mighty intercessor, * O holy Nicholas, 
sacred preacher of Christ. * Wherefore, assembling, we cry: ** Entreat the Lord, that 
we may be delivered from every evil circumstance.  
And 4 in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “With what wreaths of praise ...”: 
With what wreaths of praise shall we crown the holy hierarch who, while bodily in 
Myra, doth spiritually reach out to all who love him in purity, the advocate and helper 
of all, the comforter of all the sorrowful, the refuge for all amid misfortunes, the pillar 
of piety, the champion of the people? For his sake hath Christ, Who hath great 
mercy, cast down the arrogance of the enemy. (Twice)  
With what songs of hymnody shall we praise the holy hierarch, the opponent of 
impiety and champion of piety, the leader, great ally and teacher, who putteth to 
shame all the infamous, the destroyer of Arius and his followers? For his sake hath 
Christ, Who hath great mercy, cast down the arrogance of the enemy.  
With what hymns of prophecy shall we praise the holy hierarch, who foresaw 
things far distant and unerringly prophesied things afar off as though they were near, 
who watches over the whole world and delivers all the oppressed, who of old 
appeared to the divinely wise emperor in a dream and delivered from execution those 
unjustly arrested, bestowing upon us great mercy?  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Assembling, O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us hymn the adornment 
of hierarchs, the glory of the fathers, the well-spring of miracles and great defender of 
the faithful, saying: Rejoice, O protector of Myra, honored primate and steadfast pillar 
of its Church! Rejoice, O most radiant beacon, illumining the ends of the earth with 
wonders! Rejoice, divine joy of the sorrowful and fervent intercessor for the 
oppressed! And now, O blessed Nicholas, cease not to entreat Christ God on behalf 
of those who honor thine ever-gladsome and most illustrious memory with faith and 
love.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone VI: 
Adorn thyself well, O cave, for the ewe-lamb approacheth, bearing Christ in her 
womb! O manger, receive Him Who by His word hath loosed us mortals from 
irrational activity! Ye shepherds, piping, bear witness to the awesome wonder! O magi 
from Persia, bring ye gold, frankincense and myrrh to the King, for the Lord hath re-
vealed Himself through the Virgin Mother! And, gazing down upon Him, His Mother 
made obeisance to Him as though she were His handmaiden, and greeted Him as she 
held Him in her embrace, saying: “How wast Thou sown within me, and how didst 
Thou spring forth within me, O my Redeemer and God?”  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me; they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall 
perish. The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse. 
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable 
unto Him. Wherever pride entereth, there will also disgrace: but the mouth of the 
humble doth meditate wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the 
overthrow of the rebellious shall spoil them. Possessions shall not profit in the day of 
wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death. When a just man dieth, he leaveth 
regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy and causeth joy. Righteousness 
traceth out blameless paths: but ungodliness encountereth unjust dealing. The 
righteousness of upright men delivereth them: but transgressors are caught in their 
own destruction. At the death of a just man his hope doth not perish: but the boast 
of the ungodly perisheth. A righteous man escapeth from a snare, and the ungodly 
man is delivered up in his place. In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare for citizens: 
but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous. In the prosperity of righteous 
men a city prospereth, but at the destruction of the wicked there is exultation. At the 
blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted, but by the mouths of ungodly men it is 
overthrown. A man void of understanding sneereth at his fellow citizens: but a 
sensible man is quiet.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him; so that, living among sinners, he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of lust doth undermine the simple 
mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time; for his soul 
pleased the Lord: therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. This 
the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that His 
grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He doth visit His chosen.  
At Litiya, these Stichera, the composition of Byzantius:  
In Tone II: Christ God hath revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith and a 
model of meekness, O holy hierarch Nicholas. For which cause, as one who emitteth 
sweet fragrance in Myra, and whose divine corrections shine forth in the joy of the 
Lord, ever intercede for us, O holy Nicholas.  
O father Nicholas, the shrine of thy relics, like a phial, doth enrich Myra with 
fragrant myrrh. And, appearing to the emperor in a vision during sleep, thou didst 
thereby free from death, fetters and prison those unjustly held condemned. And now, 
as then, do thou ever appear in visions, praying for our souls.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
O father Nicholas, even though the land of Myra hath fallen silent, yet the whole 
world, which hath been enlightened by thee with the sweet fragrance of thy myrrh 
and the multitudes of thy miracles, crieth out in hymns of goodly praises; and we, 
saved by thee from condemnation cry out with those in Myra, chanting: Pray thou, 
that our souls be saved. 
In Tone IV: O father Nicholas, as the phial of the most holy Spirit, thou pourest 
forth the sweet fragrance of divine perfume in Myra; for, having emulated the 
apostles of Christ, thou dost traverse the world over in the report of thy miracles. 
Wherefore, appearing during sleep to those afar off and to those nearby, thou didst 
deliver from death those who were to be executed through an unjust sentence, and 
most gloriously savest from misfortunes many who call upon thee. Wherefore, by thy 
supplications, from besetting evils free us also, who ever praise thee.  
In Tone VIII: The fruit of thy valiant deeds hath illumined the hearts of the 
faithful, O venerable father. For who, hearing of thy boundless humility, hath not 
marveled at thy patience, thy solicitude toward the poor, thy consolation of the 
sorrowful? Thou hast taught all in a godly manner, O holy hierarch Nicholas, and hast 
now been crowned with a never-fading wreath. Pray thou on behalf of our souls.  
Throughout this fleeting life thou didst hasten to praise the Lord, O Nicholas, and 
He hath therefore glorified thee in the true life in heaven. Wherefore, having acquired 
boldness before Him, pray that He save our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
O good and faithful servant, husbandman of the vineyard of Christ: thou didst 
bear the burden of the day and didst increase the talant entrusted to thee; and thou 
didst not envy those who came after thee. Wherefore, as the portals of heaven have 
been opened to thee, enter thou into the splendor, O intercessor for the orphans and 
widows. Wherefore, pray thou unceasingly, that He save our souls.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone VI: 
Hold festival, O Sion! Be glad, O Jerusalem, thou city of Christ! Receive the 
Creator Who is contained in the cave and the manger! Open unto me thy gates, and, 
entering therein, I shall behold Him Who holdeth all creation in His hand, wrapped 
as a babe in swaddling-clothes: the Lord and Bestower of life, Whom the angels hymn 
with unceasing voices, and Who saveth our souls.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Rejoice, O sacred one, pure abode of the virtues, standard of the most divine 
priesthood, great shepherd, most radiant beacon, who bearest victory in thy name, 
who dost ever incline mercifully to those who entreat thee, bending thine ear to the 
pleas of the infirm, ready deliverer, saving preserver of all who with faith honor thine 
all-glorious memory! O most blessed one, beseech Christ, that He send down great 
mercy upon the world!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Rejoice, O most sacred mind, pure habitation of the Trinity, pillar of the Church, 
confirmation of the faithful, help of the vanquished, star who, by the splendors of thy 
right acceptable supplications, dost ever dispel the darkness of perils and sorrows, 
calm haven to which those beset by the threefold waves of life hasten and find 
salvation. O holy hierarch Nicholas, entreat Christ, that He grant great mercy to our 
souls!  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Rejoice, O thou who wast filled with divine zeal, and who, by thy dread 
confrontation and warnings, didst deliver from a wicked sentence those who were 
unjustly condemned to be executed, O wellspring in Myra, pouring forth myrrh in 
abundance, giving drink to our souls and driving away the fetor of the passions, O 
sword mowing down the tares of delusion, O winnowing-fan scattering the teachings 
of Arius like chaff! O Nicholas, pray thou, that He send down great mercy upon our 
souls.  
Glory ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone VI:  
O man of God, faithful servant and minister of the Lord, man of divine desires, 
chosen vessel, pillar and foundation of the Church, heir of the kingdom: cease thou 
never to cry unto the Lord on our behalf.  
Both now ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VI: 
O Virgin who knewest not wedlock, from whence hast thou come? Who begat 
thee? Who is thy mother? How is it that thou bearest the Creator in thine arms? How 
is it that thy womb was not subject to corruption? O the great, most glorious and 
awesome mysteries which we see wrought in thee on earth, O all-holy one! We make 
ready fitting recompense for thee on earth: the cave; and we ask that the star be given 
from heaven, and that magi come from the lands of the East to the West, to behold 
the Salvation of men, Who is wrapped in swaddling-bands in the manger.  
At the blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Nicholas our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
And “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice! ...,” (Once).  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Nicholas our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Dwelling bodily in Myra, O hierarch, thou wast shown to be noetically anointed 
with the myrrh of the Spirit, O father Nicholas. Wherefore, thou hast perfumed the 
world with the myrrh of thy wonders, pouring forth ever-flowing myrrh through thy 
memory and thy discourses, which are fragrant of myrrh.  
Glory ..., another Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Thou shinest forth upon the earth with rays of miracles, O wise Nicholas, moving 
every tongue to the glorification and praise of Him Who hath glorified thee on earth. 
Him do thou beseech, that we who with faith and love honor thy memory may be 
delivered from all want, O thou who art chosen among the fathers.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I:  
Through the Holy Spirit didst thou conceive in thy womb God, the Creator and 
Fashioner of all, O pure and all-immaculate one, and gave birth to Him without 
corruption. Glorifying Him, we hymn thee, O Virgin, as the palace of the King of all, 
the protection of the world.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
Thou intercedest for the faithful, protecting and preserving them, O blessed one, 
and manifestly delivering them from all sorrow, O most comely glory and boast of 
hierarchs, venerable Nicholas.  
Glory ..., another Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Receiving from God a well-spring of miracles, O wise father, thou pourest forth 
honeyed waters upon all the faithful, O blessed one; for as a pastor and preacher of 
the Faith, thou didst carry out the words of the true Shepherd. Wherefore, as thou 

--- PAGE 9 ---
hast boldness before Him, thou didst save men from death, O blessed hierarch 
Nicholas. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who honor 
thy holy memory with love.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
I have fallen into the mire of sins, and there is no firm place for me. The tempest 
of transgressions hath cruelly engulfed me. Yet as thou hast given birth to the Word 
Who alone is the Lover of mankind, look upon me, thy servant, and deliver me from 
every sin and the soul-destroying passions, and from every wicked affliction of the 
murderer, O Theotokos who knewest not a man. Entreat Christ God, that He grant 
me remission of sins, for thee do I, thy servant, have as my hope.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Nicholas, 
and we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God on our 
behalf.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
O ye faithful, let us all piously praise the God-bearing Nicholas, the most wise 
hierarch, as a fervent ally and defender amid misfortunes and sorrows, sent by God; 
for he prayeth to the Lord on behalf of those who with faith celebrate and hymn his 
divine memory.  
Glory ..., another Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Thou hast been shown to be a most ardent intercessor for the Church of Christ, O 
Nicholas, boldly refuting the ungodly teachings of heresies, and thou hast been 
revealed to all as a standard of Orthodoxy, praying for all who follow thy divine 
teachings and instructions.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Quickly receive our prayers, O Lady, and bring them to thy Son and God, O all-
blameless Sovereign Lady; extinguish the blasphemies of the evil-tongued heretics; 
bring to naught their devices, and cast down the impudence of the ungodly who make 
war against thy servants, O most pure One.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon in Tone IV  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN §36 (10:9-16)  
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: I am the door: by me if any man 
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The thief cometh 
not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, 
and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, 
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and 
fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth, 
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and 
know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I 
the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are 
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall 
be one fold, and one shepherd.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
 O heir of God, fellow communicant of Christ, minister of the Lord, holy 
Nicholas: as was thy name, so also was thy life. For the radiance of thy countenance 
bore witness to thine intellect, shining forth in thine innocence of spirit, and thy 
serenity proclaimed thy meekness. Thy life was glorious, and thy repose is with the 
saints. Pray thou on behalf of our souls.  
Canon of the Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and two canons of the 
holy hierarch, with a total of 8 Troparia;  
ODE I  
Canon of the Theotokos, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
O pure one who hast given birth to the Abyss of wisdom, by thy grace send down 
upon me a wellspring which poureth forth drops of wisdom, that I may hymn the 
abyss of thy grace.  
I hymn thee, O all-hymned one, whom the ranks of angels hymn as the one who 
gave birth to the supremely hymned God, Whom all creation doth hymn, for He hath 
been glorified.  
Canon I of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof is: “I chant divine hymnody unto 
thee, O Nicholas”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone II:  
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh's whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Standing, crowned, before the throne of Christ with the angelic armies, O most 
wise Nicholas, grant me the enlightenment which illumineth the darkness of my soul, 
that, rejoicing, I may praise thy memory, O all-blessed one.  
The Lord Who glorifieth all who glorify Him hath given thee to the faithful as a 
refuge delivering from perils those who have recourse to thy protection, who call 
upon thee with faith and love, O Nicholas.  
Theotokion: The all-wicked serpent, instilling in me the desire to make myself 
equal with the Creator, took me captive; but through thee, O all-pure one, I have 
been restored and truly deified, for thou hast given birth to Him Who hath deified 
me, O Mother of God.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch, the acrostic whereof, excluding the Triadica and 
Theotokia, is the (Greek) alphabet, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye 
Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the Lord, * 
and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
Though my tongue and lips are at a loss, O Nicholas, I have come to bring this 
meager praise and entreaty to thy godly excellence; but, as thou art a bestower of 
riches, render God the Savior merciful to me.  
As a heavenly man thou wast shown to be angelic upon the earth, a ready defender 
of widows, an avenger of the oppressed, and a helper amid misfortunes for all who 
are sorrowful, O father Nicholas.  
All who are under the heavens speak of the abyss of the wonders of thy virtues, O 
thrice blessed Nicholas: the poor call thee their intercessor, the orphans and widows 
their nurturer, the blind their guide, and all mankind their champion.  
Triadicon: I honor the uncreated Trinity the Father, the Son and the Spirit - the 
simple Being, the Godhead, the indivisible Essence, which existeth essentially in three 
Hypostases, distinguished as to Person and Hypostasis.  
Theotokion: Without seed thou didst conceive the Word Who is One of the 
Trinity, O all-immaculate one, giving birth to Him in the flesh, yet remaining a virgin 
after birthgiving, as thou wast before. Ever entreat Him on our behalf, in that He is 
thy Son and God.  
Katavasia: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet 
ye Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the 
Lord, * and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
ODE III  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
I herald the Theotokos as the abode of the King, more pure than the heavens, the 
truly fragrant garden of paradise emitting the sweet odor of grace, the hope of 
Christians.  
At the word of the archangel thou hast given birth to the Word Who by His word 
hath brought all nature, rational and irrational, into existence, and Who delivereth 
mankind from irrationality, O all-blessed one.  
Canon I of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a lily * 
at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established. 
O blessed Nicholas, as thou art the true disciple of the Master thou savest from 
grievous misfortunes and bitter death, those who have recourse to thee.  
Cleanse thy servants, granting them remission of sins, in that Thou art good, 
through the mediations before Thee of Nicholas, Thy favorite, O greatly Merciful 
One.  
Theotokion: Quell thou the turmoil of my soul, O all-pure one, and guide thou my 
life, O most holy one who hast given birth to God, in Whom my heart hath been 
established.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before all 
ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * to 
Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art Thou, 
O Lord. 
Having acquired in thy heart tablets inscribed with many virtues by the immortal 
and most pure finger of Christ God, O Nicholas, sweetness’s greater than that of 
honey or the honey-comb poureth forth from thy lips.  
Grace most gloriously showed forth miracles in thee, O Nicholas, for thy pure life, 
truly more lustrous than gold, illumines darkened souls with the radiance of the divine 
Spirit.  
Thou livest even after death, manifestly appearing in dreams, and most gloriously 
delivering the young men from death, crying aloud to the emperor: “Do no harm to 
these men, who have been slandered by vainglorious jealousy!”  
Triadicon: Be merciful, O all-holy Trinity our God, unto me who have defiled my 
life with immeasurable transgressions, O Father, Son and living Spirit, Who 
preservest me wholly and ever unwounded by sorrow.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou givest thy servants hope of salvation. Stand forth 
in thy speedy supplications to preserve and help us amid wants and perils, for thou art 
the boast of us, the faithful, O Ever-virgin.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Katavasia: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before 
all ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * 
to Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art 
Thou, O Lord. 
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Having ascended to the summit of the virtues and been illumined by the divine 
splendors of miracles O father, thou wast truly revealed to be a most radiant pastor 
for the world, and an invincible intercessor for us amid perils. Wherefore, having 
most gloriously vanquished the enemy, thou didst drive falsehood away and save 
many from sin. O Nicholas, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto 
those who with love honor thy holy memory.  
Glory ..., Another Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
The Abyss of mercy hath shown thee to be a river pouring forth healings in 
abundance and an inexhaustible well-spring of miracles, O Nicholas; for those who 
are bitterly afflicted with grievous ailments and cruelly tormented by the vexations of 
life truly find the curative healing of all suffering in thy fervent defense. Wherefore, 
we cry aloud to thee: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions 
unto those who with love celebrate thy holy memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the Virgin 
who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the flesh; * for 
the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed the Creator 
and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind and of 
angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: * Entreat Christ 
God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith worship thy most holy 
Offspring.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
Eve became the cause of death for mortals through the counsel of the serpent; but 
thou, O pure Virgin who at the angel's word gave birth to the Word, hast been 
revealed to be the mediatress of immortality and life. Wherefore, we hymn thee as is 
meet.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Foreseeing thee in the Spirit as the mountain, the gate, the table, the holy ark, the 
lampstand, the throne of Life, the jar and couch, O pure one, the prophets revealed 
thee beforehand in indistinct images, the fulfillment of which we behold.  
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the whole 
man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Having in purity drawn nigh to the rays of the Spirit, thou didst become a light-
bearer, illumining the ends of the world, interceding for all, and saving all who have 
recourse to thee with faith.  
As of old thou didst appear, delivering the young men from death, O venerable 
Nicholas, so now save me from every evil circumstance, from perils and misfortunes, 
O all-blessed one.  
Thou didst shine forth with the effulgence of the virtues, O all-blessed one, as a 
most excellent emulator of thy Master; saving those who invoke and glorify thee with 
reverence and love.  
Theotokion: Incarnate, the Master of creation came upon thee, wholly saving me, 
in that He is compassionate. Wherefore, we, the faithful, glorify thee as Theotokos.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, * 
O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 
When thy name alone is invoked, with all speed it truly delivereth those who 
fervently call upon thee from all the counsels of the enemy, O sacred Nicholas. As of 
old thou didst deliver the soldiers, so also save us from every grievous circumstance.  
Standing before the throne of God, cease thou never to make earnest supplication 
on behalf of all of us, thy faithful servants, O wise and wondrous Nicholas, that we 
may be delivered from everlasting fire, from the enemy, from the wicked tongue, and 
from affliction.  
Thou dost everywhere pour forth healings upon those who have recourse to thee, 
delivering all from bondage. Wherefore, by thy supplications which are acceptable to 
God, transform our grief into joy, O most radiant Nicholas, casting down the proud 
haughtiness of our enemies.  
Triadicon: I honor and venerate the principality of the beginningless Godhead-the 
Father, the Son, and the all-holy Spirit, which accomplisheth all things, and is one, 
indivisible, and ever distinguished in three sets of characteristics and Hypostases: the 
single undivided Kingship.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: Thou alone art truly more honorable than those on earth and those in 
heaven, O Birthgiver of God, for thou didst conceive in thy womb the Creator of all, 
clothed in material flesh, giving birth to Him without seed. O what a new wondrous 
sight!  
Katavasia: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, 
* O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 
ODE V  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light * upon us who rise early at 
dawn, * unto the judgments of Thy commandments, * O Master, Lover of 
mankind, * Christ our God.  
O honored Lady, thou didst contain God Almighty like the ark of sanctity, like the 
holy throne of fire, like a sanctified palace.  
O only most pure one, among virgins thou hast been revealed to be a Mother who 
knew not a man, and among mothers a virgin; for thou didst ineffably give birth to 
God Who animateth nature. 
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness of 
sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
Enlightened by a godly life, O thrice blessed one, standing forth thou didst deliver 
those condemned by an unjust sentence to death, and who cried to Christ God: We 
know none other God than Thee!  
Now beholding everlasting glory in the heavens, and delighting in the most 
splendid effulgence of ineffable and divine radiance, protect me by thine 
intercessions, O venerable and most honorable favorite of Christ.  
Theotokion: That Thou mightest seek out Thine image, which had been buried by 
the passions, O Savior, hiding from the heavenly hosts, Thou didst appear, incarnate 
of the Virgin, to those who cry to Thee: We know none other God than Thee!  
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
The great metropolis of Myra, the province of Lycia, and all the parts of thy 
homeland, proclaim thy wonders and miracles, whereby thou dost deliver all from 
pain and sorrow, O divinely blessed father Nicholas.  
As the feeder of wisdom and father of orphans, the most excellent help of those in 
sorrow, the consolation of the grieving, the shepherd and guide of all the lost, O 
Nicholas, by thy supplications deliver us from misfortunes.  
Thou hast passed over from earth to the immaterial mansions, where thou dost 
gaze upon the ineffable beauty of Christ, and hast been revealed to be a converser 
with the angelic armies. Wherefore, joining chorus with the apostles and martyrs, 
earnestly pray for us to the Master of all, O father Nicholas.  
Triadicon: I manifestly glorify the three independent Hypostases of the one, 
indivisible Godhead, co-beginningless and co-enthroned, by Whom I have been 
brought out of nothingness into existence; and with the angels I cry; Holy, Holy, Holy 
art Thou, O Lord!  
Theotokion: O pure one, who alone settest salvation and hope before all mankind 
and savest them, help us now who cry aloud to thee and ever call upon thee amid 
grievous circumstances; for after God, we have none other intercessor than thee.  
Katavasia: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou 
hast sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * 
Wherefore guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching 
by night we glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
ODE VI  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
O help of the faithful and joyful gladness of the grieving, with spiritual joy enrich 
thy servants, who desire thine aid.  
Let the noetic heaven, the most pure temple, the holy ark, the most beautiful 
paradise of God, wherein the Tree of my life doth stand, be hymned!  
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
The crown of victory hath fittingly been placed upon thy head, O Nicholas. As 
thou art a most excellent victor, save those who call upon thee.  
Appearing, O blessed one, save me who am slain by transgressions and engulfed 
by the threefold billows of the passions, and lead me to the harbor of the will of God.  
Theotokion: In thee, O Ever-virgin Mother, have I placed my hope of salvation, 
and thee do I set forth as the steadfast and unshakable intercessor for my life.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
Thou hast been shown to be a new Abraham, O Nicholas, for, ever offering up 
the un-bloody sacrifice, thou didst bring thy mind to thy Master as if it were thine 
only-begotten son; wherefore, thou wast blessed as a lover of strangers, O father, and 
became a divine and immaculate habitation of the Trinity.  
Thou workest strange and awesome miracles, O Nicholas, interceding in thy 
speedy supplications for those in peril throughout the earth and far out at sea, 
showing thyself to the faithful as a physician of the sick, a feeder of the poor, and the 
namesake of victory over the enemy.  
Foreseeing things yet to come with the eye of thy mind, thou didst fill all the ends 
of the earth with right doctrines, and, declaring to us that the Son is consubstantial 
with the Father, thou didst set at naught the savagery of Arius, O pillar of the 
Orthodox Faith, setting forth thine honored corrections.  
Triadicon: I venerate and honor the indivisible Trinity, which is ever distinguished 
in three Hypostases, and united in essence and nature, as a single Principal: the 
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, Who with might hath dominion over all and 
preserveth all things as He so desires.  
Theotokion: Wholly incarnate within thy womb, O most pure one, Christ God was 
born without seed; for, unable to endure the sight of the work of His hands 
tormented by the deceiver, He came in the guise of a servant to deliver the race of 
mankind.  
Katavasia: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a 
babe from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken 
flesh, * came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not 
subject to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
In Myra thou wast shown to be a performer of the sacred mysteries, O holy one, * 
for, fulfilling the Gospel of Christ, * thou didst lay down thy life for thy people, O 
venerable one, * saving the innocent from death. ** Wherefore, thou hast been 
sanctified as a great initiate of the grace of God.  
Ikos: With songs let us now hymn the holy hierarch, the pastor and teacher of the 
people of Myra, that we may be enlightened by his prayers. For, lo! he hath been 
shown to be wholly pure, incorrupt of spirit, offering to Christ the immaculate and 

--- PAGE 18 ---
pure sacrifice which is right acceptable to God, as a hierarch pure in soul and body. 
Wherefore; as a true intercessor and champion of the Church, he is a great initiate of 
the grace of God.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: The furnace became bedewed, O Savior, * and the children dancing, 
chanted: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The Most High hath shown thee, O pure one, to be an animate heaven, a bridal-
chamber surrounded with grace, a royal robe in-woven with gold, a garden of 
paradise.  
Make steadfast the inconstancy of my mind, and by thy protection establish my 
turbulent thoughts upon the immovable Rock, O Virgin Mother.  
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Into precipitous temptation have I fallen, and am grievously pierced; I have drawn 
nigh unto the gates of Hades and am wounded by sorrows. Save me by thy 
supplications, O blessed one, and raise me up who chant: O God of our fathers, 
Blessed art Thou!  
Illumined with the immaterial rays of the never-waning Light, rescue the afflicted 
who find themselves in the darkness of tribulations, and guide to the light of gladness 
those who chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Ask Christ, thy Son and God, O Virgin Birthgiver of God, for those 
sold under grievous transgressions and the deceptions of the serpent, that by His pre-
cious Blood they may be delivered who chant: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children brought 
up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing in the 
midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Having been shown to be a most excellent physician of all manner of grievous 
ailments, and having healed the infirmity of my soul, O father Nicholas, grant me 
goodly health, that I may cry: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having of old delivered the warriors from death, O holy one, thou didst raise 
them up to hymn and glorify Christ with ardent faith; and they cried aloud: O God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Having mystically approached the cup of wisdom, O father Nicholas, from thy lips 
thou didst let fall rain-drops sweeter than honey or the honey-comb, commanding the 
people to cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Triadicon: We hymn Thee, O Trinity, Thou thrice-effulgent consubstantial Unity: 
Father, Son and Holy Spirit. And having been baptized there-into, we chant: O God 
of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: As thou art more exalted than all other creatures, O Theotokos, 
entreat thy Son and God, that those who truly honor and glorify thee may be 
delivered from torments, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Katavasia: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children 
brought up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing 
in the midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
O Virgin, thou hast been revealed to be an animate bridal-chamber and an inspired 
mantle of scarlet, the embroidered cloak of the King of all, and the purple robe, from 
whom the flesh of the Word and God-man shone forth.  
Ineffably, and beyond all understanding, thou didst conceive God the Creator, 
Who holdeth all creation in the palm of His hand, Who for our sake became a man 
like us, without forsaking that which He was.  
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
As thou art good and compassionate, O blessed Nicholas, free those who are 
grievously mired in the abyss of perils, granting them release from the evils which 
hold them, by thy supplications to Christ the Savior, O initiate of the sacred 
mysteries.  
As thou art an initiate of things which pass understanding, the minister of things 
holy and celestial, and a faithful hierarch, O divinely wise one, ask our Savior for 
remission of transgressions, O thou who art manifest in sanctity.  
Theotokion: My mind now faileth, having fallen into the abyss of impiety, for I am 
beset on every side by divers evils; yet do thou heal me, O Virgin, clothing me in the 
light of dispassion.  
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so the 
fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin's womb * into which it had 
descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation bless the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The ranks of the patriarchs and apostles, the assemblies of the hieromartyrs, the 
company of prophets and the whole council of fasters bless thy godly life; and with 
them we also cry aloud: Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
O Most High, O Word, Thou King of all great in might! Through the 
supplications of the venerable pastor grant peace to the life of all Christians, aiding 
our Orthodox hierarchs in the struggle against heresy, that with him we may cry out 
to Christ: Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Illumined with light unapproachable, O father, thou shinest upon the souls of 
those in tribulation, dispelling all the gloomy darkness of perils, and enlightening our 
hearts with gladness. And enlightened thereby from afar, we cry aloud: Let all creation 
bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Triadicon: Following the truly divine teachings of the fathers, with faith we hymn 
the Trinity - the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit - the Life and Lives, the One and 
Three Lights. And with them we piously chant: Let all creation bless the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Of old on Mount Sinai, the bush prefigured a strange mystery, O pure 
Maiden, burning without being consumed, depicting the mystery of thy birthgiving; 
for the fire of the Godhead which dwelt within thee preserved thee unharmed. Him 
do we magnify throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so the 
fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin's womb * into which it had 
descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation bless the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
ODE IX  
Canon of the Theotokos  
Irmos: The ever-flowing wellspring of life, * light-bearing candlestick of grace, 
* the animate temple, and most pure cloud, * wider than the heavens and the 
earth, * the Theotokos do we the faithful magnify. 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
A stream of thy grace do thou pour forth upon me who am consumed by the 
flame of afflictions, and am grievously wasting away, O wellspring who pourest forth 
in abundance and hast given birth to the River of grace, which, drinking thereof, we 
thirst no more.  
O Lady of all, save me who entreat thee as the beautiful chamber of the 
Bridegroom, the animate palace of the Master, the golden robe, the most comely 
habitation of Christ.  
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
Enlightened by lamps of grace, O divinely wise one, thou didst manifestly become 
a lamp of piety: saving those in danger, delivering those out upon the deep of the sea, 
and most gloriously feeding the hungry, O all-blessed one.  
Dwelling now in the sweetness of paradise, and clearly beholding ineffable glory, 
thou lookest down from the circles of heaven upon those who hymn thee, delivering 
them from sufferings, O all-blessed God-bearer.  
Theotokion: O pure Mother of God, thou hast given birth to the Wisdom, Power 
and hypostatic Word of the Father, Who built the temple of His body from thy most 
pure blood, and inseparably joined Himself to it through unification.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is heaven; * 
the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in which Christ 
God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and magnify. 
O ye who love the feasts of the Church, let us all join chorus in spirit. Ye heavens, 
ye mountains and hills, ye choirs of virgins and of the Church, ye splendor of fasters: 
rejoice at the memorial of the all-blessed one; and, assembling together thereon, let us 
magnify the Savior.  
With hymns let all the ends of the earth chant unceasingly, manifestly adorning 
Nicholas, the favorite of Christ God, with wreaths of praise. Through his supplica-
tions may we be delivered from sufferings and misfortunes.  
O Nicholas, accept this meager effort as fitting hymnody, as Christ accepted the 
widow's two mites. Disdain not one accursed with passions, for it is not out of pride 
that I presumed to do so, O thrice-blessed one.  
Triadicon: The Trinity is united in a consubstantial will, yet it is indivisibly 
distinguished in Hypostases - the Father, the Son and the living Spirit - the one God 
in three Hypostases, ever preserving His might. Him do we magnify.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Theotokion: All grief hath been abolished by thy birthgiving, and the Lord hath 
taken away lamentation, weeping, and every tear from the face of mortals, O pure 
Theotokos who knewest not wedlock. In thee do we also fulfill our debt.  
Katavasia: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is 
heaven; * the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in 
which Christ God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and 
magnify. 
Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Let us all praise Nicholas, the great arch-pastor, hierarch and prelate of Myra; for 
he saved those who were unjustly condemned to be executed, appearing to the 
emperor and to Ablavius in a dream, annulling the unjust verdict.  
Glory ..., Another Exapostilarion:  
The Lord glorified thee greatly in miracles, both during thy life and after thine end, 
O hierarch Nicholas; for whenever anyone, out of love for the Faith, doth but call 
upon thy holy name, he is straightway heard, and findeth thee to be a fervent 
intercessor.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Having given birth to Christ, the hypostatic Wisdom, the transcendent Word, the 
Physician of all, O Virgin, heal thou the grievous and longstanding wounds of my 
soul, and slay thou the passionate thoughts of my heart.  
On the Praises, 6 Stichera: 2 Stichera, in Tone I:  
Lifting thine eyes unwaveringly toward the heights of understanding, and gazing 
mystically into the abyss of wisdom, O father, thou hast enriched the world with thy 
teachings. Pray thou ever to Christ on our behalf, O holy hierarch Nicholas.  
O man of God, faithful favorite, performer of His mysteries, man of divine 
desires, animate pillar and inspired image: the Church of Myra, marveling, received 
thee as a divine treasure, and an advocate for our souls.  
And 4 Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Soaring above the flowers of the Church, * like a fledgling of the angelic nest of 
the Most High, * O thrice-blessed Nicholas, * thou ever criest out to God * on behalf 
of us who find ourselves amid violent misfortunes and temptations, ** delivering us 
by thy supplications. 
Thou didst make the beauty of thy priestly vesture * yet more splendid through 
active virtues, * O God-bearing father; * wherefore, as a hierarch thou dost 
accomplish wondrous things for us, * delivering us from evils, ** O sacred minister 
of glorious miracles.  

--- PAGE 23 ---
Passing through the beauties of the invisible ones, * thou didst comprehend the 
awesome glory of the saints, * O holy one; * wherefore, O most sacred father, * thou 
hast revealed to us in heavenly words ** the visions of those who live eternally.  
Thou didst stand before the pious emperor in a dream, * and didst deliver the 
prisoners from death, O father. * Pray thou unceasingly, * that, by thy supplications, * 
we also, who praise thee well, * may be delivered from temptations, ** misfortunes 
and pain.  
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
Rejoicing, let us sound the trumpet of festal hymns, let us leap up and join chorus 
on this the God-bearing father's prayerful celebration. Let kings and princes come 
together, and let them hymn him who by his dread appearance in a dream prevailed 
upon the king to release the three warriors who were unjustly imprisoned. O ye 
teachers and pastors of the good Shepherd, assembling, let us praise the pastor who 
showed forth love like His. And lauding the great hierarch, the physician of the 
infirm, the redeemer of those in misfortune, the helper of sinners, the treasure of the 
poor, the consoler of the sorrowful, the companion of those who travel, the 
helmsman of those at sea, who fervently anticipateth the needs of all in every place, 
let us say thus: O most holy Nicholas, come forth and deliver us from these present 
tribulations, and save thy flock by thy supplications!  
Both now ..., the composition of German us the Patriarch, in Tone V: 
Let us sound the trumpet of hymnody! For the Queen of all, who is both Mother 
and Virgin, hath been revealed from on high, and with blessings crowneth those who 
hymn her. Let those who exercise dominion assemble and in hymns praise the Queen 
who hath given birth unto the King Who before was well-pleased, in His love for 
mankind, to deliver those held fast by death. Ye pastors and teachers, assembling, let 
us praise the most pure Mother of the good Shepherd, the golden lamp-stand, the 
Light-bearing cloud, her who is more spacious than the heavens, the animate ark, the 
fiery throne of the Master, the golden jar which received the Manna, the gate of the 
Word which was shut, the refuge of all Christians; and praising her with divinely 
eloquent hymns, let us say thus: O palace of the Word, vouchsafe the kingdom of 
heaven unto us, the lowly, for naught is impossible for thy mediation.  
Great Doxology. Troparion. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  

--- PAGE 24 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I, and 4 from ODE 
VI of Canon II of the holy hierarch.  
O blessed Nicholas, as thou art the true disciple of the Master thou savest from 
grievous misfortunes and bitter death, those who have recourse to thee. (Twice) 
Cleanse thy servants, granting them remission of sins, in that Thou art good, 
through the mediations before Thee of Nicholas, Thy favorite, O greatly Merciful 
One. (Twice) 
Thou hast been shown to be a new Abraham, O Nicholas, for, ever offering up 
the un-bloody sacrifice, thou didst bring thy mind to thy Master as if it were thine 
only-begotten son; wherefore, thou wast blessed as a lover of strangers, O father, and 
became a divine and immaculate habitation of the Trinity.  
Thou workest strange and awesome miracles, O Nicholas, interceding in thy 
speedy supplications for those in peril throughout the earth and far out at sea, 
showing thyself to the faithful as a physician of the sick, a feeder of the poor, and the 
namesake of victory over the enemy.  
Triadicon: I venerate and honor the indivisible Trinity, which is ever distinguished 
in three Hypostases, and united in essence and nature, as a single Principal: the 
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, Who with might hath dominion over all and 
preserveth all things as He so desires.  
Theotokion: Wholly incarnate within thy womb, O most pure one, Christ God was 
born without seed; for, unable to endure the sight of the work of His hands 
tormented by the deceiver, He came in the guise of a servant to deliver the race of 
mankind.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of meekness, 
and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights through 
humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Nicholas our father, ** entreat 
Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone III: 
In Myra thou wast shown to be a performer of the sacred mysteries, O holy one, * 
for, fulfilling the Gospel of Christ, * thou didst lay down thy life for thy people, O 
venerable one, * saving the innocent from death. ** Wherefore, thou hast been 
sanctified as a great initiate of the grace of God.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and 
shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  

--- PAGE 25 ---
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 335 (13: 17-21)  
Brethren: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they 
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and 
not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us; for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, that 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work 
to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
Verse: For the Lord hath elected Sion, He hath chosen her to be a habitation 
for Himself.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, § 24 (6: 17-23).  
At that time, Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of Tyre and 
Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they that were 
vexed with unclean spirits; and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to 
touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his 
eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. 
Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: 
for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall 
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as 
evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, 
your reward is great in heaven.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
