--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 17th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
FOREFEAST OF THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY PROPHET DANIEL  
& OF THE THREE HOLY YOUTHS, ANANIAS, AZARIAS & MISAEL  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 of the holy prophet, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
The wondrous Daniel, * having made his heart * a pure abode of the Spirit, * and 
having been illumined by Him * doth manifestly proclaim * the revelation of things to 
come; * and, adorned with the splendor of prophecy, * he clearly interpreteth the 
hidden dreams ** of most iniquitous and mighty kings.  
Having rendered thy body strong beforehand * with intense fasting, * thou didst 
close the mouths of the lions; * for, standing in their midst, * O wondrous prophet, * 
and lifting thine eyes unto our good God, * thou didst remain unharmed * through 
the ineffable power * of the Redeemer of our souls ** Who most gloriously doth 
accomplish all things.  
O wondrous prophet, * thou didst behold the Unapproachable One, * the just 
Judge, * sitting on a throne, * surrounded by angels. * And, marveling at the awesome 
and terrible sight, * thou didst describe it for all who came after thee, * telling all of 
the second coming ** of our incarnate God.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy youths, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Observing the God-given laws, * O all-blessed ones, * ye did not defile yourselves 
with abominable foods, * but for the Master * Who doth glorify His favored ones, * 
ye kept the beauty of your souls incorrupt, * preserving the flower of your flesh * 
untainted and unwithered ** and your splendor comely.  
Enkindled by the divine flame, * the youths prevailed over the fire; * for the 
honored ones * were seen to be bedewed therein, * forming a most splendid choir, * 
chanting in melodious hymnody; * wherefore Daniel rejoiced, * having beheld the 
immutable kingdom of Christ, ** in that he is an all-excellent prophet.  
Marveling at the wisdom of thy words * and the understanding of the youths, * O 
right wondrous Daniel, * the tyrants appointed you * to rule and govern the land of 
Chaldea, * O honored ones; * for the adversary knew to marvel most manifestly * at 
your virtue and the splendor of life; ** for ye restrained the passions from gaining 
power over you.  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone II: 
Today, the Prophet Daniel hath spiritually assembled us, O ye faithful, and laid an 
abundant banquet of the virtues for the rich and the poor, for paupers, wanderers, 
and household servants, filling a noetic cup with the water of piety, gladdening the 
hearts of the faithful and imparting the grace of the Holy Spirit, for he is a most 
splendid luminary who, shining forth in the world, cast down all the worship of the 
Assyrians and shut the mouths of the untamed beasts. And with him let the three 
youths be praised who, though not gold by nature, were shown to be tried like gold; 
for the fire of the furnace melded them together, yet preserved them whole, and 
naphtha, sulphur and tinder crowned them. May the Lord Who hath led us to the 
turning of the year grant that we also may attain unto the regal and honorable day of 
the nativity of Christ, Who through their supplications bestoweth cleansing of sins 
and great mercy upon us.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, the composition of Andrew, in Tone II:  
Come ye all, and with faith let us celebrate the forefeast of the nativity of Christ, 
noetically offering up hymns of glorification like the star of the magi, and with the 
shepherds let us cry aloud: The deliverance of the nations hath come forth from the 
Virgin's womb, summoning the faithful.  
On the Aposticha, Stichera from the Oktoechos; 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Daniel, a man of divine desires, perceiving Thee, O Lord, as the Stone not cut by 
human hands, foretold that Thou wouldst be born seedlessly as a babe, the Word 
incarnate from the Virgin, God immutable, and the Savior of our souls.  
Troparion of the righteous ones, in Tone II:  
Great are the accomplishments of faith! * In the fountain of flame, as in refreshing 
water, * the three holy children rejoiced; * and the Prophet Daniel was shown to be a 
shepherd of lions, as of sheep. ** By their prayers, O Christ God, save Thou our 
souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
One canon from the Oktoechos, and two of the righteous ones:  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy prophet, the acrostic whereof is: “With hymns I will crown the 
wise Daniel”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII:  
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
O Savior and Benefactor, Cause of every good thing, Who lovest mankind: with 
thy radiant effulgence illumine my mind, that I may praise the glorious memory of 
Thy prophet.  
Thou didst shine forth in chastity like the dawn and didst save the chaste Susanna 
who was in danger; for God, Who knoweth all secrets, raised thee up to condemn the 
cruel elders.  
The descendents of Abraham, strengthened by the fear of God, valiantly spurned 
the most iniquitous food; and, nurtured by desire for piety, have been taken up into 
the greatest glory.  
Theotokion: O most sacred Daniel, thou didst perceive the only Ever-virgin, the 
most pure Maiden, as the noetic mountain from whence was cut the Chief 
Cornerstone Who hath crushed all delusion.  
Canon of the three holy youths, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn the three youths and 
the great Daniel”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Let us glorify the beginningless Word Who was divinely begotten of the Father 
before time began, and Whose likeness was seen by the youths in the furnace.  
Firmly reviling the words of the impious tyrant, the noble youths did not wish to 
defile themselves with vile foods like the all-iniquitous Chaldeans.  
Ye fed yourselves spiritually with the word of God and bodily with foods ye grew 
yourselves, and showed yourselves to the king as more comely of appearance than 
those who ate gross foods.  
Theotokion: O Maiden who sprang forth from David and hast given birth to the 
Redeemer, thou healest the venom which the serpent poured bitterly into the ears of 
Eve.  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy prophet  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Receiving understanding and wisdom from God, thou didst interpret obscure 
dreams for the kings.  
Scattering the food-offerings, O glorious one, thou didst slay the material serpent; 
for thou didst first vanquish the immaterial demons.  
Theotokion: Illumined with radiance, O glorious one, thou didst behold the 
mountain manifestly blessed by God, the adornment of mankind.  
Canon of the holy youths 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
The youths of David, having acquired an understanding taught by God, O Master, 
kept the laws of their fathers with godly wisdom.  
Fire did not consume the most pure bodies of the pious ones, for they had already 
been consumed by the fasting which nourisheth the soul.  
Wondrously bedewed in the midst of the furnace, the three youths sing universal 
and most laudable praise.  
Theotokion: That thou mightest show forth Thy birthgiving from the body of the 
Virgin, O Master, Thou didst save the bodies of the virginal youths in the furnace.  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Enlightened by the Spirit, * thy pure heart became the receptacle of the most 
splendid prophecy: * for beholding far-off things as though they were present, * and, 
cast into the pit, thou didst tame the lions. ** Wherefore, we honor thee, O blessed 
and glorious Prophet Daniel.  
Ikos: Jesus Christ, our true God, Whose divine advent thou didst manifestly 
proclaim, do thou entreat without ceasing for those who with gladness celebrate this 
thy divine memorial and honor thee with love, that we be saved from all temptations, 
sins and evil circumstances, for thou hast boldness before Him, O divinely wise one; 
and grant that I may open my lips to hymn thine excellent discourse.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy youths, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
In the flame the youths prophetically inscribed the image of the Trinity with the 
pen of faith in immaterial ink; and they mystically beheld the Word's extreme descent 
to the earth proclaiming it to all. Wherefore, having received the dew of the Spirit 
from heaven, they pour forth gifts upon the faithful who cry out to Thee together: O 
Christ God, as Thou art compassionate grant remission of transgressions unto those 
who with love celebrate their holy memory!  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the holy prophet, in the same melody:  
Enriched by the grace of prophecy, thou didst describe the birth giving of the 
Virgin in shadowy images, but didst clearly interpret the dreams of the king. And, cast 
into the pit as a martyr, thou didst most gloriously teach the lions to fast, O blessed 
one. Wherefore, thou hast destroyed the worship of the ungodly, O right wondrous 
Daniel. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with love 
celebrate thy holy memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Rejoice, O fiery throne of God! Rejoice, O Maiden, thou royal seat and bower all-
adorned with divers colors, thou bridal-chamber hung with gold and purple, cloak of 
scarlet hue, decorated temple, sword of lightning, lamp of great radiance! Rejoice, O 
Theotokos, thou twelve-walled city, gate of beaten gold, tabernacle adorned by God! 
Rejoice, O glorious Bride who hast let the Sun fall like rain! Rejoice, thou only goodly 
wonder of my soul!  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer * upon the 
Cross, * the ewe-lamb exclaimed weeping, bitterly lamenting, and crying aloud: * 
“The world rejoiceth, having received deliverance through Thee, * but my womb 
doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, * which Thou hast endured in Thy merciful 
loving-kindness. * O long-suffering Lord, * Thou abyss and inexhaustible well-spring 
of mercy, * take pity, and grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who hymn Thy 
divine sufferings with faith!”  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy prophet 
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Preserving the law in piety, O prophet, thou didst truly come to know the 
Bestower of wisdom Who teacheth men profound mysteries, illumining them in 
darkness.  
Living a sacred life, O thou who wast revealed by God, thou wast called a man of 
divine desires; for, having manfully trampled the passions underfoot, thou hast been 
translated to the life which ageth not.  
The grace of the Comforter which dwelt within thee, O Daniel, showed thee to be 
the radiant victor over tyrants and kings, and the abode of wisdom.  
Theotokion: The Prophet Daniel beheld Thee, O Word, as the Stone cut, not by 
human hands, from the mountain of the Virgin Theotokos; and he cried out and 
hymned Thy divinity.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the holy youths 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
By divine grace the most wise Daniel, divinely illumined in mind, interpreted the 
dreams of the kings.  
The suffering of the youths in the furnace shone with miracles; for they prevailed 
upon the tyrant to acknowledge Thee, O Almighty One.  
The melodies of the instruments and the harmonious playing of music did not lead 
the valiant ones astray, and they did not worship the golden image.  
Theotokion: With hymns the children in Babylon honored thy supremely divine 
Son, Whom they recognized in the furnace, O all-hymned one.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy prophet 
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 
Illumining thy struggles of suffering with the proclamation of prophecy, thou art 
resplendent in both, full of divine inspiration.  
By splendors of wisdom which pass understanding thou hast been shown to be 
most wise, O blessed and divinely eloquent Daniel who art most great, enlightening 
all things.  
Theotokion: O pure one, the glorious Prophet Daniel with images described the 
mystery of the ineffable incarnation of the Most High Who came forth from thee.  
Canon of the holy youths 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Having studied the law, O Savior, Thy favored ones, the great Daniel and the 
three godly-minded youths, did not deny Thee; but, receiving strength from Thee, our 
Benefactor, they manfully vanquished the tyrant.  
Daniel studied Thy mysteries noetically, O Lover of mankind; for in purity of 
mind he beheld Thee as the Son of man coming upon a cloud, as the Judge and King 
of all the nations.  
Shining like a golden beam, O children, your company shone with splendor greater 
than that of a sapphire; and set afire with zeal for piety, ye entered the furnace joyfully 
and formed yourselves into a universal chorus.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: O Virgin, the divine Daniel clearly prefigured thee as a mountain; and 
the three youths, beholding the flame bearing dew, with hymns praise thy divine birth 
giving as that of the Savior, Creator and Lord.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy prophet 
Irmos: As Thou didst deliver the prophet from the depths * of the abyss, O 
Christ God, * so deliver me also from my sins, * O Lover of mankind, * and 
guide my life, I pray Thee.  
Beholding the angelic choirs in most radiant light, thou hast become their most 
excellent emulator, delighting in the splendors of the King of all.  
Proclaiming the salvific coming of the Word, thou didst also foretell the 
destruction of the temple, the fulfillment of the law, and gifts of grace which pass all 
understanding.  
Theotokion: Behold! the Virgin whose image the glorious Daniel beheld, shall 
manifestly conceive Christ God within her womb, illumined by the Spirit.  
Canon of the holy youths 
Irmos: The abyss of my sins and the storm of my transgressions * disquieten 
me and thrust me down * into the depths of despondency; * but do Thou 
stretch forth Thy mighty arm, * unto me as Thou didst to Peter, * and save 
me, O my Guide.  
Having gained control over natural passions through the power of the Word, ye 
became rulers of the land of the Chaldean peoples, O ye wise descendents of David; 
for virtue knoweth how to render honor to those who have acquired her.  
Daniel, having arrayed himself of old in life-bearing mortality, and with food slew 
the evil serpent which the Chaldeans impiously considered to be a god; and he wisely 
slew the ungodly priests.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother and Theotokos, by thy supplications entreat the 
merciful Judge, thy Son, that He deliver me from cruel punishment on the day of 
judgment; for in thee alone do I set my hope.  
Kontakion of the holy youths, in Tone VI:  
O thrice-blessed ones, who did not honor an image wrought by hands, * but were 
defended by the indescribable Essence, * ye were glorified in your ordeal by fire; * 
and standing in the midst of unbearable flame, ye called upon God, saying: * Speed 
Thou and make haste to our aid, O Compassionate One, ** in that Thou art merciful; 
for what Thou willest, Thou canst do!  
Ikos: Stretch forth Thy hand whereby of old the warring Egyptians and the 
embattled Hebrews were tested. Forsake us not, that death, which thirsteth after us, 
not swallow us up; and spare our souls, as Thou once didst spare Thy three children 
in Babylon, who glorified Thee unceasingly and were cast for Thy sake into a furnace, 
from whence they cried out to Thee: Speed Thou and make haste to our aid, O 
Compassionate One, in that Thou art merciful; for what Thou willest, Thou canst do!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy prophet 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages'.  
Protected by the law, O prophet, thou didst not allow thyself to be iniquitously 
defiled, and, divinely illumined with understanding, thou didst cry aloud: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Thy miracle filled all with awe; for, caught up, the Prophet Habbakuk appeared 
before thee, a prophet, bearing food to thee and crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Imprisoned in a pit and offered as food to the lions, O blessed one, thou wast 
saved, God protecting thee, and didst cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
Theotokion: Thou pourest forth in abundance a stream of healings, O Virgin 
Mother of God; for Daniel clearly perceived thee as the mountain from whence the 
Savior shone forth, the God of our fathers.  
Canon of the holy youths 
Irmos: In Babylon, the pious youths did not worship the golden image, * but, 
bedewed in the midst of the fiery furnace, * they chanted a hymn, saying: * O 
supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
God-loving voices sang to the Almighty out of the midst of the fire; for, forming a 
divine choir, Azarias chanted a hymn, saying: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
The harp of the youths theologized concerning the Almighty, the God of all Who 
manifestly appeared to them in the furnace as they chanted a hymn, saying: Blessed is 
the God of our fathers!  
Having watched as the three youths were cast into the furnace, the king beheld a 
fourth appear, Whom He called the Son of God; and he cried out to all: Blessed is the 
God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Possessed of a mind illumined with divine radiance, O Daniel blessed 
of God, thou didst manifestly foresee the birth giving of the Virgin prefigured in 
mystical images, and didst cry aloud: Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy prophet 
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * 'Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord'. 
Through active vision thou wast shown to be clearly sacred, O prophet, and didst 
chant with the incorporeal ones: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
We all praise thee, O all-blessed one, and rejoicing on thine honored festival, we 
cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: O divinely eloquent one, perceiving the most wondrous Maiden in 
symbolic images, thou didst cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Canon of the holy youths 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Striving to preserve the nobility of Abraham, O venerable ones, ye acquired his 
own foundational faith and hope, his patience and endurance of temptations, crying 
aloud: Ye priests bless ye the Master! Ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  
Shining forth like beacons and making the earth like heaven, rendered luminous by 
the enlightenment of piety, and having formed a universal choir, the youths chant to 
the Master Who saved them from perils: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
The descendents of Abraham, extinguishing the burning furnace and binding the 
jaws of the lions in their youth, rejoicing, hymn Thee now, the King and Benefactor 
of all: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
Theotokion: The most wise Daniel teacheth the mysteries, and the three divinely 
wise youths prefigure thy birthgiving, O most pure one, beholding in images Him 
Who ineffably issued forth from thy womb, Whom the children bless, the priests 
hymn and the people supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy prophet 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Thou didst reap the harvest of thy pangs, ever dancing in the heavens with the 
prophets about the most exalted throne of the Almighty.  
In the light of the threefold Sun thou dost now stand, crowned, before thine 
ultimate Desire, rejoicing with the incorporeal choirs.  
Theotokion: Beautiful is the glory which thou dost now delight in! For thou, O 
honored prophet, hast been deemed worthy to proclaim unto all, in images, the all-
hymned Maiden.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Canon of the holy youths  
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Ye have attained your desired end and stand before your ultimate Desire in the 
mansions of heaven, O ye spiritually rich youths.  
Having produced the grain of incorruption with tears, rejoicing, ye have received 
the sheaves of your goodly labor.  
Splendor hath now shone forth upon you as is meet, and gladness of heart hath 
blossomed forth; for grief hath fled away from whence ye have made your abode.  
Theotokion: Thou hast departed from the fields of death, O Virgin, having given 
birth to the Lord, the Bestower of life, Who Bestoweth life upon those who magnify 
thee with faith.  
Exapostilarion from the Oktoechos; and Glory ..., that of the holy prophet: 
Let Daniel, the greatest among the prophets, be honored now, for he beheld 
Christ our God as the Stone cut, not by human hands, from the mountain of the pure 
Virgin. And with him let the three youths be praised whom the divine and ineffable 
image of the Virgin saved unharmed by the fire of the furnace, and whereby the 
world hath been saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The most wise Daniel teacheth the mysteries through the divine Spirit, O all-pure 
one, and by faith the three children of Abraham prefigure thy seedless birthgiving; for 
the Word Who is uncircumscribable in His divinity, desiring to be circumscribed by 
the flesh through thee, O Theotokos, is born in Bethlehem for the salvation of 
mankind.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, and:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Malaxas, in Tone VI:  
When the noetic Sun of righteousness desired to shine forth from the Virgin's 
womb, the three youths, equal in number to the Trinity, shone forth upon us 
beforehand out of the fiery furnace, prefiguring in themselves the awesome mystery. 
And with them the most splendid Prophet Daniel illumined the ends of the earth with 
the light of prophecy, proclaiming Christ to be the Stone not cut by human hands, 
quarried from the Virgin, the mountain overshadowed, Who issueth forth for the sal-
vation of our souls.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the holy 
prophet, and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the holy youths.  
Receiving understanding and wisdom from God, thou didst interpret obscure 
dreams for the kings. (Twice) 
Scattering the food-offerings, O glorious one, thou didst slay the material serpent; 
for thou didst first vanquish the immaterial demons. (Twice) 
Having gained control over natural passions through the power of the Word, ye 
became rulers of the land of the Chaldean peoples, O ye wise descendents of David; 
for virtue knoweth how to render honor to those who have acquired her. (Twice) 
Daniel, having arrayed himself of old in life-bearing mortality, and with food slew 
the evil serpent which the Chaldeans impiously considered to be a god; and he wisely 
slew the ungodly priests.  
Theotokion: O Virgin Mother and Theotokos, by thy supplications entreat the 
merciful Judge, thy Son, that He deliver me from cruel punishment on the day of 
judgment; for in thee alone do I set my hope.  
Troparion of the righteous ones, in Tone II:  
Great are the accomplishments of faith! * In the fountain of flame, as in refreshing 
water, * the three holy children rejoiced; * and the Prophet Daniel was shown to be a 
shepherd of lions, as of sheep. ** By their prayers, O Christ God, save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy prophet, in Tone III:  
Enlightened by the Spirit, * thy pure heart became the receptacle of the most 
splendid prophecy: * for beholding far-off things as though they were present, * and, 
cast into the pit, thou didst tame the lions. ** Wherefore, we honor thee, O blessed 
and glorious Prophet Daniel.  
Kontakion of the holy youths, in Tone VI:  
O thrice-blessed ones, who did not honor an image wrought by hands, * but were 
defended by the indescribable Essence, * ye were glorified in your ordeal by fire; * 
and standing in the midst of unbearable flame, ye called upon God, saying: * Speed 
Thou and make haste to our aid, O Compassionate One, ** in that Thou art merciful; 
for what Thou willest, Thou canst do!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, §330 (HEB. 11: 33-40) 
Brethren: All the saints who, through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought 
righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the 
violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, 
waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Women received their 
dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they 
might obtain a better resurrection: And others had trial of cruel mockings and 
scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds .and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were 
sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in 
sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; (Of whom the world 
was not worthy:) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves 
of the earth. And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not 
the promise: God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us 
should not be made perfect.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE §62 (11:47-12: 1)  
The Lord said to the Jews who came unto Him: “Woe unto you! for ye build the 
sepulchers of the prophets, and your fathers killed them. Truly ye bear witness that ye 
allow the deeds of your fathers: for they indeed killed them, and ye build their 
sepulchers. Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and 
apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute: That the blood of all the 
prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of this 
generation; From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias which perished 
between the altar and the temple: verily I say unto you, It shall be required of this 
generation. Woe unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge: ye 
entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye hindered. And as he said 
these things unto them, the scribes and the Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, 
and to provoke him to speak of many things: Laying wait for him, and seeking to 
catch something out of his mouth, that they might accuse him. In the mean time, 
when there were gathered together an innumerable multitude of people, insomuch 
that they trod one upon another, he began to say unto his disciples first of all, Beware 
ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.  
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
