--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 15th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR ELEUTHERIUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Thou didst become a most sacred vessel of the divine Spirit, * having cleansed thy 
soul of the passions, O most sacred one. * Hence, thou didst receive the holy and 
divine anointing, * becoming a hierarch, * a divinely wise leader of the people, * and 
an invincible martyr * of Him Who endured sufferings for our sake * and hath 
poured forth dispassion, ** O spiritual athlete Eleutherius.  
Seeing thee finishing well the contest, * she who gave birth to thee * desired to run 
the same race as thee; * and, embracing thee * in the midst of the arena, O wise one, * 
she was slain like a heifer. * With her we entreat thee, * O most blessed Eleutherius: 
** Beseech the Lord and Savior on our behalf.  
Thou didst prevail over thy body, * which was wounded by blows * and brought 
into contact with fire; * for thou didst furnish thy mind with wings through invincible 
desire * and the most comely beauty of the Divine One Who loveth us, * by Whose 
sweet desire thou wast wounded, * O adornment of martyrs, ornament of hierarchs, * 
converser with angels, ** O spiritual athlete Eleutherius.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”:  
O Paul, adornment of monastics, * beauteous scion of the wilderness, * boast of 
the venerable, pride of Mount Latros, * confirmation of the faithful: * by thy 
supplications to the Master * deliver from every evil circumstance * and con-
demnation to the fire * those who with love celebrate thy most honored memory ** 
and kiss the shrine of thy relics.  
Having made thyself a temple of the Trinity, * O divinely blessed father, * thou 
didst erect a temple dedicated to the Trinity; * and having entered the trackless 
wilderness of Mount Latros, * as Moses did Mount Sinai, * thou didst make thine 
abode thereon, * where, receiving the divine law, * thou didst truly instruct multitudes 
of monastics, O most wondrous one, ** with great excellence.  
As thou hast boldness before God, * pray thou, O venerable one, * that the flock 
which thou didst gather together * with great effort * be preserved from the 
temptations of the enemy * and the assaults of the heathen, * from fire and sword 
and every attack of the evil one; * for, having thee as our guardian and protection, O 
blessed one, ** we have acquired thee as our hope with God.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody:  
The only uncontainable God, * Who became a man in His goodness, * didst thou 
bear in thy womb without restraint and confinement, * O most holy Bride of God. * 
Wherefore, I beseech thee: * Release me from the passions * which restrain and 
confine me, * that having traversed the straight and narrow path, ** I may attain unto 
that which leadeth to life, O Virgin.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding her Lamb * led of His own will to the 
slaughter as a man, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud weeping: * “Dost Thou 
now hasten to leave childless, * the one who gave Thee birth, O Christ? * What is this 
that Thou hast done, O Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine 
extreme goodness * which passeth understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of 
mankind!”  
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Eleutherius, entreat Christ God, that 
our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
O all-glorious Paul, * we hymn thee as one who dwelleth together with the 
bodiless hosts * and as a companion of all the venerable, * we beseech thee, to ever 
pray thou for us, ** that we may find mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or Stavrotheotokion.  
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
One canon from the Oktoechos, and two canons of the saints.  
ODE I  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr, the acrostic whereof is: “Show me to be free of the 
passions, O all-blessed one”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
By thy radiant supplications, O martyr Eleutherius, free me, who am held captive 
by the darkness of the passions, that I may hymn thee, the servant of Christ, with 
divine hymns.  
Thou didst shine forth with the most pure rays of suffering, O most sacred one, 
with thy blood didst thou dye thy priestly raiment, and become radiant through the 
Spirit.  
Cleaving unto God from thy youth with a most pure mind, thou didst drive carnal 
understanding away from thy soul and became enriched with the abundant grace of 
miracles.  
Theotokion: Like a throne of fire thou didst bear the Creator, and like an animate 
bridal-chamber and a beautiful palace thou didst contain the King Who became as we 
are, apart from change and mingling of natures.  
Canon of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye 
Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the Lord, * 
and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
New hymnody of praise do I hasten to bring to mine open lips, O God-bearing 
Paul. By thy prayers grant me the grace to speak, O venerable one, that I may recount 
thine honored struggles.  
Taking up the yoke of the Lord from thy youth, O venerable one, and sowing the 
wheat of the Spirit in the furrows of thy heart, thou didst reap the grain which 
maketh firm men's souls, O divinely blessed one.  
Through manifold efforts thou didst receive the kingdom on high, having lived on 
earth like an incorporeal being and passed through life like an angel in thy body. And 
now, standing in the highest before the Trinity, be thou mindful of us.  
Theotokion: The Incorporeal and supremely good One, receiving my corruptible 
flesh from thy body, and lying in the manger of His own will, O Bride of God, hath 
deified that which He received by uniting Himself with it.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 
O wise one who didst will to suffer for Christ, thou didst endure the wounding of 
thy body, finding delight in thy pangs and afflictions; wherefore, thou hast now 
received a life without pain.  
Holding fast with the fervent desire for the Creator, O divinely wise spiritual 
athlete Eleutherius, bedewed by the fire of the Spirit thou didst submit thyself to fiery 
testing.  
Shown forth as most sacred among priests and a martyr most steadfast among the 
martyrs, O blessed one, thou hast received a twofold crown, continually beholding 
the face of God.  
Theotokion: Thou didst bud forth the Staff of strength whereby we are made 
steadfast; for the staff of Aaron, which once put forth branches, prefigured thee, O 
land untouched by the plough, O pure turtle-dove, O Ever-virgin!  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before all 
ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * to 
Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art Thou, 
O Lord. 
O thy courage! O the valor of thy soul, O glorious one! For, desiring to break the 
jaws of the invisible lions, thou didst carry two large stones at night, as a weight upon 
thy shoulders.  
Who can fittingly recount thy struggles? For, treading the hard paths in the 
wilderness, thou didst eat wild plants, learning to sweeten thy meals with the pangs of 
asceticism.  
Moses the God-seer of old was deemed worthy of a divine vision in the bush, and 
the most honored Paul manifestly recognized within himself the fire which appeared 
from on high, burning without being consumed.  
Theotokion: O Word, Who as God art beginningless in essence and art equally 
worshipped with the Father: in being born of the Virgin Thou hast received a 
beginning in time, manifesting Thyself as man by nature; and becoming a babe, O 
Christ, Thou didst reveal Thyself as an infant wrapped in swaddling bands. 
  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”: 
From thy youth, O wise one, thou didst manfully desire that which passeth under-
standing * and didst forsake the tumult of the world. * For thy divine way of life thou 
didst become a dwelling-place of the Trinity, * illumining those who have recourse to 
thee with faith. ** Wherefore, we cry out: Rejoice, O most noetically rich Paul!  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Having acquired a mind free of the passions, thou wast a most dutiful servant of 
God, and didst free from delusion those who hearkened well unto thee; and having 
suffered as priest and martyr, O Eleutherius, thou hast received a twofold crown. 
Pray thou, that we be saved.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Steered by the power of the Almighty, and impelled by the mast and sail of the 
Cross, thou didst pass easily through the storm of life and hast reached the truly 
divine havens; and having acquired a heavy cargo of the virtues, thou didst bring it to 
the Master of all, and didst hear from Him: Well done, O good servant. Wherefore, O 
blessed Paul, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who with 
love honor thy holy memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Having fallen into the temptations of great cunning laid for me by enemies visible 
and invisible, caught in the tempest of my countless offenses, I make haste to the 
haven of thy goodness, O pure one, as to my fervent assistance and protection. 
Wherefore, O most pure one, pray thou earnestly to Him Who becameth incarnate of 
thee without seed on behalf of all thy servants who unceasingly entreat thee, O most 
pure one, ever beseeching Him to grant remission of sins unto those who hymn thy 
glory as is meet.  
Stavrotheotokion: The Virgin and Mother of the Redeemer, standing before the 
Cross and lamenting with tears of anguish, cried out maternally: What strange and 
most glorious thing is this that I behold, O my Son? Thou that pourest forth 
dispassion upon all men art crucified upon a Cross between two condemned thieves, 
Thy side pierced, and Thou art given gall to drink by hands which Thou Thyself hast 
made! But arise and grant remission of sins unto those who hymn Thy divine Passion 
with faith.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Neither the gaping mouths of the lions, nor the raging of the fire, nor cruel threats 
were able to weaken the endurance of thy strength, O initiate of the sacred mysteries; 
but, as firm as adamant, thou didst delight in tortures, aflame with divine zeal.  
Full of life-bearing waters, thy mouth poured forth rivers of divine doctrines, O 
hieromartyr, engulfing the mockery of the iniquitous and watering the hearts of those 
who acknowledge Christ as God.  
Glorifying thee greatly, thy Creator, for Whom thou wast zealous to suffer, O 
spiritual athlete, sent a dove bearing angelic food to thee who didst become angelic 
through the most radiant splendors of suffering.  
Theotokion: The angelic armies were in awe, beholding how He Who is invisible 
became visible, through thee assuming a guise like unto us, O Virgin Birthgiver of 
God. Him do thou beseech, that He grant salvation unto all who glorify thee with 
faith.  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, * 
O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 
Once, in the time of thy youth, when thou wast overcome by sleep and didst 
weaken while standing all night, thine honored teacher Peter, seeing this, smote thee 
in the face; and, having smote thee, he straightway soothed thee.  
Conversing privily with God, having drawn nigh to Him directly, our father Paul 
was never overcome by sleep after the blow dealt him by his teacher; and becoming 
like unto the incorporeal ones, he ever remained vigilant.  
Shown forth as a most sacred vessel, thou didst receive the heavenly myrrh of 
Christ in thy heart; and, having brightly lighted the lamp of thy patient abstinence 
with a virtuous life, thou didst hasten to the divine Bridegroom.  
Theotokion: O Word Who hast heaven for Thy throne and the earth for Thy 
footstool, becoming incarnate Thou didst enter the womb of the Virgin and made 
Thine abode in a wretched cave; yet as King and the God-man Thou didst receive 
gifts from the magi, the kings of Persia.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr 
Irmos: Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, * for we know no other God than 
Thee, * and we call upon Thy Name, * for Thou art the God of the living and 
the dead. 
The most wicked enemy, plotting to lead thee astray through deceitful words, O 
martyr, was shown to be put to scorn, the most crafty sage of malice being outwitted 
by thy wisdom.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Mounting the chariot of the divine virtues, O glorious one, thou didst reach the 
summit of martyrdom and didst cast down the vaunted pride of the wicked demons.  
Desiring to behold the beauty of Jesus, O venerable one, thou didst adorn thyself 
with the beauty of martyrdom, and departed to Him, crowned with a wreath of 
splendor.  
Theotokion: Every mind marvels at the wonder of thee, O pure one; for thou hast 
given birth to God in the flesh and fed the Nurturer with milk, without having 
experienced the temptation of a man, as thou thyself knowest.  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
Having cleansed thy mind of the mire of the passions, thou didst become an 
unblemished mirror, ever receiving the radiance of the Spirit, wherefore vanquished, 
the tempter who taught our ancestors the weakness of evil in the garden was put to 
shame by thee.  
Having acquired Christ God, Who is Wisdom, abiding in thy heart, thou didst 
trample beneath thy beautiful feet the foolish sage of evil who attempted to deceive 
thee with divers ideas, O divinely wise Paul.  
As a receptacle of the Light, a son of the Day, as though he were a lion thou didst 
deceive the prince of darkness who assailed thee with earthquakes and a rain of 
stones, seeking to terrify thee with his arrogance, and raging against thee, O Paul.  
Theotokion: Incarnate of thee, O Ever-virgin Maiden Bride of God, the 
beginningless Word, Who through thee lowered Himself to lie as a babe in a manger 
of dumb beasts, hath delivered from irrationality our race, that of the first Adam who 
was driven from Eden.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr 
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
The excellent shepherd of the flock of Christ, the most eloquent pastor, the path 
of struggles, is glorified, having glorified God with his members.  
Given life through visions of God, thou didst steadfastly render lifeless the greatly 
crafty foe, O ever-memorable wise one, glory of the martyrs and rule of the 
priesthood.  
Enduring wounds, entering the fire of thine own will, thou didst put down the 
onslaughts of the savage beasts, possessing constant love for the Creator.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: Revealed as a tabernacle of sanctity, O Mary, sanctify my wretched 
soul, which hath been defiled by the pleasures, and make it a receptacle of divine 
glory.  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
As the Savior, Christ our God fed a vast multitude with a few loaves of bread, so 
did Paul, the initiate of Christ's mysteries, with the little water contained in a tiny 
cruse gladden a multitude, filling them to satiety with its abundance.  
By thy supplications, O wondrous one, thou didst cause burning heat to cease and 
lifted a dire famine; and with waters poured forth from on high thou dost irrigate the 
earth and give drink to its dry furrows, causing it to put forth richly, multiplying the 
crops thereof.  
Amid thy pangs thou didst receive the life which is devoid of pain, and thou 
causest the affliction of cruel pangs to cease for those who with faith ask to receive 
healing from thee, O all-honored one, thou adornment of the fathers. Wherefore; 
loose thou the pangs of my body and soul, I pray thee. 
Theotokion: The Word of the Father, the timeless Son of God, the pre-eternal 
Offspring of the pure and divine Maiden and Mother, Who as man became a babe 
and as God is uncontainable, is now contained by the cave. Wherefore, marveling, we 
all worship the great mystery.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “The steadfast ...”: 
We all praise thee as the adornment of priests * and the proclamation of passion-
bearers, * O venerable hieromartyr Eleutherius, * and we entreat thee: * From 
multifarious misfortunes free those * who celebrate thy memory with love, ** praying 
unceasingly for us all.  
Ikos: As Thou alone art the compassionate God Who is the Lover of mankind, O 
loving Bestower of life, look Thou upon the darkness of my soul, and with Thine 
omnipotent right hand free me from the oppression of the passions, O Word, that I 
may hymn Thy hierarch Eleutherius; for, truly acknowledging Thee from his mother's 
womb, he became sanctified, and like Samuel was offered by his sacred mother to 
Thee, the Creator, unceasingly praying for us all.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr 
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither touched 
nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a single mouth * 
Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * 'O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou.' 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Shattered, O wise one, thou didst cry out: “May Christ now be magnified in my 
flesh! I fear neither the boiling of the cauldron, nor am I daunted by death or the 
assaults of wild beasts, for the sake of life!”  
“Seeking the beauty of the one God, I desire to receive His glory alone! Let my 
whole body be broken and burned!” didst thou cry aloud, O glorious one; “I seek the 
freedom which doth enslave me to Christ!”  
Looking toward the life to come, O blessed one, thou didst truly die to the world, 
and, burned with the wounds of torture, thou didst shine forth like gold and hast 
been laid up in the treasuries of the mansions of heaven.  
Theotokion: The most pure Word, of God, Who was born of thy womb, found 
thee alone to be most pure, O all-immaculate Bride of God, puriying us the faithful of 
the defilements which have come upon us through the passions and lack of restraint.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children brought 
up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing in the 
midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Shining forth like the sun, thou didst straightway illumine the East, and ascending 
thy pillar, standing as in the midst of the heavens, thou hast gladdened the whole 
world with thy teachings, crying: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst withdraw, fleeing the billows of the world, and, making thine abode in 
the wilderness, as saith the Psalms, O divinely blessed one, thou didst receive God in 
thy heart, Who preserved thee with angelic protection.  
With spiritual eyes thou didst behold the tortures of the next world, and pained in 
heart by thy loving soul, thou didst ever water thyself with tears, not like David, who 
only at night drenched his couch with tears.  
Theotokion: The Incorporeal One is become incarnate, the Timeless One cometh 
under time, The Lord Who wrappeth the earth in mist is wrapped in swaddling bands 
for our sake, Himself appearing, past understanding, unchanged through her who 
knew not a man.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr 
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Blossoming, thou didst put forth a garden beauteous in the splendors of 
martyrdom, O adornment of the martyrs. Ye have now shown yourselves to be 
flowers of paradise, emitting a divine fragrance in a most godly manner.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Thy mother mingleth her own blood with the outpouring of the blood of thee 
who wast born from her; for, embracing thy body, O wise one, she was slain by the 
sword and liveth forevermore.  
Thy shrine poureth forth the waters of healings and rivers of miracles upon those 
in need, who wash away the defilements of soul-destroying passions, O martyred 
hierarch, throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: Like rain Christ, the only Benefactor, descended upon thy womb, O 
Virgin, truly watering all creation, and drying up the turbid rivers of the madness of 
idolatry.  
Canon of the venerable one 
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew showed forth an image * of a wonder past 
nature, * for it burned not the youths whom it had received; * neither did the 
fire of the Godhead consume the Virgin * when it descended into her womb. * 
Wherefore, chanting, we sing: * Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
With David thou didst chant a melodious hymn, well-tuned on all strings, saying: 
“O King of all, Thy consolations have divinely gladdened my soul by Thy loving 
gesture!” Wherefore, rejoicing, thou didst cry aloud: Let all creation bless the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Granting thee that which is contrary to carnal love and preserving thee from thy 
youth with His right hand, the Creator thrice divinely fed thee with greens who from 
childhood trampled down every lust; and by the hand of an angel He gave such to 
thee who, loving the life of the angels, hast been glorified, O God-bearing Paul.  
The three men, bound and condemned, were able to escape execution as deserters 
from general service, invisibly freed from their bonds by thy name, O all-glorious 
father; for thou didst deliver those in fetters from misfortunes, and they were borne 
away by the hand alone of Him Who holdeth all things.  
Theotokion: She who gave birth to the Sun of righteousness by a star summoneth 
the magi with gold, myrrh and frankincense, who worship Him Who hath newly and 
immutably become a babe. Him the shepherds magnified and the multitude of angels 
hymned, glorifying Him as God in essence and man by nature.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy hieromartyr 
Irmos: The ever-flowing wellspring of life, * light-bearing candlestick of grace, 
* the animate temple, and most pure cloud, * wider than the heavens and the 
earth, * the Theotokos do we the faithful magnify. 
As the mouth of God, rescuing vain-minded people from the mouth of the alien, 
thou didst show them to be heirs of grace; and suffering mightily, thou livest with 
priests and passion-bearers, O Eleutherius.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Let Eleutherius be faithfully praised: the pure phial of the Spirit, the beautiful 
abode of the virtues, the innocent lamb, the ever-burning lamp, the foundation of 
hierarchs and martyrs.  
Truly thou dost live in never-waning light, having become the most radiant light of 
the Sun; wherefore, by thy supplications to God, O Eleutherius deliver from the 
darkness of the passions those who celebrate thy radiant memory today.  
Theotokion: Spare us who hymn Thee, O Lord, Thou ineffable Offspring of the 
Virgin, in that Thou alone art our Benefactor Who lovest mankind, delivering Thy 
servants from perils, passions and tribulations.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is heaven; * 
the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in which Christ 
God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and magnify. 
Thy boldness crieth out to God, and thou hast wrought wondrous works even 
after thy departure unto Him; for thou hast freed many from divers infirmities by the 
oil of thine effulgence.  
Possessed of a most radiant soul, O venerable one, and wholly anointed as with 
the ointment of grace, by oil thou dispellest demons, cleansing lepers and those 
confused in mind, and causing cruel scabs to fall away.  
Stumbling, Satan the most wicked one, falleth headlong like a most savage wild 
beast, upon beholding thee stretching forth the oil of thy lamp like myrrh for the 
healing of divers ailments; and, seized with fear, he hath been vanquished.  
Theotokion: In latter times, O Mother who knew not a man, thou didst conceive 
in thy womb the Son Whom the Father begat incorruptibly before time. Him do the 
heavens show forth by the star and the earth by a cave in the ground.  
Exapostilarion from the Oktoechos; Glory ...,  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples let us ascend ...”:  
As David saith, thou didst flourish in the house of the word like a palm-tree, O 
venerable father, now multiplying the fruits of thy labors a hundredfold: Wherefore, 
drowning the hordes of the demons in the showers of thy tears, O blessed Paul, thou 
hast received honor from Christ O all-wise one, and a crown of victory, and the grace 
of rich and abundant miracles.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
He Who on high is glorified as God by the angels, O pure one, ineffably dwelt 
with those below without leaving the bosom of the Father; and thou wast the cause 
of His salvation, inexpressibly lending flesh to Him of thy pure blood, O pure one. 
Him do thou beseech, that He grant deliverance from transgressions to thy servants. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone IV: 
As thou didst share in the ways of the apostles * and didst occupy their throne, * 
thou didst find thine activity to be a passage to divine vision, * O divinely inspired 
one. * Wherefore, ordering the word of truth, * thou didst suffer for the Faith even to 
the shedding of thy blood, ** O Hieromartyr Eleutherius, entreat Christ God, that 
our souls be saved.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
O all-glorious Paul, * we hymn thee as one who dwelleth together with the 
bodiless hosts * and as a companion of all the venerable, * we beseech thee, to ever 
pray thou for us, ** that we may find mercy.  
Kontakion of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone II: 
We all praise thee as the adornment of priests * and the proclamation of passion-
bearers, * O venerable hieromartyr Eleutherius, * and we entreat thee: * From 
multifarious misfortunes free those * who celebrate thy memory with love, ** praying 
unceasingly for us all.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
From thy youth, O wise one, thou didst manfully desire that which passeth under-
standing * and didst forsake the tumult of the world. * For thy divine way of life thou 
didst become a dwelling-place of the Trinity, * illumining those who have recourse to 
thee with faith. ** Wherefore, we cry out: Rejoice, O most noetically rich Paul!  
 
