--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 11th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER DANIEL THE STYLITE OF 
CONSTANTINOPLE  
Alleluia, or “God is the Lord ...,”  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel: “What shall we call you ...”: 
What shall we proclaim thee to be, O Daniel? * An uprooter of the passions * and 
planter of the virtues, * a true wonderworker, an intercessor for sinners, * a most 
valiant exorcist of demons, * a beacon radiant with piety, * a dwelling place of the 
Spirit and champion of the Church. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
What shall we name thee, O Daniel? * A faster, * for thou didst subject the 
passions to thy mind; * a sufferer, * for thou didst endure all manner of discomfort, * 
lifted high above the ground on thy pillar; * a most diligent spiritual athlete and a 
most skilled physician. ** Pray thou that our souls be saved.  
What shall we now call thee, O Daniel? * A model for monastics and teacher of 
abstinence, * an adornment of the faithful * and worker of healings, * a beacon 
shining forth light upon those who are in darkness, * a fellow citizen of the angels, 
equal in honor to them, * and an inhabitant of paradise and a heavenly man. ** Pray 
thou that our souls be saved.  
But if Alleluia be chanted at Matins instead of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant the 
following Stichera of the Theotokos before the foregoing, in the same melody: 
Strange and awesome is the mystery * of thy seedless birthgiving, * surpassing all 
of man's thought in majesty, O pure Virgin. * For thou hast given birth in the flesh * 
unto Him Who is ever of the Father's essence, * upon Whom the many-eyed 
cherubim dare not gaze * and before Whom all the ranks of angels tremble. * We 
glorify thee who gavest Him birth, ** O Bride of God!  
To whom hast thou likened thyself, * in no wise rousing thyself to repentance, * O 
my wretched soul, * neither fearing the fire * which awaiteth the wicked? * Arise, and 
call upon her who alone is quick to help, and cry aloud: * O Virgin Mother, entreat 
thy Son and our God, ** that He deliver me from the snares of the deceiver!  
O pure and undefiled one, * who hast given birth unto the unbearable Fire * which 
utterly consumeth sins * and bedeweth the faithful: * By thy supplications burn up 
the tinder of my countless offenses, * and with dew cool thou my soul * which 
withereth because of the passions, ** that I, thy servant, may magnify thy mercy and 
power.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
O Lady, help of all, * send down a drop of the oil of thy mercy upon me * who am 
tempest-tossed upon the sea of darkness * and ever compassed about by the billows 
and waves * of the evils of this life; * and give me a helping hand, * and grant unto 
me the portion of the elect and the righteous, ** for thou hast given birth unto the 
Lover of mankind.  
Stavrotheotokion: The ewe-lamb, as she beheld the Lamb * stretched out of His 
own will upon the Tree of the Cross, * cried out maternally, in pain with her weeping: 
* O my Son, what is this strange sight? * O Longsuffering One, how is it that Thou 
art slain, * Who, as Lord, bestoweth life upon all, * granting resurrection to mortals? 
** I glorify Thy great condescension, O my God!  
If “God is the Lord ...” is to be chanted at Matins, then we chant: 
 Glory ..., in Tone V, the composition of the Studite: 
Having made good the talent entrusted thee by Christ, O venerable father, even 
after death thou hast been revealed to be an exorcist of demons and a physician for 
those suffering from divers ailments, a pillar and foundation, and a holy mountain of 
the Church of Christ. Wherefore, we beseech thee, O wonderworker Daniel: Ask 
thou that our souls find peace and great mercy!  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos.  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
Thou wast a pillar of patience, O venerable one, * emulating the forefathers: * Job 
in sufferings, Joseph in temptations, * and the life of the bodiless ones while yet in 
the body. * O Daniel, our father, ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
Both canons from the Oktoechos; and that of the venerable one, with 4 Troparia, the 
acrostic whereof is: “With hymns I honor Daniel the Stylite,” the composition of 
Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
O blessed Daniel, send down a luminous ray of light from heaven upon me who 
with hymns desire to praise thy memory.  
As a truly great sun, O father, thou didst shine forth to the ends of the earth, 
illumining the assemblies of the faithful with the splendor of thy virtues.  
Submitting to the laws of the Master, O father, thou didst mortify the flesh with 
abstinence, and subject it to the Spirit.  
Theotokion: The immutable Lord Who was born from thee, O Theotokos, 
appeared as a whole man, even though after incarnation He remained as He had 
been.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Having parted the sea of the passions with the rod of abstinence, O father, thou 
didst traverse it without drowning, and attained unto the mountain of true dispassion, 
conversing with God in purity of mind.  
Having ascended to the heights of the virtues, thou didst become known to the 
world; for thou didst stand lifted aloft upon thy pillar, illumining those who came to 
thee with faith with the splendor of most glorious wonders.  
Founded upon the rock of the knowledge of God, thou wast revealed to be 
unmoved by all the wiles of the demons; wherefore, thou didst raise up thy body on a 
pillar above the earth, and didst let thy soul soar to the heavens.  
Theotokion: Deliver me from the assault of the passions, O Lady, and do thou 
now vanquish the enemies that war against me; establish me upon the rock of the will 
of God, and enlighten my soul, O portal of the Light divine.  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
Having lifted thyself up upon a pillar, thou didst lay waste to thy flesh through 
abstinence, O father Daniel. Wherefore, thou wast deemed worthy to become a vessel 
of the Spirit, and having received divine grace, O thrice-blessed one, thou dost drive 
away every ailment from those who with faith honor thy memory.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and correction 
of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon the 
Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming maternally: 
* “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings * which 
surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the Prophet Habbakuk I 
cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!’ 
O ever-memorable father, thou didst behold Simeon, the servant of God, shining 
forth like the radiant sun upon his pillar; and divinely illumined by the divine 
splendors which issued forth from him, O Daniel, thou didst follow his manner of 
life.  
Thou didst vanquish the demonic legions with the sword of faith and drown them 
in the torrents of thy prayers, causing the destruction they wrought upon those at sea 
to cease; and thereby save those who chanted with faith unto God: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lover of mankind!  
Having ascended thy pillar, O all-blessed father, thou didst stand whole nights like 
one of the bodiless ones, having acquired an humble spiritual eye; and, as a shining 
mirror of the Spirit, received radiance and divine manifestations with a pure mind. 
Theotokion: The laws of nature are renewed in thee, O most pure one, for thou 
hast given birth, in a manner truly beyond cause and telling, unto the Word, the Giver 
of the Law, Who hath delivered from ignorance the race of mankind which faithfully 
chants: Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!  
ODE V  
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
That thou O father mightest receive immortal glory, thou didst slay the desires of 
thy flesh, and bridle the urgings of the passions with the labors of abstinence; and 
hast thereby been revealed to be a river of miracles and a wellspring of healings. O 
ever-memorable one.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
The wondrous Simeon appeared to thee who wast struck with fear, O blessed 
father, and with two angels he pointed out the path which thou wast to tread upon 
the earth, crying aloud: Come and stand by me, borne aloft to God by grace!  
Illumined by unwaning radiance and divine effulgence, O father, thou didst dispel 
the gloom of the passions and wast revealed to be a pillar of light and a stairway truly 
leading the faithful up to God.  
Theotokion: O Maiden Bride of God, who hast given birth unto the Master, thou 
hast been revealed to be more exalted than the heavenly hosts, and hast deified the 
nature of the earthly; wherefore, with soul and tongue, O Virgin, we the faithful 
glorify thee as her who is most truly the Theotokos.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Thy mind, O father, illumined through drawing nigh unto God, remained 
unconsumed by the fire of pleasures and above the passions, and higher than 
passionate attachments to the flesh.  
Thy soul was filled with the Spirit's gifts of life-creating waters, O divinely wise 
and all-blessed one; and thou didst truly pour forth rivers of healing which quench 
the torrents of the passions.  
Theotokion: All we, the faithful, have acquired thee as an intercessor and a helper 
in the deep of evil and the billows and waves of tribulation which ever pass over us, 
O Theotokos, for thou alone art the refuge of mortals.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII,  
Spec. Mel: “As first fruits ...”:  
Having ascended thy pillar like a star of great radiance, * thou didst illumine the 
world with thy venerable deeds, * and didst dispel the gloom of deception O father, * 
wherefore, we beseech thee: Shine forth even now in the hearts of thy servants ** the 
unwaning light of knowledge.  
Ikos: Flawed is the hymn which I now offer in praise of thy struggles, O father; for 
my heart is impure, in that I have shamefully defiled it. But grant me the words, O 
holy one, to hymn in a pure manner thy life at which even the angels marveled, for 
thou wast like an incorporeal one, having received the unwaning light of knowledge.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages'.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
The ranks of angels marveled at thy standing upon thy pillar, O all-blessed God-
bearer; for having assumed their manner of life while yet in the body, thou didst cry 
aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
Luminous with the loftiness of an immaterial way of life and with the splendor of 
prophecy, thou hast shone forth rays of healing upon us who piously honor thee, O 
wondrous Daniel.  
With the radiance of thy prayers disperse thou the gloom of my passions, O all- 
blessed one, and guide me to the path of life who chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
God, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: Be thou merciful unto me, O Virgin, and with the healing power of 
thy prayers cure me who have been wounded by the sting of sin and who cry aloud: 
Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
O God-bearing father, in renowned manner thou didst attain unto the ultimate 
desire, the greatest good, soaring aloft on the wings of thy virtuous deeds; and with 
the bodiless ones, O Daniel, thou dost cry aloud: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; 
ye people supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
The power of God manifestly strengthened thee and enabled thee to endure the 
bitter cold of winter, the burning heat of the sun, the decay of thy flesh and the 
discomfort caused by the worms which issued forth therefrom; and thou didst cry: Ye 
children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Thou wast revealed to be a new Job, O right wondrous Daniel, beset by a 
multitude of temptations and tribulations; and emulating the meekness of David, the 
guilelessness of Jacob and the chastity of Joseph, thou didst cry aloud in thanksgiving: 
Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages!  
Theotokion: O all-hymned and all-holy Lady, fulfilling thy words by 
acknowledging thee to be the Theotokos, we now bless thee, in that thou hast given 
birth unto God for us. And hymning Him in two natures and one Hypostasis, we cry 
aloud: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout 
the ages!  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE IX  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God's ineffable condescension, * 
for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming man 
in the Virgin's womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most pure 
Theotokos. 
Lo! when thou didst repose, having finished thy course, the gates of heaven were 
opened unto thee, and the ranks of angels received thee; and Christ, the Bestower of 
crowns, crowned thee with the glory of righteousness. We, the faithful, magnify Him 
in song.  
Like a lily of the valley didst thou blossom in the paradise of abstinence, and like a 
cypress didst thou rise to the heights of perfection; like the olive tree of the Psalms 
hast thou been shown to be, anointing our faces and hearts with the oil of thine 
asceticism.  
Creation knoweth thee to be a pillar firmly grounded upon the rock of the virtues, 
an unbreachable rampart, a foundation of miracles, a right calm haven, a treasury of 
healing and the dwelling place of the Spirit. Wherefore, we celebrate thy memory 
today, O Daniel.  
Today thy divine memory hath shone forth upon us more brightly than the sun, 
illumining the hearts of the faithful with the light of righteousness, and dispelling the 
darkness of the soul-destroying passions. And celebrating it, we piously hymn thee.  
Theotokion: O Thou that wast born of her whom Thou didst preserve incorrupt 
even after birthgiving, have pity upon me when Thou sittest to judge my deeds, and 
overlook mine iniquities and my sins; for Thou, Who only art without sin, a merciful 
God and the Lover of mankind.  
Exapostilarion from the Oktoechos, and Glory ..., 
 Spec. Mel: “O immutable Light ...”: 
With wordless utterance, thy pillar proclaimeth the ascetic feats of thee who 
suffered, standing unprotected at the mercy of the adverse elements. Wherefore, thou 
didst shine forth as a luminous beacon, enlightening all creation, O father.  
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
With unceasing hymns we bless thee, O Virgin, for thou hast given birth unto One 
of the Trinity and didst bear in thy divine arms the transcendent Word, immutably 
and without change.  
Aposticha from the Oktoechos.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
Thou wast a pillar of patience, O venerable one, * emulating the forefathers: * Job 
in sufferings, Joseph in temptations, * and the life of the bodiless ones while yet in 
the body. * O Daniel, our father, ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved!  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Having ascended thy pillar like a star of great radiance, * thou didst illumine the 
world with thy venerable deeds, * and didst dispel the gloom of deception O father, * 
wherefore, we beseech thee: Shine forth even now in the hearts of thy servants ** the 
unwaning light of knowledge.  
 
