--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY ON OR AFTER THE 18th OF DECEMBER 
THE SUNDAY BEFORE THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST 
COMMEMORATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT HOLY FATHERS  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” Stichera to the Resurrection and the Theotokos, as usual. 
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,”  
Note: If this Sunday falls on either the 18th or 19th of December, On “Lord, I have 
cried ...,” we chant 3 Stichera of the Resurrection, 3 by Anatolius, and 4 of the holy 
fathers. But if it falls between the 20th and 23rd of December, we chant 4 Stichera of 
the Resurrection, (one by Anatolius), 3 Stichera of the forefeast, and 3 of the holy 
fathers.  
The Stichera of the forefeast, the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set all aside ...”: 
The never-setting Sun doth come to shine forth from the Virgin's womb and 
enlighten all the world. Let us make haste to meet Him with pure eyes and deeds; and 
let us now make ready in spirit to receive Him Who cometh unto His own through a 
strange birth, as He hath been well pleased to do. In that He is compassionate, and so 
that He might lead us up who have estranged ourselves from the life of Eden, He is 
born in Bethlehem.  
God the Word, Who is borne up upon the shoulders of the cherubim, having 
united Himself hypostatically to the flesh, hath made His abode within the womb of 
the all-immaculate one and become a man; and He hath come to earth to be born of 
the tribe of Judah. The holy cave is beautifully adorned, like a most magnificent 
palace, for the King of all; and the manger, wherein the Virgin Mary layeth the 
Infinite One like a babe, is like a fiery throne, serving for the renewal of creation.  
In a manger of dumb beasts the Virgin doth lay Thee, O beginningless Word of 
God, Who, in a manner transcending understanding, hast received a beginning. For 
Thou hast come to put an end to that foolishness which I assumed through the 
malice of the serpent, and to be wrapped in swaddling clothes, that Thou mightest 
rend asunder the rags and chains of my transgressions, O Thou Who alone art good 
and the Lover of mankind. Wherefore, I glorify Thee and I hymn and most joyfully 
worship Thine advent in the flesh, whereby I have been set free.  
The Stichera of the holy fathers, in the same melody: 
Unto the ends of the earth hath the memory of the forefathers been manifest as 
truly filled with light and shining with rays of grace; for Christ, the radiant Sun, 
shining from afar on high, doth lead forth an assembly of stars which shine with Him, 
and in the midst of Bethlehem a nativity is revealed to be that of God and man. 
Therefore, piously clapping our hands, with faith let us all join chorus to utter pre-
festive praise unto His nativity. (Twice, if the Sunday falleth before December 20th)  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Rejoicing today, Adam is adorned with the glory of divine communion, as the 
foundation and confirmation of the wise forefathers; and with him Abel doth leap for 
joy and Enoch is glad, and Seth danceth together with Noah; the all-praised Abraham 
doth chant with the patriarchs, and from on high Melchizedek doth behold a birth 
wherein a father had no part. Wherefore, celebrating the divine memory of the 
forefathers of Christ, we beseech Him, that our souls be saved.  
With gladness the assembly of the divinely wise children in the furnace hath shone 
forth, proclaiming the nativity of Christ on earth; for the Lord, descending like a pre-
cious dew, doth preserve unconsumed her who gave birth to Him, keeping her 
undefiled and enriching her with divine gifts. Wherefore, the God-pleasing Daniel 
rejoiceth in gladness, for he clearly foresaw the Stone uncut from the mountain, and 
with boldness he doth now pray in behalf of our souls.  
Glory ..., of the holy fathers, in Tone VI:  
Daniel, the man of divine desires, seeing Thee, the Stone uncut by human hands, 
O Lord, prophetically called Thee a babe born without seed, the Word incarnate from 
the Virgin, the supremely immaculate God, the Savior of our souls.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VI: 
Adorn thyself well, O cave, for the ewe-lamb approacheth, bearing Christ in her 
womb! O manger, receive Him Who by His word hath loosed us mortals from 
irrational activity! Ye shepherds, piping, bear witness to the awesome wonder! O magi 
from Persia, bring ye gold, frankincense and myrrh to the King, for the Lord hath re-
vealed Himself through the Virgin Mother! And, gazing down upon Him, His Mother 
made obeisance to Him as though she were His handmaiden, and greeted Him as she 
held Him in her embrace, saying: “How wast Thou sown within me, and how didst 
Thou spring forth within me, O my Redeemer and God?”  
Note: If this Sunday falls on the 18th or 19th of December: We chant, Both now ..., the 
Dogmatic Theotokion of the Tone of the week.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the Day. Three Lessons:  
READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (14:14-20) 
And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained 
servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto 
Dan. And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote 
them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus. And he 
brought back all the goods, and also brought back again his brother Lot, and his 
goods, and the women also, and the people. And the king of Sodom went out to meet 
him, after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlomer and of the kings that were 
with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which is the king's dale. And Melchizedek king of 
Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the most high God. 
And he blessed him, and said: Blessed be Abram of the most high God, possessor of 
heaven and earth: and blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine 
enemies into thy hand.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
READING FROM THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY (1:8-11, 15-17)  
In those days, Moses said unto the sons of Israel; The land I have set the before 
you, go in and possess the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers, Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob, to give unto them and to their seed after them. And I spake unto 
you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you myself alone: The Lord your God 
hath multiplied you, and, behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude. 
(The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many more as ye are, 
and bless you, as he hath promised you!) So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men, 
and known, and made them heads over you, captains over thousands, and captains 
over hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and officers among 
your tribes. And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear the causes between 
your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the 
stranger that is with him. Ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye shall hear 
the small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face of man; for the 
judgment is God's. 
 READING FROM THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY (10:14-21) 
In those days, Moses said unto the sons of Israel; Behold, the heaven and the 
heaven of heavens is the Lord's thy God, the earth also, with all that therein is. Only 
the Lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, 
even you above all people, as it is this day. Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your 
heart, and be no more stiffnecked. For the Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord 
of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor 
taketh reward: he doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth 
the stranger, in giving him food and raiment. Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye 
were strangers in the land of Egypt. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God; him shalt thou 
serve, and to him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name. He is thy praise, and he is 
thy God, that hath done for thee these great and terrible things, which thine eyes have 
seen.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple.  
And this Sticheron of the holy fathers, in Tone I: 
The prophets of great renown, splendid in the rays of divine eloquence, are ever 
blessed, and, putting forth the sayings of the Spirit as fruit, they preached to all the 
ineffable nativity of Christ God; and having lived most wondrously, they ended their 
lives in accordance with the Law.  
Glory ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone III: 
Come, ye lovers of the feasts of the Church, and with psalms let us praise the 
assembly of the forefathers: Adam, the forefather of us all, Enoch, Noah, 
Melchizedek, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and, after the Law, Moses and Aaron, 
Joshua, Samuel and David, and, with them, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel and the 
twelve prophets, together with Elijah, Elisha and all the rest, Zechariah and the 
Forerunner; who all preached Christ, the Life and Resurrection of our race.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone III: 
Radiantly adorn thyself O Bethlehem, for Eden hath been opened! Make ready, O 
Ephratha, for Adam is restored, and Eve with him; for the curse is annulled, the 
salvation of the world hath blossomed forth, and the souls of the righteous are 
adorned. And bearing hymnody as a gift of offering instead of myrrh, they receive 
spiritual salvation and incorruption. For, lo! He that lieth in the manger hath 
commanded previously, that a spiritual hymn be chanted by those who cry out 
unceasingly: O Lord, glory be to Thee!  
Note: If this Sunday falls before the 20th of December:  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Without seed, through the divine Spirit and by the will of the Father didst thou 
conceive the Son of God, Who is begotten of the Father without mother before the 
ages; to Him that, for our sake, was born of thee without father didst thou give birth 
in the flesh, and thou didst nourish Him as a babe with thy milk. Wherefore, cease 
thou never to pray that our souls be delivered from misfortunes.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection.  
But if this Sunday falls on the 24th of December, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
O house of Ephratha, * thou holy city, * glory of the prophets: * adorn thou the 
house * wherein the Divine One is born.  
Verse: God shall come from Theman, * and the Holy One from the mountain 
overshadowed and densely wooded.  
Tone II: O Bethlehem, land of Judah, * splendid habitation of Him Who is 
incarnate: * prepare thou the divine cave * wherein God is born in the flesh of the 
holy Virgin * who hath not known man, that He might save the world!  
Verse: O Lord, I have Thy report, and I was afraid; * O Lord, I have 
considered Thy works, and I was stricken with awe.  
Tone II: Come ye all, let us faithfully celebrate the forefeast * of the nativity of 
Christ, * and noetically let us put forth like a star the hymn * of the glorification of 
the Magi, and with the shepherds let us cry out: * The salvation of all hath come from 
the Virgin's womb, summoning the faithful.  
Glory ..., the composition of Cyprian, in Tone II:  
Rejoice, ye honorable prophets who dedicated yourselves well to the Law of the 
Lord, and by faith revealed yourselves to be unshaken and unbreakable pillars of 
Christ; and, having passed on to heaven, beseech ye Him to grant peace to the world 
and to save our souls.  
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., of the forefeast, the composition of Cyprian, in Tone II: 
Behold, the hour of our salvation draweth nigh! Make ready, O cave, for the 
Virgin approacheth to give birth! Rejoice and be glad, O Bethlehem, land of Judah, 
for from thee our Lord shall shine forth! Lo! hearken, O ye mountains and hills, and 
ye surrounding lands of Judea, for Christ cometh to save mankind whom He created, 
in that He is the Lover of mankind!  
Note: If this Sunday falls before the 20th of December:  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
O new wonder greater than all the wonders of old! * For who hath ever known a 
mother to give birth without having known a man, * and to bear on her arm Him 
Who sustaineth all creation? * Yet it was the will of God to be born. * O most pure 
one, who carried Him as an infant in thine embrace * and before Whom thou hast a 
mother's boldness: * cease not to pray on behalf of those who honor thee, ** that He 
have compassion and save our souls. 
After the blessing of the loaves, “Virgin Theotokos, rejoice ...,” (Twice) 
And the Troparion of the holy fathers, in Tone II: 
Great are the accomplishments of faith! * In the fountain of flame, as in refreshing 
water, * the three holy children rejoiced; * and the prophet Daniel was shown to be a 
shepherd of lions, as of sheep. ** By their prayers, O Christ God, save Thou our 
souls! (Once) 
Note: If this Sunday falls on the 24th of December, the above Troparion of the 
fathers (Twice), and the following Troparion of the forefeast (Once), in Tone IV: 
Once Mary, pregnant with a seedless pregnancy, * was registered in Bethlehem 
with the elder Joseph, * as being of the seed of David. * And while they were there, 
the days were accomplished that she should be delivered, * but there was no room for 
them in the inn. * But the cave showed itself to be a beauteous palace for the Queen, 
** and Christ is born to raise up the image that fell of old!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Resurrection (Twice);  
Glory ..., that of the holy fathers, in Tone II: 
Great are the accomplishments of faith! * In the fountain of flame, as in refreshing 
water, * the three holy children rejoiced; * and the prophet Daniel was shown to be a 
shepherd of lions, as of sheep. ** By their prayers, O Christ God, save Thou our 
souls!  
Both now ..., Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Open unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O Ephratha! 
* For the Tree of life hath blossomed forth from the Virgin in the cave. * Her womb 
is shown to be a noetic paradise, * wherein lieth a divine garden, * eating from 
whence we live, not dying like Adam. * Christ is born to raise up His image ** which 
before was fallen.  
Note: If this Sunday falls on the 24th of December, we chant the following  
Both now ..., Once Mary, pregnant with a seedless pregnancy, * was registered in 
Bethlehem with the elder Joseph, * as being of the seed of David. * And while they 
were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered, * but there was 
no room for them in the inn. * But the cave showed itself to be a beauteous palace 
for the Queen, ** and Christ is born to raise up the image that fell of old!  
The usual Kathismata, Sessional Hymns, and Theotokia of the Resurrection.  
The Gospel Lesson and the rest, in the Tone of the week.  
Note: If this Sunday falls on the 24th of December, we chant the following:  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph was amazed ...”:  
In the fathers, in Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Judah and the other patriarchs, Jesse, 
David and the rest, didst Thou mystically prophesy the manifestation of God which 
would come to pass on earth, that of Thy pre-eternal Son from the Virgin, Christ, 
Who hath appeared in Bethlehem prophesying in the Spirit and Who calleth out to all 
that are in the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of Wisdom ...”:  
O ye faithful, let us joyously celebrate the feast of the divine fathers, and, honoring 
Adam and Abel, blessing Seth and Enos, let us hymn Enoch, Noah, Shem and 
Japheth. Let us praise Abraham, who shone forth in faith before the Law, and the 
divine Isaac, Jacob, Judah and Levi, and the chaste Joseph, and let us faithfully cry 
aloud: O God-bearing forefathers, entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins 
unto those who, with love, celebrate your holy memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the chanting of the usual Evlogitaria; 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
The Sessional Hymn of the holy fathers, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
With hymns let us all praise Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the meek David, Joshua, 
and the twelve patriarchs, together with the three youths that quenched the fiery 
flame with the power of the Spirit. And let us cry out to them: Rejoice, ye that bravely 
denounced the deception of the mad king! Pray ye to Christ, that He grant remission 
of offenses unto those who celebrate your holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., another Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
From the bosom of the Father didst Thou come down, and in Thine ineffable 
condescension took upon Thyself poverty like unto ours, in a manner surpassing 
nature, O Lover of mankind. It was Thy good pleasure to make Thine abode in a 
cave, O Lord, and as a babe, Thou Who art the Creator and Lord, art suckled at Thy 
Mother's breast. Wherefore, the Magi, guided by the star, bring gifts unto Thee and 
cry out: Glory in the highest to God, Who cometh to earth to be born as a man!  
Note: If this Sunday falls on either the 18th or the 19th of December, we chant the 
following Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Like the widow who gave two mites as an offering, I offer thee the praise of 
thanksgiving which is thy due, O Lady, for all thy gifts; for thou hast been revealed to 
be a shelter and aid, ever rescuing me from temptations and tribulations. Wherefore, 
delivered from that which causeth me grief, as from the midst of a burning furnace, I 
cry out to thee with all my heart: O Theotokos, help me by entreating Christ God to 
grant me remission of sins, for I, thy servant, have thee as my hope.  
The Song of Ascents & Prokeimenon in the Tone of the week, as usual.  
The Canons:  
N.B. If this Sunday fall on either the 18th or the 19th of December: The canon to 
the Resurrection from the Oktoechos, with 4 Troparia, including its Irmos; the canon 
to the Cross and the Resurrection, with 2 Troparia; the canon to the Theotokos, with 
2 Troparia; and the canon to the fathers, with 6 Troparia.  
But if this Sunday falleth between the 20th and the 23rd of December: The canon to 
the Resurrection from the Oktoechos, with 4 Troparia, including the Irmos; the 
canon for the forefeast (from the Menaion service for the day, not that given 
below), with 4 Troparia; and the canon to the fathers, with 6 Troparia (excluding the 
initial 2 Troparia of that canon, which are to the Resurrection).  
If, however, this Sunday falleth on the 24th of December, then the canon to the 
fathers, with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos, and that of the forefeast below, with 6 
Troparia.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE I  
Canon of the Resurrection, then that of the holy fathers, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: He Who in ancient times * hid the pursuing tyrant beneath the 
waves of the sea, * is hidden beneath the earth by the children of those 
whom once He saved. * But let us, like the children, sing unto the Lord, 
* for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Through fear the gates of death are thrown open unto Thee and the everlasting 
portals are cast down, for through Thine honorable descent the dead of old have 
arisen, hymning Thy Resurrection with gladness, O Christ. 
 God, before Whom those of heaven and earth tremble, wisheth to stand before 
the tribunal of Pilate, as One condemned by the judge of an iniquitous trial, and is 
struck in the face by the hands of the unrighteous.  
Troparia of the holy fathers: Today the assembly of the divine fathers doth 
radiantly celebrate the forefeast of the nativity of Christ, and most glorious grace doth 
prefigure it, for Abraham and the children of the Law are an image of grace.  
Of old the sacred Abraham received One of the tri-hypostatic Godhead, and now 
the Word of the Father, He that is gloriously praised as co-enthroned with Him, doth 
through the divine Spirit, descend to the children.  
The children that cast down godlessness in the furnace, in number and faith 
prefigure the divine Trinity, revealing to the world the hidden mysteries of God.  
Abraham was delivered from the hands of the unrighteous, and the divine youths 
and Daniel the prophet were once saved from the flame of the furnace and from the 
den of wild beasts, wherefore, let us celebrate the forefeast of the nativity of Christ.  
Theotokion: O joyous and unwedded Mother, incorrupt Virgin, we bless thee, for 
thou didst blossom forth from the generation of Abraham and the tribe of David, 
and gave birth unto Christ, Who of old was foretold by the prophets.  
Canon of the forefeast, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye 
Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the Lord, * 
and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
The Virgin doth now come to Bethlehem to give birth to Christ, Who becometh a 
babe in the flesh, Who of His own will beggared Himself, and Who becometh visible. 
Let heaven and earth rejoice!  
Leap up, ye mountains and hills! Join chorus, ye divinely eloquent prophets! Ye 
people and nations, clap your hands! Our salvation and Enlightenment, Who is born 
in the city of Bethlehem, hath nearly come. 
  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: God is known as a man through the Virgin who hath not known 
wedlock; He that is abundantly rich becometh poor, enriching those who, through 
malice, have been reduced to poverty. Let us all hymn Him with praises, for He hath 
been glorified.  
Katavasia: “Christ is born ...”  
ODE III  
Canon of the holy fathers 
Irmos: When creation beheld Thee, * Who founded the whole earth upon the 
waters, * hanging on Golgotha, * it was seized with awe and cried aloud: * 
None is holy save Thee, O Lord!! 
Having spent three days in the tomb, by Thy life-creating Resurrection Thou didst 
raise up the dead of ages past, and, loosed from condemnation, they rejoiced with 
gladness, crying aloud: Behold, Thou hast come as our Deliverance, O Lord!  
Glory to Thine arising, O our Savior, for as Almighty, Thou hast delivered us from 
Hades, corruption and death, and, crying aloud, we say: There is none holy save Thee, 
O Lord, Lover of mankind!  
Troparia of the holy fathers: Faithfully preserving the glory of the image and 
likeness of God, with the fire of the Spirit the children, as champions, extinguished 
the fire of the golden image, chanting: We know but one Lord!  
The captive children, clothed with the wisdom and power of the Spirit, put to 
shame the wise men of Babylon and boldly cried aloud: None is holy save Thee, O 
Lord, Lover of mankind!  
The Law doth rejoice and joineth chorus with the children and the prophets and 
doth exult today before the divine advent of the Lord. And Abraham doth rejoice, for 
from his seed hath the incarnate Lord appeared.  
Theotokion: A conception without pangs, an acceptance of thy birthgiving hath 
transpired in a manner beyond all telling, O Theotokos, for the Word of God, Who is 
God and was proclaimed by the prophets, hath revealed Himself to be a mystery 
beyond nature.  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before all 
ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * to 
Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art Thou, 
O Lord. 
He, Who in a manner beyond understanding was born of the Father before all 
ages, hath become incarnate from the Virgin in the latter times, as He Himself knew, 
wishing to renew mankind which had become corrupt through the counsel of the evil 
serpent.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
The beginningless Son of God, Who is co-enthroned with the Father and the 
Spirit in the highest, beholding human nature which had been humbled, doth accept a 
beginning and wisheth to be born in the flesh as a man.  
Theotokion: She who is more holy than the angels and all creation doth now 
seedlessly give birth in the flesh to the Angel of Great Counsel, for the restoration of 
all who unceasingly chant unto Him: Holy art Thou, O Lord!  
Hypacoi, in Tone VIII:  
An Angel bedewed the children in the furnace, and hath now put an end to the 
lamentation of the myrrh-bearing women, saying: Why bring ye myrrh? Whom seek 
ye in the tomb? Christ God is arisen, for He is the life and salvation of the race of 
mankind!  
ODE IV  
Canon of the holy fathers 
Irmos: Foreseeing Thy divine self-emptying upon the Cross, * Habakkuk, in 
amazement, cried out: * “Thou hast cut asunder the strength of the mighty, * 
O Good One, * and preached to those in Hades, * as the Almighty One. 
Thy divine descent into hell, O Christ God, was been revealed to be life for the 
dead; for Thou didst restrict the dominion of the enemy below, O Good One, 
opening a path for mortals to heaven.  
The most pure body of the Redeemer, which lay in the tomb, did not decay, but, 
as Almighty, Thou didst break down the gates of Hades and rise again in glory on the 
third day, O Christ!  
Troparia of the holy fathers: Let us honor Abraham, Isaac and Jacob as the first-
fruits of the fathers, for from their seed hath Christ appeared incarnate from the 
Virgin, in that He is almighty.  
Indicating the coming events of the descent of Christ unto all, Daniel clearly 
showed forth lions as sheep, for, as a prophet of God, he foresaw the future.  
Not attracted by the poison of sin, O children, ye were delivered from the flame; 
for, being of a wisdom more pure than gold, ye remained unchanged in the furnace of 
deception.  
Theotokion: O honored and most pure one, thine Offspring, Who surpasseth 
nature, is proclaimed aloud to be the expectation of the nations and the salvation of 
the world. And today the multitude of the fathers hymn Him.  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, * 
O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Thou hast given rise unto a staff from the root of Jesse, O Virgin, putting forth 
the unfading Blossom of the Creator of all, Who as God adorns with flowers all the 
earth, which cries aloud to Him: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
O Word of God, Thou hast come to edify me, who have been despoiled through 
evil food and dragged down in mind and made like unto dumb beasts; and, becoming 
a Babe, Thou didst lie down in a manger of dumb beasts. Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!  
Theotokion: O Jesus, Habbakuk foresaw Thee incarnate from the Virgin, the 
mountain overshadowed, breaking down the mountains and hills of evil, and giving 
over to utter destruction the arrogance of the evil one and the uprisings of the 
demons.  
ODE V  
Canon of the holy fathers 
Irmos: Thy Theophany, O Christ, the Unwaning Light, * that mercifully 
came to pass for us, * Isaiah, keeping watch, beheld out of the night, * 
and he cried aloud: * “The dead shall arise, and those in the tombs * 
shall be raised up, * and all that are born of earth shall rejoice.” 
The angel, manifestly symbolizing that which radiates joy, is shown forth as a light-
bearer in the tomb, proclaiming the Resurrection to the women; and, setting aside 
their lamentation, they rejoiced in the risen Christ, from Whom they received 
unending joy.  
O Good One, Who in Thy tender compassion assumed a form like ours, Thou 
wast willingly nailed to the Cross for the sake of me, who, of old in paradise, rejected 
Thy holy commandment for the sake of food; and Thou hast died as a man, granting 
me life.  
Troparia of the holy fathers: Let us honor today the divine Daniel, of the race of 
Abraham, the first-fruit of the fathers, as a leader of the Law and of grace; for, as a 
prophet of God, he foretold the advent of Christ from the Virgin, awaiting 
beforehand the divine nativity.  
Clearly prefiguring through the Angel's descent the coming of the Lord unto us, 
the children of Abraham extinguished the furnace; and, rendering the flame moist 
with dew by their faith, they consumed the splendor of the golden image therein.  
Through the Spirit, Daniel closed the mouths of the wild beasts in the pit; and, 
through grace, the children of Abraham quenched the strength of the fire. And, saved 
from corruption, they proclaim Christ Who is born of the Virgin, entreating Him as 
the Redeemer of our salvation.  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: Revealing through the divine Spirit Thy painless assumption of our 
nature, and keeping vigil in the Law of grace, O Lord, Isaiah cried out: From the race 
of Abraham and the tribe of Judah doth a Virgin come, giving birth in the flesh 
without seed.  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
The most perfect Son of God, the Master by nature, in His tender compassion was 
well pleased to be called the Son of man and reckoned among slaves, O most 
Compassionate One. Wherefore, willingly beggaring Thyself, Thou comest to be born 
in a cave, O Supremely good One.  
O Christ our King, Who art uncontainable in Thy divine nature, how can a little 
cave receive Thee? How can a manger contain Thee, Who comest in the flesh to 
Thine own for our sake, from a Mother who knew not wedlock, that Thou mightest 
save those who have been estranged from Thee, O Lord?  
Theotokion: The Shepherd's ewe-lamb hath come to give birth. Make ready, O 
holy cave! Make haste, ye shepherds, to see the newborn· Shepherd and Lamb! Ye 
Magi, prepare yourselves with gifts to worship Him as King in the flesh.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the holy fathers 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
By Thy three-day burial, O Good One, Thou didst bring about the mortification 
of death and the destruction of Hades; and, having arisen, O good Jesus, in a godly 
manner Thou hast poured forth life upon those who are in the world. (Twice)  
Troparia of the holy fathers: Hospitable was the nature and exalted was the faith 
of Abraham the forefather. Wherefore, receiving in image the divine mystery, he 
rejoiced, and, running before Christ, he now rejoiceth exceedingly.  
The faith of the youths now holds creation subject by the gift of the Creator, for 
the all-devouring and shameless fire stood in awe of those who honor Jesus Christ, 
the Creator of fire.  
Daniel the prophet, once closing the mouths of the lions in the pit, showed in a 
godly manner that through the coming of Christ the savagery of the world would be 
in harmony with divine peace.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: O Mary, thou Mother who knewest not a man, from a virginal womb 
didst thou give birth unto Christ, Whom the prophets beheld in the Spirit; and the 
fathers who begot Him now join chorus before His nativity.  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
O Lady, as thou art a new heaven thou dost come, that Christ, the Sun of glory, 
might shine forth in the flesh from thy womb, as through a cloud, in the cave; for in 
His boundless loving-kindness, He wondrously desireth to illumine all who are of this 
earth with the beams of His own light.  
Thou didst perceive our infirmity and misery, O compassionate Christ, and didst 
not disdain us; but, without leaving the Father, Thou didst empty Thyself and make 
Thine abode in the womb of her who knew not wedlock, and who now cometh forth 
to give birth unto Thee, without pangs, in the cave.  
Theotokion: Ye mountains and hills, fields and vales, people and generations, 
nations and every creature: exult, filled with divine gladness, for the deliverance of all, 
the Word of God, the Timeless One, Who, in His loving-kindness, hath come under 
time, now cometh with haste.  
N.B. If this Sunday falleth on the 18th or 19th of December, we chant this Kontakion 
of the holy fathers, in Tone VI: 
O thrice-blessed ones, * ye who did not honor an image wrought by hands, * but 
were defended by the indescribable Essence, * ye were glorified in your ordeal by fire; 
* and, standing in the midst of unbearable flame, * ye called upon God, saying: * 
Make speed and hasten Thou to help us, O Compassionate One, * in that Thou art 
merciful; ** for what Thou willest, Thou canst do!  
Ikos: Stretch forth Thy hand whereby of old the warring Egyptians and the 
embattled Hebrews were tested. Forsake us not, that death, which thirsteth after us, 
not swallow us up; and spare our souls, as Thou once didst spare Thy three children 
in Babylon, who glorified Thee unceasingly and were cast for Thy sake into a furnace, 
from whence they cried out to Thee: Make speed and haste Thou to help us, O 
Compassionate One, in that Thou art merciful; for what Thou wiliest, Thou canst do!  
But if this Sunday falls between the 20th and the 24th of December; 
We chant this Kontakion, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of Angels ...”:  
Be glad, O Bethlehem! Make ready, O Ephratha! * For, lo! she that beareth the 
Lamb and great Shepherd in her womb * hasteneth to give birth. * Beholding this, the 
God-bearing fathers are glad, * and with the shepherds ** they hymn the pregnant 
Virgin.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Ikos: Beholding the splendid radiance of thy birthgiving, O Virgin, the God-loving 
Abraham, the ever-memorable Isaac, Jacob and all the divinely assembled choir of 
saints rejoice, and, with joyous proclamations, they lead creation forth to meet thee; 
for thou hast been revealed to be the mediatress of joy for all, having conceived in thy 
womb Him Who once was seen in Babylon, Who preserved unconsumed the youths 
that had been cast unjustly into the furnace, and Who showed thee forth in a manner 
transcending comprehension. Wherefore, the young maidens chant unto Him Whom 
thou dost bear in thine arms, hymning thee as the pregnant Virgin.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the holy fathers 
Irmos: O ineffable wonder! * He Who delivered the holy Children from the 
fiery furnace * boweth His head and asketh baptism of a servant, * cleansing 
those who cry: * O God our Redeemer, blessed art Thou!  
O strange wonder! The Lord, Who sitteth upon a throne in the highest, by 
assuming flesh endured death; but He hath arisen through the might of the Godhead, 
raising with Himself the dead from all ages.  
Thou didst shake the might of death and didst rise again, granting resurrection 
unto those who truly glorify Thee, the Lord, and who chant unto Thee with 
Orthodox faith: O God, our Redeemer, blessed art Thou!  
Troparia of the holy fathers: O father Abraham, founder of thy race, having 
begotten Christ in the flesh, thou art clearly revealed by the Spirit to be the father of 
the nations, unto the salvation of us who chant: O God, our Redeemer, blessed art 
Thou!  
Thy hymn of the inspired ones hath put to shame those who utter soulless noises, 
for the youths, bodily trampling down unharmed the furnace which burned with fire, 
chant: O God, our Redeemer, blessed art Thou!  
Of old, the prophet Daniel, gazing with spiritual vision, revealed the second 
coming of Christ, foretelling the dreadful things which shall come to pass therein, 
crying aloud: O God, our Redeemer, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O strange wonder, known among the prophets and revealed of old to 
the fathers: a pure Virgin is come, wishing to give birth unto the salvation of us who 
chant: O God, our Redeemer, blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children brought 
up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing in the 
midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
The divine vine upon which the incorrupt Cluster did ripen, draweth nigh, coming 
to give birth unto Him that poureth forth the wine of gladness, watering us who cry 
out to Him: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
The divine phial which beareth within herself the fragrant Myrrh cometh to pour it 
out in the cave of Bethlehem, filling with mystic fragrance those who chant: O God 
of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: The tongs which Isaiah the prophet beheld of old cometh, holding in 
her womb Christ, the divine Ember, which burns up all the fuel of sin, enlightening 
the souls of the faithful.  
ODE VIII  
Canon of the holy fathers 
Irmos Be thou astonished and afraid, O heaven, * and let the foundations of 
the earth be shaken; * for lo! He Who of old burnt the sacrifice of the righteous 
man with water * doth clothe Himself in water! * Him do ye children bless, ye 
priests hymn, * ye people supremely exalt throughout all ages!  
O Thine ineffable condescension toward us sinners, O Christ! For, lo! having 
tasted death, though Thou art immortal God, Thou wast laid in the tomb as a man. 
But didst arise again, O Word, raising with Thyself those who were below and who 
supremely exalt Thee throughout all ages.  
Every ear is struck with awe at how the Most High willingly came to earth to 
destroy the power of Hades by His Cross and burial, and how He hath raised all with 
Himself to cry aloud: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Troparia of the holy fathers: Prefiguring Thy sacrifice, O Christ, Abraham, 
obedient to Thee, O Master, went forth with faith, wishing to sacrifice on the 
mountain the son whom he had begotten; but he returned with him, rejoicing and 
glorifying and supremely exalting Thee, the Redeemer of the world.  
When Thou didst robe Thyself in ever-blazing flame as in a divine robe, O Christ, 
thou didst utterly extinguish the fire for the three holy children, and by Thy descent 
the dew crieth out to those who chant: Ye priests hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages!  
The prophet Daniel is given over to the lions as an unjust trial, but, through the 
precept of abstinence, in his piety he subdued the wild beasts as fellow fasters in the 
depths of the pit. Through his prayers and those of Abraham and the children, save 
those who hymn Thee in the world, O Christ!  
Theotokion: The voices of the prophets faithfully proclaimed Him as Jesus 
Emmanuel, Who cometh in human form, God and man; and the Virgin Mary, 
without having known a man, giveth birth in the city of Bethlehem unto a Son, the 
co-beginningless Word, through the Holy Spirit.  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so the 
fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin's womb * into which it had 
descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation bless the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
In gladness let us cry out with the angels: Glory to God in the highest! The Savior 
is born! The Master cometh, Whom the star doth indicate! The Magi hasten to behold 
Him, a Babe in a manger! Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Amongst slaves wast Thou enrolled of Thine own will, O Master, subjecting 
Thyself to the law of Caesar, that Thou mightest free mankind from slavery to the 
evil one, O greatly merciful God. Wherefore, rejoicing, we chant: Let all creation bless 
the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O beginningless Word, I bear Thee as a newborn Babe, although I 
have in no wise known a man, said the Virgin, marveling. I know not whom on earth 
I can call Thy father?. Wherefore, with all I chant to Thee: Let all creation bless the 
Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
ODE IX  
Canon of the holy fathers 
Irmos: Weep not for Me, O Mother, * beholding in the tomb the Son Whom 
thou hast conceived * without seed in the womb; * for I shall arise and shall be 
glorified, * and as God I shall exalt with glory unceasing, * those that with 
faith and love magnify thee. 
Why dost thou lament, O creation, beholding the Bestower of life as a mortal 
upon the Cross and in the tomb? For He shall rise again, renewing thee with light; for 
by His resurrection on the third day He hath cast down Hades and raised up with 
Himself the dead that praise Him.  
Though Thou didst go down in the grave as one dead, O Christ, Bestower of life, 
even so, Thou didst destroy the might of Hades. And raising up with Thyself the dead 
which it had swallowed up from all ages, and as God Thou didst give resurrection 
unto those who magnify Thee with faith and love.  
Troparia of the holy fathers: Celebrating the feast of the fathers who lived before 
the Law, let us honor Christ, Who, in a godly manner, is begotten from them in the 
flesh; for Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who, through faith, proclaimers of the Spirit and 
grace, have been revealed to be the foundation of the prophets and the Law.  
God, Who by the fire in the bush showed to Moses the godly mystery in a manner 
beyond understanding, having descended into the fire with the children, showed the 
flame of the furnace to be dew by the fire of the Essence of His divinity.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
The most holy children, assembling with Abraham, and Daniel, the wondrous 
prophet of God, Isaac and Jacob, with Moses and Aaron, faithfully join chorus before 
the nativity of Christ, praying unceasingly that we be saved.  
Theotokion: All of creation doth rejoice in thy birthgiving, O Virgin, for 
Bethlehem hath opened Eden unto us. And, lo! delighting in the Tree of Life, we all 
earnestly cry out in faith: Thou hast fulfilled our prayers, O Lady!  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is heaven; * 
the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in which Christ 
God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and magnify. 
O strange, awesome and most glorious mystery: the Lord of glory hath come to 
earth and, having beggared Himself, He hath entered a cave in the flesh, seeking to 
restore Adam and to deliver Eve from her pangs.  
By Thy swaddling clothes Thou dost loose the bonds of our sinful falls; by Thy 
great poverty Thou dost enrich us all, O Compassionate One; and having been laid in 
a manger of dumb beasts Thou dost release mankind from irrational malice, O 
beginningless Word of God.  
Theotokion: The preaching of the prophets hath reached the ends of the earth, for 
they foretold Him Who was to come in the fullness of time; and He came and 
appeared incarnate of the pure Virgin; Him let us receive with a pure mind!  
 
Exapostilarion of the Resurrection; Glory ..., that of the holy fathers:  
Spec. Mel.: “To the disciples ...”: 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the elect of the patriarchs, the fathers before the Law, 
have shone forth like beacons, for all the prophets and the righteous shone forth 
from them like radiant lamps. With rays of honorable prophecy they have illumined 
all of creation, earnestly praying to God on behalf of the world.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Wondrous is this blessed event! The unblemished ewe-lamb, the granddaughter of 
Adam and David, giveth birth unto the Lamb, the beginningless Word, in the latter 
days, as is meet, and the forefeast of her ineffable birthgiving is fittingly celebrated by 
the multitude of the fathers.  
Note: If this Sunday falls on the 24th day of December, the Exapostilarion of the 
Resurrection is not chanted, but is replaced by this one of the holy fathers:  
From the seed of Abraham and the divine forefather David is the beginningless 
Word brought forth, Who of old wondrously saved the youths equal in number to the 
Trinity by the descent of the Angel into the flame, and Who transformed the 
lamentation of the myrrh-bearing women into joy.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Glory ..., “Abraham, Isaac and Jacob ...,” (see above)  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Be glad, O Bethlehem! And thou, O Ephratha, make ready, for the Theotokos 
cometh to the cave and the manger to give birth ineffably unto God. O dread 
mystery! Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the patriarchs and prophets, angels and 
men, now radiantly celebrate the forefeast of His divine nativity.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the Resurrection, and 4 of the holy fathers, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Lift up thy voice, O Zion, Thou truly divine city, and proclaim the divine memory 
of the fathers, honoring Abraham, Isaac and the ever-memorable Jacob; for, lo! we all 
magnify Judah and Levi, the great Moses and the wondrous Aaron, and we honor 
David, Joshua and Samuel. And weaving divine hymns into godly praise on the 
forefeast of Christ's nativity, we ask that we receive grace from Him, and that He 
grant the world great mercy. (Twice)  
Verse: Blessed art Thou, O Lord, God of our fathers, * and praised and 
glorified is Thy name unto the ages!  
O Elijah, thou who once rode upon a divine chariot of fire, come forth, and thou, 
O divinely wise Elisha; and joining with Ezekiel and Hosea, rejoice! O ye honored 
and divinely inspired twelve prophets, join chorus, and all ye righteous, chant in 
hymns unto the nativity of Christ; ye all-blessed youths who quenched the flame of 
the furnace with the dew of the Spirit, entreat Christ on our behalf, that He send 
down upon our souls great mercy.  
Verse: For righteous art Thou in all * which Thou hast done for us.  
The Virgin Theotokos, she who through the ages hath been preached on earth by 
the prophets in their utterances, she whom the wise patriarchs and the assemblies of 
the righteous proclaim, with whom the comely women join chorus: Sarah, Rebecca, 
Rachel and Hannah, together with the glorious Miriam, the sister of Moses. With 
them all the ends of the world rejoice and all creation rendereth honor, for the 
Creator and God of all cometh to be born in the flesh and to grant us great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
The compilation of the teachings of the Law doth reveal the divine birth of Christ 
in the flesh as being from those who, before the Law, proclaimed the glad tidings of 
grace to those who lived beyond the Law. Wherefore, in that this birth is the means 
of deliverance from corruption, for the sake of the resurrection they declared to the 
souls held fast in Hades: O Lord, glory be to Thee!  
Note: If this Sunday falls on the 24th day of December, the following Stichera are 
chanted, in Tone IV: 

--- PAGE 19 ---
 Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
The proclamation of Isaiah is fulfilled! For, lo! the Virgin beareth in her womb the 
Incomprehensible and Indescribable One in the flesh, and she cometh most 
gloriously to receive God. Make ready, O Bethlehem! For it is the King's pleasure that 
thou didst become His abode. O manger, receive Christ wrapped as a babe, Who in 
His goodness wisheth to loose the bonds of man's offenses. (Twice) 
Enrolled with slaves, the Master wished to thoroughly erase the handwriting of our 
transgressions and to enter in the Book of the Living all who had been slain by the 
thievery of the serpent. And the Virgin beareth Thee, Who bearest all things, Who art 
wrapped in mortal flesh and hast been well-pleased to dwell in a little cave. Marveling 
at Thy might, the heavenly choirs of angels and the godly shepherds praised Thee 
Who art born.  
The radiant and animate cloud laden with the heavenly Rain now approacheth to 
pour It forth upon the earth, that It might water the face of the earth. The spring of 
grace, the noetic swallow, who is pregnant, giveth birth by the ineffable Word, putting 
an end to the winter of godlessness. The pure and undefiled palace doth bring forth 
the incarnate King in the cave.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
The compilation of the teachings of the Law doth reveal the divine birth of Christ 
in the flesh as being from those who, before the Law, proclaimed the glad tidings of 
grace to those who lived beyond the Law. Wherefore, in that this birth is the means 
of deliverance from corruption, for the sake of the resurrection they declared to the 
souls held fast in Hades: O Lord, glory be to Thee!  
Both now ..., “Most blessed art thou ...”: 
Great Doxology. After the Trisagion, the Troparion of the Resurrection.  
Litanies and the Dismissal.  
We chant the Gospel Sticheron, in the narthex.  
First Hour and final Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 10 or 12 Troparia: Consult the Typicon for details 
Troparia of the holy fathers: Faithfully preserving the glory of the image and 
likeness of God, with the fire of the Spirit the children, as champions, extinguished 
the fire of the golden image, chanting: We know but one Lord!  
The captive children, clothed with the wisdom and power of the Spirit, put to 
shame the wise men of Babylon and boldly cried aloud: None is holy save Thee, O 
Lord, Lover of mankind!  
The Law doth rejoice and joineth chorus with the children and the prophets and 
doth exult today before the divine advent of the Lord. And Abraham doth rejoice, for 
from his seed hath the incarnate Lord appeared.  
Theotokion: A conception without pangs, an acceptance of thy birthgiving hath 
transpired in a manner beyond all telling, O Theotokos, for the Word of God, Who is 
God and was proclaimed by the prophets, hath revealed Himself to be a mystery 
beyond nature.  
 
At the Entrance, the Troparia of the Resurrection, and that of the holy fathers in 
Tone II: 
Great are the accomplishments of faith! * In the fountain of flame, as in refreshing 
water, * the three holy children rejoiced; * and the prophet Daniel was shown to be a 
shepherd of lions, as of sheep. ** By their prayers, O Christ God, save Thou our 
souls!  
Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Open unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O Ephratha! 
* For the Tree of life hath blossomed forth from the Virgin in the cave. * Her womb 
is shown to be a noetic paradise, * wherein lieth a divine garden, * eating from 
whence we live, not dying like Adam. * Christ is born to raise up His image ** which 
before was fallen.  
Note: If this Sunday falls on the 24th of December, the above Troparion of the 
holy fathers, and then the following Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Once Mary, pregnant with a seedless pregnancy, * was registered in Bethlehem 
with the elder Joseph, * as being of the seed of David. * And while they were there, 
the days were accomplished that she should be delivered, * but there was no room for 
them in the inn. * But the cave showed itself to be a beauteous palace for the Queen, 
** and Christ is born to raise up the image that fell of old!  
 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Kontakion to the Fathers:  
Note: If this Sunday falls on the 24th of December, we chant:  
Glory ..., this Kontakion of the holy fathers, in Tone VI: 
O thrice-blessed ones, * ye who did not honor an image wrought by hands, * but 
were defended by the indescribable Essence, * ye were glorified in your ordeal by fire; 
* and, standing in the midst of unbearable flame, * ye called upon God, saying: * 
Make speed and hasten Thou to help us, O Compassionate One, * in that Thou art 
merciful; ** for what Thou willest, Thou canst do!  
Both now ..., the Kontakion of the forefeast in Tone I:  
Be glad, O Bethlehem! Make ready, O Ephratha! * For, lo! she that beareth the 
Lamb and great Shepherd in her womb * hasteneth to give birth. * Beholding this, the 
God-bearing fathers are glad, * and with the shepherds ** they hymn the pregnant 
Virgin.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV, the hymn of the fathers: Blessed art Thou, O Lord, 
God of our fathers, * and praised and glorified is Thy name unto the ages!  
Verse: For righteous art Thou in all which Thou hast done for us.  
 
READING FROM THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (11:9-11, 17-23,32-40) 
Brethren, by faith Abraham sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange 
country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same 
promise: for he looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is 
God. Through faith also Sarah herself received strength to conceive seed, and was 
delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful who had 
promised. By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac: and he that had 
received the promises offered up his only begotten son, of whom it was said, That in 
Isaac shall thy seed be called: accounting that God was able to raise him up, even 
from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure. By faith Isaac blessed 
Jacob and Esau concerning things to come. By faith Jacob, when he was a dying, 
blessed both the sons of Joseph; and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff. 
By faith Joseph, when he died, made mention of the departing of the children of 
Israel; and gave commandment concerning his bones. By faith Moses, when he was 
born, was hid three months of his parents, because they saw he was a proper child: 
and they were not afraid of the king's commandment. And what more shall I say? for 
the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of 
Jephthah; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets: who through faith subdued 
kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, 
quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were 
made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Women 

--- PAGE 22 ---
received their dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deli-
verance; that they might obtain a better resurrection: and others had trial of cruel 
mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: they were 
stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they 
wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; of 
whom the world was not worthy: they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in 
dens and caves of the earth. And these all, having obtained a good report through 
faith, received not the promise: God having provided some better thing for us, that 
they without us should not be made perfect.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: O God, with our ears have we heard, for our fathers have 
told us.  
Verse: For Thou hast saved us from them that afflict us, and them that hate us 
hast Thou put to shame.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (1 :1-25)  
The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham. 
Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judah and his brethren; 
and Judah begat Pharez and Zerah of Tamar; and Pharez begat Hezron; and Hezron 
begat Ram; and Ram begat Amminadab; and Amminadab begat Nahshon; and 
Nahshon begat Salmon; and Salmon begat Boaz of Rachab; and Boaz begat abed of 
Ruth; and Gbed begat Jesse; and Jesse begat David the king. And David the king 
begat Solomon of her that had been the wife of Uriah; and Solomon begat 
Rehoboam; and Rehoboam begat Abijah; and Abijah begat Asa; and Asa begat 
Jehoshaphat; and Jehoshaphat begat Jehoram; and Jehoram begat Uzziah; and Uzziah 
begat Jotham; and Jotham begat Ahaz; andAhaz begat Hezekiah; and Hezekiah begat 
Manasseh; and Manasseh begat Amon; and Amon begat Josiah; and Josiah begat 
Jeconiah and his brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon. And 
after they were brought to Babylon, Jeconiah begat Shealtiel; and Shealtiel begat 
Zerubbabel; and Zerubbabel begat Abiud; and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim 
begat Azor; and Azor begat Zadok; and Zadok begat Achim; and Achim begat Eliud; 
and Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat Matthan; and Matthan begat Jacob; and 
Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called 
Christ. So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and 
from David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations; and from 
the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations. Now the birth 
of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, 
before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost. Then Joseph 
her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a public example, was 
minded to put her away privily. But while he thought on these things, behold, the 
angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, 

--- PAGE 23 ---
fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the 
Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus: for 
he shall save his people from their sins. Now all this was done, that it might be 
fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold, a virgin shall 
be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Immanuel, 
which being interpreted is, God with us. Then Joseph being raised from sleep as the 
angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife: and knew her not till 
she had brought forth her firstborn son: and he called his name Jesus.  
 
Communion Verse I: Praise the Lord from the heavens; praise Him in the 
highest.  
Communion Verse II: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for 
the upright.  
 
