--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 12th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER SPYRIDON THE 
WONDERWORKER, BISHOP OF TREMITHUS  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Rejoice, thou rule of hierarchs, unshaken confirmation of the Church, glory of 
the Orthodox, wellspring of miracles, inexhaustible stream of love, most radiant 
beacon, organ of the Spirit, intellect divine, meek and guileless, adorned with true 
simplicity, heavenly man and earthly angel, laborer in the vineyard, true friend of 
Christ! Beseech Him to grant great mercy to those who honor thee! (Twice)  
O Spyridon, glory of the fathers, thou wast truly shown to be meek and an heir 
to the land of the meek. By the sinews of thy wise and simple words thou didst 
strangle Arius, the most wicked and demented enemy, by divine grace. And, having 
clarified the divine dogma for all, and extolled by the Spirit that which leadeth to 
salvation, and enlightened all the Orthodox most manifestly, thou didst indicate to 
all the faithful to glorify the One Word as truly the Only Begotten of the 
beginningless Father, Who granteth the world great mercy. (Twice)  
Having slain the carnal passions, thou didst raise the dead by the grace of God, 
and didst change a serpent into gold, and didst restrain the raging of the river by 
thy prayer, O father, Appearing to the afflicted emperor by night, thou didst heal 
him by drawing nigh unto his heart when the Lord glorified thee most gloriously. 
Wherefore, we honor thy memory with a mighty voice and reverence the divine 
and sacred shrine of thy relics, whence floweth forth a divine stream of healings 
and great mercy. (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone I: 
O venerable father Spyridon, blessed and wise, for the sake of the love of God 
thou didst question the dead woman as though she were alive, and didst transform 
a serpent into gold for him that was beset by poverty, and didst restrain the flow of 
the river, taking pity on the people, and didst stand before the emperor as 
physician through the providence of God; and, as His disciple, thou didst raise up 
the dead, and amongst many fathers didst make clear the Faith. Wherefore, 
enabled to do all things by Christ, Who strengtheneth thee, do thou now entreat 
Him that our souls be saved!  
Both now ..., Theotokion; or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
The Virgin, beholding Thine unjust sacrifice, weeping, cried out to Thee, O 
Christ: O my Child most sweet, how is it that Thou diest unjustly? How is it that 
Thou, Who suspended all the earth upon the waters, art Thyself suspended upon a 
Tree? O greatly merciful Benefactor, I pray Thee, leave me not alone who am Thy 
Mother and handmaid!  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
The Aposticha from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., to the saint, in Tone II: 
O father Spyridon, venerable and wise, by thy virtues hast thou been shown to 
be a divine treasure of hierarchs. Wherefore, being an intercessor of the Church, 
thou didst cast out the chief of the heretics and, in council, didst crush the 
blasphemy of Arius to the earth. Therefore, working wonders in word and deed, 
do thou beseech Christ that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thine unjust slaying, O Christ, * the Virgin, 
cried out to Thee, weeping: * “O my sweetest Child! * How is it that Thou diest 
unjustly? * How is it that Thee Who hast suspended the whole earth upon the 
waters * dost hang upon the Tree *? * Leave me not alone * who am Thy Mother 
and handmaiden, ** I pray, O greatly merciful Benefactor!”  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of 
meekness, and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights 
through humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Spyridon our father, ** 
entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Or this Troparion, in Tone I: 
Thou wast shown forth as a champion of the First Council * and a 
wonderworker, O Spyridon, our God-bearing father. * Wherefore, thou didst 
speak to one dead in the grave, * and didst change a serpent into gold. * And, 
whilst chanting thy holy prayers, * thou didst have angels serving with thee, O 
most sacred one. * Glory to Him that hath given thee strength! * Glory to Him 
that hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him that worketh healings for all through 
thee!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
Both canons from the Oktoechos, without their martyria; and the canon of the 
holy hierarch, with 6 Troparia, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone II: 
ODE I 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh's whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Having attained unto the land of the meek, being thyself meek, merciful and 
pure, O father, calm thou the present tempest of my heart, that, in divine 
tranquility, I may hymn thee.  
Having cleared thy soul of the overgrowth of the passions through godly 
cultivation, O father Spyridon, thou didst become god-like and wast enriched by 
the most radiant splendor of the divine Spirit. Wherefore, thou dost illumine those 
who sincerely bless thee.  
Taking thee from a flock as He had David, the Creator appointed thee as a 
most eminent shepherd of the rational sheep, shining forth in simplicity and 
meekness, and adorned with guilelessness, O venerable pastor.  
Theotokion: O most holy and pure Virgin, enlighten and hallow my thoughts and 
soul, I pray thee, dispelling the clouds of mine ignorance, and removing the 
darkness of sin, that I may bless thee as is meet.  
ODE III 
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I 
sing: * There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than 
Thee, O Lord. 
Having illumined thy mind with dispassion and adorned thyself with divine 
humility, thou didst receive the gifts of the Spirit to cast out evil spirits and to loose 
the infirmities of those who faithfully honor thee, O most sacred one.  
Having slain the serpent, the author of evil, and trampled down the inclination 
towards avarice, O holy hierarch, taking pity on him who was in need, thou didst 
transform a serpent into a golden ornament by thy sacred prayers, O venerable 
father.  
Thou didst ascend the mountain of dispassion; thou didst enter the darkness of 
the vision of God, and didst receive the law of salvation on the tablets of thy heart, 
in that thou art a most sacred and faithful favorite of thy Master.  
Theotokion: Heal thou the wounds of my soul, O Bride of God, and illumine 
my mind which hath been darkened by neglect, that I may chant: There is none 
blameless save thee, O immaculate one, and none pure but thee, O Lady!  
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Thou didst shine forth as a divinely appointed pastor, O Spyridon, raised from 
the tending of sheep by God, Who entrusted thee to preside over the Church of 
Christ. Thou didst drive away the wolves of false teaching by thy words, grazing 
thy flock on the pasture of piety. Wherefore, thou didst affirm the Faith by the 
wisdom of the Spirit in the midst of the God-bearing fathers, O blessed hierarch. 
Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto those who celebrate thy 
holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in the same melody: 
As the all-immaculate Bride of the Creator, * Mother of the Redeemer, who 
knewest not a man, * and as the receptacle of the Comforter O all-hymned one, * 
hasten thou to deliver me, * the vile abode of iniquity and noetic plaything of the 
demons, * from their evil machinations; * and make me the bright dwelling-place 
of the virtues, * O thou incorrupt light-bearing one. * Drive away the clouds of the 
passions and grant that, * by thy supplications, * I may receive a portion on high ** 
and share in the never-waning light.  
Stavrotheotokion: The ewe-lamb, beholding her Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer 
upon the Cross, weeping, exclaimed, and bitterly lamenting, cried out: The world 
doth. rejoice, receiving deliverance through Thee, but my womb doth burn, 
beholding Thy crucifixion, which Thou dost endure in the tender compassion of 
Thy mercy. O longsuffering Lord, Thou abyss and inexhaustible wellspring of 
mercy, have pity and grant remission of sins unto those who hymn Thy divine Pas-
sion with faith!  
ODE IV 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor as 
an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the 
whole man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Set afire by the burning coal of the honored Spirit, thou didst burn up all the 
readily kindled fuel of the passions, O all-blessed one, enlightening the world with 
the fiery rays of thy virtues.  
Having slain the movements of thy flesh, O divinely inspired one, thou didst 
raise up the dead by thy life-imparting call. Wherefore, I beseech thee: Enliven my 
slain soul, O father!  
O father, the dead woman, obeying thee, spake, and by thy commands the 
raging of the river was restrained. For thou wast revealed as a worker of wonders 
endowed with divine grace, O blessed one.  
Theotokion: The prophets foretold the incomprehensible abyss of thy mystery, 
for thou alone, O pure one, didst give birth unto the Unknowable One, Who, in 
His unutterable tender compassion, became incarnate.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE V 
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness 
of sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with Thy 
radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
The river of the gifts which are within thee doth water every heart, O venerable 
one, and richly granteth health unto all, moving all to glorify God, Who hath 
glorified thee and honored thee with all manner of wonders.  
The earthly emperor clearly recognized thee as a true servant of the heavenly 
King, full of divine gifts, O blessed one, when thou didst come to him, proclaiming 
the great Physician, Who is God.  
Emulating the hospitable character of Abraham, thou didst open the doors of 
thy house unto all, and wast all things to all people, mindful of those who were in 
evil straits, O blessed Spyridon.  
Theotokion: For us hast thou given birth unto a newborn Babe, Who before 
the ages was begotten of the beginningless Father, O Maiden. Him do thou entreat 
as thy Son and God, that He spare those who, with a pure soul, proclaim thee to 
be the Theotokos.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable 
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Gold was as mire to thee who shone forth in dispassion more brightly than 
gold, and wast enriched by thy most golden gifts of the Spirit, O venerable one.  
Serving thy Master in purity, O venerable one, thou didst have a multitude of 
the angelic hosts serving thee with unseen voices, O most sacred one.  
O most glorious and all-wise father, thy life hath made thee most glorious to the 
world. Wherefore, rejoicing, we that hymn thee celebrate thy divine memory.  
Theotokion: More spacious than the heavens was thy womb, which contained 
God Whom no place can contain, O all-holy virgin Bride of God, who knewest 
not a man.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the Highest ...”:  
O most sacred one, wounded with love for Christ, * and giving wings to thy 
mind through the radiance of the Spirit, * thou didst find thy work fulfilled in the 
activity of divine vision. * O thou who art pleasing to God, thou divine oblation, 
** beseech Him that divine illumination be granted unto all.  
Ikos: Let us now praise Spyridon, the hierarch of the Lord, sanctified from his 
mother's womb, who received the tablets of the grace of divine glory, as one most 
glorious in miracles from all of creation, as a fervent witness of the divine radiance, 
intercessor for the poor, and spiritual guide for the sinful; for he hath become a 
divine oblation for the throne of Christ, asking divine illumination for all.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He 
is blessed and supremely exalted. 
Having acquired the guilelessness of Moses, the meekness of David and the 
blamelessness of Job of Uz, thou didst become a dwelling-place of the Spirit, 
chanting most sacredly: Blessed and supremely glorious art Thou!  
The showers of heaven rained down upon thy head during the harvest and 
prefigured the future; for, as thou didst say, God glorified thy divine memory, 
sanctifying the faithful by thy mediation.  
In the council of the fathers God glorified thee, who guarded thy words in 
judgment, O blessed one. Thou didst bring them forth with faith, openly disclosing 
the follies of the most irrational Arius and destroying his opposition.  
Theotokion: Through the ineffable Word, O Virgin, thou didst put forth the 
Cluster of grapes as the Branch which alone was uncultivated and which poureth 
forth the wine gladdening all mankind, sanctifying mortals and dispelling all the 
drunkenness of the wicked.  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, 
who chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Thou didst extinguish the furnace of the passions with divine outpourings of 
the divine Spirit, O father, pouring forth a dew which taketh away the fever of the 
ailing who ever have recourse unto thee in faith, O blessed and most noetically rich 
Spyridon.  
Guileless, upright, meek, merciful, not mindful of the wrongs done thee, loving 
and hospitable wast thou, O most sacred hierarch, adorned with the wisdom of 
Orthodoxy, O venerable one. Wherefore, we honor thee with faith.  
Of old, the dead woman when questioned by thee O father, replied as though 
alive. Oh what a most marvelous wonder! Oh what a most glorious mystery! Oh, 
the grace which thou hast received, having adorned thyself with an angelic life, O 
right wondrous one!  
Theotokion: Heal thou the passions of my heart with thy mercy, O all-hymned 
one; calm thou my mind, enlighten my soul, and guide me to walk the paths of 
salvation, that I may ever hymn thee, O all-hymned one.  
ODE IX 
Irmos: The Son of the Beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath appeared 
to us incarnate of a Virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we magnify 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Exalted among the God-bearing fathers, thou didst openly proclaim the Son of 
the beginningless Father to be of one essence and equally everlasting with the 
Father, and didst stop the mouths of the iniquitous, O all-blessed and holy 
hierarch.  
O all-radiant sun, adornment of the fathers, glory of priests, converser with 
angels: By thy prayers grant the unwaning Light unto those who now joyously 
celebrate thy light-bearing memory.  
With a voice of rejoicing have the divine mansions, the heavenly city and the 
beauteous choir of those who hold festival received thy soul, which hath been 
hallowed and adorned with the virtues, O all-blessed one.  
Theotokion: The great mystery of thy birthgiving, which passeth understanding 
doth astound the angels, O divinely joyous one, delighting the assembly of the 
venerable and making glad the sacred fathers who hymn thee, the hope of our 
souls, in a godly manner.  
Exapostilarion from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., that of the holy hierarch:  
Spec. Mel.: “He, Who as God hath adorned heaven with stars ...”: 
O God-bearing Spyridon, thou light of the world, like Moses and David, whose 
calling thou didst follow, the Spirit led thee up from an irrational flock unto the 
rational one.  
Theotokion: Thou wast the cause of the blessings bestowed by God upon the 
world, O Theotokos. And, even now, for the salvation of all, do thou move to pity 
God, Who is readily appeased.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, then: 
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
O venerable father, all-praised and holy hierarch, filled with the teaching of the 
apostles, and manifest as the habitation of the divine Spirit by thy virtuous life, 
with thy teachings thou didst drive off the wolves that beset the Church, and didst 
make clear the Faith of the Orthodox, and wast a pillar and champion of piety. 
Wherefore, working wonders in days past, thou didst transform a serpent into 
gold, and didst raise up a dead woman to question her. Yet, O thou that art right 
wondrous among the fathers, converser with teachers, entreat the Savior, that He 
save our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
The most pure Lady, beholding Christ dying, Who doth slay the deceiver, 
bitterly cried out to Him that had come forth from her womb, and marveling at 
His longsuffering, exclaimed: O my most beloved Child, forget not Thy handmaid! 
O Lover of mankind, delay not my consolation!  
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 
N.B. In Greek usage, the service to St. Spyridon is of Doxology rank, 
rather than of six-Stichera rank, as in the Slavonic Menaion. Therefore, if 
Greek usage is followed, On the Praises: 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Illumined with the radiance of the Spirit, thou didst dispel the darkness of the 
foolish prating of Arius, O wise hierarch. Wherefore, in simplicity, faithfully 
teaching the Trinity, thou wast glorified by the wise and learned, and didst confirm 
the Council. (Twice)  
Illumined with heavenly rays and with the power of Christ, thou dost bestow 
healing of both soul and body upon those who even now celebrate thy memory 
with faith, O divinely blessed father and wonderworker. Cease thou never to 
intercede for us.  
In thy faithfulness to the commandments, thou wast shown to be a 
husbandman of Christ, the True Vine, O God-bearer. Wherefore, having mystically 
received the talent of the kingdom from on high, pray thou without ceasing for us 
that honor thee, O wise Spyridon.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
O venerable father, most praised and holy hierarch, filled with the teaching of 
the apostles, and manifest as the habitation of the divine Spirit by thy virtuous life, 
with thy teachings thou didst drive off the wolves that beset the Church, and didst 
make clear the Faith of the Orthodox, and wast a pillar and champion of piety. 
Wherefore, working wonders in days past, thou didst transform a serpent into 
gold, and didst raise up a dead woman to question her. Yet, O thou that art right 
wondrous among the fathers, converser with teachers, entreat the Savior, that He 
save our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
The most pure Lady, beholding Christ dying, Who doth slay the deceiver, 
bitterly cried out to Him that had come forth from her womb, and marveling at 
His longsuffering, exclaimed: O my most beloved Child, forget not Thy handmaid! 
O Lover of mankind, delay not my consolation!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III 
of the canon of the holy hierarch.  
Having illumined thy mind with dispassion and adorned thyself with divine 
humility, thou didst receive the gifts of the Spirit to cast out evil spirits and to loose 
the infirmities of those who faithfully honor thee, O most sacred one.  
Having slain the serpent, the author of evil, and trampled down the inclination 
towards avarice, O holy hierarch, taking pity on him who was in need, thou didst 
transform a serpent into a golden ornament by thy sacred prayers, O venerable 
father.  
Thou didst ascend the mountain of dispassion; thou didst enter the darkness of 
the vision of God, and didst receive the law of salvation on the tablets of thy heart, 
in that thou art a most sacred and faithful favorite of thy Master.  
Theotokion: Heal thou the wounds of my soul, O Bride of God, and illumine 
my mind which hath been darkened by neglect, that I may chant: There is none 
blameless save thee, O immaculate one, and none pure but thee, O Lady!  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
The truth of things revealed thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, * icon of 
meekness, and teacher of temperance; * wherefore, thou hast attained the heights 
through humility and riches through poverty; * O hierarch Spyridon our father, ** 
entreat Christ God, that our souls be saved.  
Or this Troparion, in Tone I: 
Thou wast shown forth as a champion of the First Council * and a 
wonderworker, O Spyridon, our God-bearing father. * Wherefore, thou didst 
speak to one dead in the grave, * and didst change a serpent into gold. * And, 
whilst chanting thy holy prayers, * thou didst have angels serving with thee, O 
most sacred one. * Glory to Him that hath given thee strength! * Glory to Him 
that hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him that worketh healings for all through 
thee!  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone II:  
O most sacred one, wounded with love for Christ, * and giving wings to thy 
mind through the radiance of the Spirit, * thou didst find thy work fulfilled in the 
activity of divine vision. * O thou who art pleasing to God, thou divine oblation, 
** beseech Him that divine illumination be granted unto all.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the medita-
tion of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (13:17-21) 
Brethren: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for 
they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with 
joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we 
have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the 
rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, 
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good 
work to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through 
Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, 
and his tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (6:17-23) 
At that time: Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a 
great multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the seacoast of 
Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; and 
they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole 
multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them 
all. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours 
is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. 
Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall 
hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach 
you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that 
day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven. 
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he 
shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
