--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 11th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR MYRAX  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone VI: 
Lo! the martyr Myrax crieth aloud: “I hear that my God and Savior hath said: 
'Whosoever rejecteth me shall I also reject on the last day!' Yet let it not be so with 
me, thrice wretched as I am, O Lord. For even though I apostatized from Thee, yet I 
know Thee to be merciful and loving: for Thou didst not spurn the tears of Peter 
who had denied Thee, nor didst thou reject the repentance of Paul who had 
persecuted Thee, but didst make both of them steadfast in Thy love. Wherefore, I 
pray: accept also my fervent repentance, and, overlooking mine apostasy, restore and 
save me, for Thou canst do all things whatsoever Thou dost desire.”  
“Judas, who betrayed Thee by a kiss, refusing to embrace repentance, devoid of 
fervent love for Thee, neither understanding that thou hast mercy on all who 
approach Thee in penitence, departed and hanged himself; but do Thou, O Lord, 
deliver me from such insane hardness of heart: accept my bitter groaning, raising me 
up from my fall, and save me who repent, in that Thou art good and full of loving-
kindness.”  
“Peter, the preeminent apostle, who once denied Thee thrice, O Christ, wept 
bitterly, and Paul, the teacher of the nations, who had persecuted Thee, called himself 
the least of the apostles; yet both afterwards served Thee, performing great deeds. But 
what shall I, who have rejected Thee, offer unto Thee besides tearful repentance? Yet 
let my blood, which is shed for Thee, cry out for me. Thou inclinest thy loving-
kindness toward me, O Lord, for thou hast mercy upon all, in that Thou art mighty.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Let him not boast who hath acquired the riches of the world, and power and glory 
which passeth quickly away, for in an instant he will be deprived of them all, and will 
find himself suddenly standing before the judgment-seat, naked, poor and bereft of 
glory, having only his trust in Thy boundless compassion, whereby do Thou also save 
me, O good Savior.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”: 
Of old, when the unblemished ewe-lamb, * the immaculate Lady, * beheld her 
Lamb * uplifted upon the Cross, * she exclaimed maternally * and, marveling, cried 
aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new and most glorious sight? * How 
is it that the ungrateful assembly hath betrayed Thee to the judgment of Pilate * and 
condemneth Thee, the Life of all, to death? * Yet do I hymn, O Word, ** Thine 
ineffable condescension.”  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera from the Oktoechos, then:  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
The martyr Myrax crieth aloud: “I have foolishly apostatized from Christ, buying a 
transitory life and vain benefits! And, lo! I see myself poor and naked, devoured by 
spiritual hunger, tormented by a thirst for forgiveness! For I received the royal coin 
from God, but have cast it to the swine, and have found naught to exchange for it. 
Yet I beg Thee, praying: Take this my transitory life, O Lord, giving me in exchange 
life everlasting! Accept my blood, which is shed for Thee, and grant that I may share 
in Thine immortal banquet! Receive my repentance as Thou didst that of the thief, 
and save me!”  
Both now ..., Theotokion, or this Stavrotheotokion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
“I cannot bear, O my Child, * to behold Thee * dying upon the Tree, * Thou Who 
givest courage unto all, * that Thou mightest give divine and saving courage * unto 
those who of old fell into the sleep of perdition * through the fruit of disobedience!” 
** weeping, said the Virgin, whom we magnify.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Myrax O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS  
  
Both canons from the Oktoechos, and that of the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof 
is: “Have mercy on me who have fallen away from Thee, O my God!” the 
composition of Valeria, in Tone II: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Taking up the Song of Moses, O my soul, * cry aloud: * 'A helper and a 
protector hath become unto me salvation. * My God, * whom I will glorify'. 
“O Christ, Who accepted the repentance of the preeminent. Peter who had denied 
Thee, and made him a great shepherd of Thy sheep; receive me like a lost sheep!” the 
martyr Myrax cried.  
“I have fallen away from Thee Who didst become incarnate for my sake! I have 
rejected Thee Who wast nailed to the Cross for me! Yet I now confess that Thou art 
my God, and I glorify Thee!”  
“O most radiant choir of martyrs, even though I denied Christ for a time, accept 
me now who have endured cruel tortures for Him, that I may glorify God with you!”  
Theotokion: “I confess to thee my great sin, O Lady; for I shamelessly denied thy 
divine Son!” Myrax cried out to the Theotokos in lamentation, begging her aid.  
ODE III  
Irmos: My mind hath not brought forth good fruit, * but do Thou show me to 
be fruitful * in Thy compassion O God, * Thou husbandman of all good 
things. 
“Lovest thou Me, O Simon? “, Thou didst ask the disciple who had denied Thee, 
O Lord. And 'Lovest thou Me, O Myrax?', Thou hast now asked me as well, O all-
merciful Savior. And I give Thee mine answer in deeds instead of words, accepting 
death for Thee.”  
“I denied Thee with my mouth, O my Savior, when my heart was filled with terror 
and grew weak amid the struggle; yet grant me strength now, O Master, to live my life 
for Thee.”  
“Whosoever confesseth Me before men, him will I also confess before the 
heavenly Father; but if any man deny Me, him will I also deny!', Thou didst proclaim, 
O Lord. Yet let not these latter words apply to me!” the martyr Myrax prayed.  
Theotokion: “Pray for me who have fallen, O Mother of God!” the martyr Myrax 
cried out in repentance; “and remain with me, the thrice-accursed, during my 
sufferings!” 
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone V:  
“I stretch forth my hands to Thee, O my God; for I am ashamed to lift up mine 
eyes to heaven. Account the fountains of my tears, for I know that they cannot wash 
away my sin. Wherefore, I hasten to wash in my blood. Turn not Thy face away from 
me, but, pouring forth upon me the depths of Thy loving-kindness, save me, O 
Lord!”  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”:  
O pure Ever-virgin, thou fervent and invincible intercessor, excellent and 
unashamed hope, rampart, protection and refuge of those who have recourse unto 
thee: with the angels entreat thy Son and God, that He grant peace, salvation and 
great mercy to the world.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee hanging of Thine own will upon the Cross 
between the thieves, O Christ, Thy Mother said maternally, her womb rent with pain: 
“O my sinless Son, how is it that Thou art unjustly nailed as a malefactor to the 
Cross, desiring to bring life to the human race, in that Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV  
Irmos: The prophet foreseeing Thy birth from a virgin, * prophesied 
crying aloud: * ‘I have heard report of Thee, and I was afraid; * For 
from the South, from the Overshadowed mountain * shalt thou come 
forth O Christ’ 
“Having eaten Thy bread, Thy most pure Body, and drunk Thy divine Blood, like 
Judas I rose up against Thee. Wherefore, I fear Thine everlasting condemnation, O 
Lord!”  
“Fearing to commit my body to tortures, I surrendered my soul instead to endless 
torment. O most merciful Savior, permit me now to change; for, lo! I give my body 
and all its members over to suffering. Wherefore, free Thou my soul from captivity to 
sin.” 
“Wretch that I am, I loved the flesh-pots of Egypt and mindlessly rejected the 
promised land, but lead me now thereto, O Thou Who knowest the hearts of men, 
for I now cross not the streams of the Jordan, by the river of my blood which I have 
shed for Thee.”  
Theotokion: “O blessed Theotokos, merciful surety of sinners: speak to thy divine 
Son on behalf of me, the thrice-accursed!” the martyr Myrax prayed.  
ODE V  
Irmos: The night is far spent, the day is at hand: * Thy light hath shone upon 
the world! * Therefore the ranks of angels sing Thy praises, * and all things 
glorify Thee, O Lord! 
“Dare I make my dwelling with the martyrs? Can I wash away the sin of apostasy 
with my blood? O all-merciful Master, illumine me with repentance, and save me!”  
“I have no wedding garment; for I have sullied the vesture of my soul with 
apostasy. Yet cleanse and make it white through repentance, as Thou didst promise, 
O Savior!”  

--- PAGE 5 ---
“I now endure bodily tortures with gladness, having endured bitter torment of soul 
when I denied Thee, O Lord; yet do I glorify Thy long-suffering, for Thou hast been 
well-pleased to illumine me with repentance.”  
Theotokion: Lead me up to the eternal mansions, O Lady; for even though I 
sinned, denying thy divine Son, yet in repentance do I lay down my life for Him. 
Wherefore, be thou well-pleased to have mercy upon me!”  
ODE VI  
Irmos: I am held fast in the depths of sin O Savior, * and am 
overwhelmed by the sea of life, * but as Jonah was delivered from the 
sea-monster, * so also deliver me from the passions, * and save me.  
“Fettered with the chains of a weak nature, as Jonah was stuck fast in the belly of 
the sea monster, I sinned; yet, calling me up from the depths of the darkness of sin, 
Thou hast freed my soul, O Merciful One!”  
“I am a useless and unfaithful servant!” the martyr Myrax cried aloud; “yet receive 
me who come to Thee in repentance like the prodigal son, O heavenly Father, and 
cause me to dwell with the thief who confessed Christ God at the eleventh hour!”  
“Who can describe the depth of my fall? Yet who can fathom the depths of the 
tender compassion? Wherefore, I cry out to Him out of the pit of destruction: With 
Thy mighty arm raise me up from the abyss of sin!”  
Theotokion: Wide is the path that leadeth to destruction, but narrow is the way of 
salvation which the martyr Myrax found in suffering, praising thine aid, O Lady.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
Overcome by the fear of cruel tortures, Myrax denied Christ; * but, repenting, he 
confessed Him again with a loud voice, * and, having suffered manfully, * he received 
the crown of martyrdom. ** Wherefore, he dwelleth in the mansions of heaven.  
Ikos: Coming to his senses and receiving boldness through repentance, the martyr 
Myrax cried aloud: “The Lord is my light! Whom shall I fear? The Lord is the 
Defender of my life! Of whom shall I be afraid?” And he was condemned to death 
for confessing Christ. Wherefore, he now dwelleth in the mansions of heaven with 
the other passion-bearers.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: Like unto the Cherubim, the Children rejoicing in the furnace sang: * 
'Blessed art Thou O God, * for in truth Thou hast brought this judgment upon 
us * because of our sins, * Thou art supremely praised and glorified 
throughout all ages'. 
“The apostles preached Thee throughout the whole world, O Christ; but out of 
fear I remained silent. The martyrs boldly proclaimed Thee, O God Whom I denied!”  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
“Let not Thy righteous wrath fall upon me!” the martyr Myrax said; “for even 
though I have sinned, yet purify me with the fire of repentance, and from the furnace 
of torments call me forth into the coolness of never-ending life, O all-hymned and 
supremely glorious God, throughout all ages!”  
“I have denied Thee, yet turn not Thy face away from me, lest the fiery sword of 
the cherubim bar mine entry through the gates of paradise! For, lo! having washed my 
garments in the blood of martyrdom, I have come; and with confession I have 
hallowed my mouth, which was defiled by apostasy. Wherefore, I chant unto Thee, 
my God, throughout all ages!”  
Theotokion: “Thy luminous grace hath turned me, who have fallen into grievous 
temptation, O most pure Virgin, and hath strengthened me for the struggle of 
martyrdom; wherefore, I hymn thee, the most glorious Mother of my God!”  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
“O God Who appeared to Moses in the fire of the bush, deliver me from eternal 
fire and burn up my guilt with the dew of my tears, that I may hymn Thee throughout 
the ages.”  
“Having quelled the throes of my conscience and acquired boldness through fiery 
repentance, rejoicing I endure tortures!” the martyr Myrax cried aloud, hymning 
Christ the Savior.  
“Remit my sins and have mercy on me; and accept the shedding of my martyr's 
blood as a redeeming sacrifice, that I may hymn and bless Thee, 'O Christ, 
throughout the ages!”  
Theotokion: “I offer my life as a pleasing sacrifice to thy Son and my Savior, O 
Lady. Him do thou entreat on behalf of me, the thrice-accursed, that I may bless thee 
throughout the ages.”  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Who born on Earth hath ever heard of, or beheld, * a Virgin 
miraculously conceiving in her womb, * and painlessly giving birth to a child, 
* wherefore we magnify thee O pure Virgin. 
“When Thou shalt sit to judge the whole world, O impartial Judge and King of all 
creation, number me among the sheep at Thy right hand, that with them I may 
magnify Thy loving-kindness, O Lord!”  
Enduring cruel tortures, the martyr Myrax prayed: “Strengthen, forgive and have 
mercy on me, O Savior of the-world, that I may magnify Thee in Thy kingdom!”  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Having redeemed his apostasy by voluntary confession, the martyr Myrax offered 
up the repentance of the thief at the eleventh hour, and, dwelling now with Christ 
God, He magnifieth the Trinity of one Dominion.  
Theotokion: “I confess thine ineffable mercy, O Lady; for thou didst not leave me 
to perish, O surety of sinners!” the martyr Myrax crieth out, rejoicing, magnifying the 
aid of the Theotokos.  
Exapostilarion of the holy martyr:  
As the martyr Myrax was proceeding to suffering of his own will, the Lord said to 
him: “Fear not those who slay the body, yet cannot slay the soul, O My child! Be not 
afraid of torture, for I shall give thee the strength to endure torment; wherefore, trust 
no longer in thyself, for thou hast come to know the weakness of man; for without 
Me ye can truly accomplish naught!”  
Theotokion: He Who on high is glorified as God by the angels, O pure one, 
ineffably dwelt with those below without leaving the bosom of the Father; and thou 
wast the cause of His salvation, inexpressibly lending flesh to Him of thy pure blood, 
O pure one. Him do thou beseech, that He grant deliverance from transgressions to 
thy servants.  
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
In his sufferings, Thy martyr Myrax O Lord, * received an imperishable crown 
from Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * he set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By his supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
Overcome by the fear of cruel tortures, Myrax denied Christ; * but, repenting, he 
confessed Him again with a loud voice, * and, having suffered manfully, * he received 
the crown of martyrdom. ** Wherefore, he dwelleth in the mansions of heaven.  
 
