--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY OF THE HOLY FOREFATHERS  
WHICH FALLETH BETWEEN THE 11th AND 17th DAYS  
OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the Resurrection, 3 by Anatolius; and the 
following 4 Stichera of the holy forefathers, in Tone VIII: 
Celebrating the memory of the forefathers today, O ye faithful, let us hymn as 
mighty and powerful Christ the Redeemer, Who exalted them among all nations, the 
Lord Who hath faithfully wrought most glorious miracles, and Who hath, through 
them, shown us a staff of power, the pure Mary, the divine Maiden, who alone 
kneweth not a man, from whom Christ came forth as a blossom, He that for all hath 
put forth life, the inexhaustible food and eternal salvation.  
O Master, Who delivered the holy youths from the fire and Daniel from the lions' 
mouths, Who blessed Abraham, and Isaac Thy servant, and Jacob his son, Whose 
good will it was to become like unto us through their seed: our forefathers, that had 
fallen in the past, hast Thou saved by Thy Cross and Resurrection; and, having 
broken the bonds of death, with Thyself Thou hast raised all among them, dead from 
ages past, who worshipped Thee, O Christ, King of the ages.  
Rejoicing in the dew of the Spirit, the godly youths walked in the midst of the 
flame as in a light rain, mystically imaging therein the Trinity and the incarnation of 
Christ, and, as they were wise, they quenched the power of the fire with faith; and the 
righteous Daniel was shown to be a restrainer of lions. By their prayers be Thou 
entreated, O Savior, Lover of mankind; deliver us from the unquenchable fire of 
eternity, and grant us Thy kingdom, O Lord.  
Thy faithful and holy youths, who walked amidst the fiery flame as in dew, 
mystically prefigured Thy coming forth from the Virgin, which hath shone upon us 
without consuming us; and the righteous Daniel, wondrous among the prophets, 
manifestly revealing Thy divine Second Coming beforehand, said that he beheld the 
thrones set up, and the Judge seated, and the river of fire flowing. By their prayers 
may we be delivered therefrom, O Master Christ.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI, the composition of Anatolius: 
O ye faithful, let us praise today all the fathers of the old Law: Abraham, the 
beloved of God, and Isaac, who was born according to the promise, and Jacob and 
the twelve patriarchs, the most meek David, and Daniel, the prophet of desires, 
glorifying with them the three youths that transformed the furnace into dew, and who 
ask remission of Christ God, Who is glorified in His saints.  
Both now ..., and the Dogmatic Theotokion, in the Tone of the Week. 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and Glory ..., in Tone I: 
The prophets of great renown, splendid in the rays of divine eloquence, are ever 
blessed, and, putting forth the sayings of the Spirit as fruit, they preached to all the 
ineffable nativity of Christ God; and having lived most wondrously, they ended their 
lives in accordance with the Law.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Behold, the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled, for a Virgin hath given birth, yet after 
her birthgiving hath remained as she was before; for God was born, wherefore nature 
hath been newly wrought. Disdain not the supplications of thy servants which are 
offered up to thee in thy temple, O Mother of God, but as thou didst bear the 
Compassionate One in thine arms, take pity on thy servants and entreat Him, that our 
souls be saved.  
The Aposticha Stichera from the Octoechos, then: 
Glory ..., in Tone III, the composition of Germanus: 
Come, ye lovers of the feasts of the Church, and with psalms let us praise the 
assembly of the forefathers: Adam, the forefather of us all, Enoch, Noah, 
Melchizedek, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and, after the Law, Moses and Aaron, 
Joshua, Samuel and David, and, with them, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel and the 
twelve prophets, together with Elijah, Elisha and all the rest, Zechariah and the 
Forerunner; who all preached Christ, the Life and Resurrection of our race.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
By the will of the Father and without seed * thou didst conceive through the 
divine Spirit the Son of God * Who hath existed from the Father without a mother 
from before the ages, * and Who for our sake came forth from Thee in the flesh 
without a father, * and Him hast thou suckled as a babe. * Wherefore, cease not to 
beseech Him, ** that our souls be delivered from tribulations. 
Troparion of the Resurrection;  
Glory ..., Both now ..., and that of the holy forefathers, in Tone II: 
By faith didst Thou justify the forefathers, * O Thou Who, through them, didst 
betroth Thyself aforetime to the Church * from among the nations. * The saints 
boast in glory, * for from their seed hath come a right glorious fruit, * even she that 
gaveth birth unto Thee. O Christ God, ** by their prayers have mercy upon us!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Resurrection, (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the holy forefathers, in Tone II: 
By faith didst Thou justify the forefathers, * O Thou Who, through them, didst 
betroth Thyself aforetime to the Church * from among the nations. * The saints 
boast in glory, * for from their seed hath come a right glorious fruit, * even she that 
gaveth birth unto Thee. O Christ God, ** by their prayers have mercy upon us!  
After each Kathisma, the Sessional Hymns and Theotokia of the Resurrection. 
After the Polyeleos, the Hypacoi of the Tone, and the following Sessional 
Hymns of the holy forefathers, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
With hymns let us all praise Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the meek David, Joshua, 
and the twelve patriarchs, together with the three youths that quenched the fiery 
flame with the power of the Spirit. And let us cry aloud to them: Rejoice, ye who 
bravely denounced the deception of the mad king! Pray ye to Christ, that He grant 
remission of offenses unto those who celebrate your holy memory with love. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Like the widow who gave two mites as an offering, I offer thee the praise of 
thanksgiving which is thy due, O Lady, for all thy gifts; for hast been revealed to be a 
shelter and aid, ever rescuing me from temptations and tribulations. Wherefore, 
delivered from that which causeth me grief, as from the midst of a burning furnace, I 
cry out to thee with all my heart: O Theotokos, help me by entreating Christ God to 
grant me remission of sins, for I, thy servant, have thee as my hope.  
Three canons: that of the Resurrection, with 4 Troparia; that of the Three Holy 
Youths and Daniel, with 4 Troparia; and that of the holy forefathers, with 6 Troparia. 
ODE I 
Canon of the three holy youths and Daniel the prophet, the acrostic whereof is: “I 
hymn the three youths and the great Daniel,” the composition of Theophanes, in 
Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Let us glorify the beginningless Word, Who in a godly manner was born from the 
Father before all ages and was visible as a figure to the youths in the furnace.  
The right noble youths, resolutely spitting upon the words of the impious tyrant, 
did not wish to defile themselves with the food of the iniquitous like the Chaldeans.  
Nourished in soul by the word of God and in body with foods which they grew 
themselves, they showed themselves to the king as more comely of countenance than 
those who were fed with coarse foods.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: The venom of the serpent, which was bitterly poured into the ears of 
Eve, dost thou heal, O Maiden, who didst spring forth from David and hast given 
birth unto the Redeemer.  
Canon of the holy forefathers, the acrostic whereof is: “I now offer up fitting praise 
to the fathers,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye 
Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the Lord, * 
and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
Let us offer up a hymn unto the fathers that shone forth before the Law and under 
the Law, that, by their upright will, were pleasing unto the Lord and Master Who 
shone forth from the Virgin, and that now delight in unwaning enlightenment.  
Let us honor the first Adam who was honored by the hand of the Creator, and 
who is the forefather of us all and resteth with all the elect in the mansions of heaven.  
The Lord and God of all accepted the gifts of Abel, who offered them with a most 
noble soul; and when he was slain by his brother's murderous hand, He received his 
soul into light as that of a divine martyr.  
Theotokion: Let us hearken to the divine sayings which declare the appearance of 
Christ; for, lo! of a Maiden that kneweth not a man hath He been born in a cave, and 
Whose awesome nativity the star which appeared to the astrologers doth proclaim.  
Katavasia: Christ is born ...,  
ODE III 
Canon of the three holy youths 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Having acquired divinely imparted understanding, the children of David kept the 
laws of their fathers in divinely wise fashion, O Master.  
The fire did not consume the most pure bodies of the pious youths, for they had 
been watered with a spiritually nourishing fast.  
Wondrously bedewed in the midst of the furnace, the three children chanted the 
universal and oft chanted hymn of praise.  
Theotokion: O Master, Thou dost show us a birthgiving from a Virgin's body and 
dost save the bodies of the virginal youths in the furnace.  
Canon of the holy forefathers 
Irmos: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before all 
ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * to 
Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art Thou, 
O Lord. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
The zeal of Seth for his Creator is hymned throughout the world, for in his 
blameless life and spiritual love he was truly pleasing unto Him, and now doth cry out 
in the land of the living: Holy art Thou, O Lord!  
The wondrous Enos trusted in the Spirit and with divine wisdom began to call 
upon the God and Master of all with mouth, tongue and heart; and having lived on 
earth in a God-pleasing manner, he received glory.  
Let us bless Enoch with sacred utterances, for, having been well pleasing unto the 
Lord, he was translated in glory, being shown to be greater than death, as it hath been 
written, since he had been a most earnest servant of God.  
Theotokion: Now doth the expectation of the nations come forth from the Virgin, 
and Bethlehem doth radiantly open the shut gates of Eden, receiving the incarnate 
Word, Who, in the flesh, is laid in a manger.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy youths, in Tone II: 
The fire was transformed into dew for the children, and the lamentation of the 
myrrh-bearing women was changed into joy; and an angel ministered in both 
wonders, transforming the furnace into a place of rest for the former, and 
announcing the Resurrection on the third day to the latter. O Lord, Author of our 
life, glory be to Thee!  
ODE IV 
Canon of the three holy youths 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
The most wise Daniel, divinely enlightened of mind, interpreted the dreams of the 
rulers by divine grace.  
The suffering of the youths in the furnace shineth forth with wonders, for they 
brought the tyrant to acknowledge Thee, O Almighty One.  
The harmonious organs and melodious hymns of music did not distract the 
valorous ones, and they did not bow down before the golden image.  
Theotokion: O all-hymned one, with hymns do the children in Babylon honor thy 
most divine Son, Whom they came to know in the furnace.  
Canon of the holy forefathers 
Irmos: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, * 
O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 
Let us offer up praise unto God, honoring with hymns Noah, who is truly 
righteous; for he hath been shown to be adorned in all the divine commandments, 
having been well pleasing unto Christ, to Whom we, the faithful, chant: Glory to Thy 
power, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Beholding thy nobility and simplicity of character, God clearly showed thee forth, 
O Noah, as perfect in all respects and the leader of the new world, who for it didst 
preserve from the deluge, the seed of every species, even as He Himself commanded.  
With hymns let us piously bless Noah, who preserved the Law of God intact; who, 
alone among all his generation, was found to be righteous, and of old saved the 
species of the animals with an ark of gopher wood at the command of Him that 
accomplisheth all things.  
O blessed Noah, thy memory doth pour forth upon us who honor thee the wine 
of compunction, which ever gladdeneth the hearts and souls of those who, in a pure 
manner, bless thine honorable and divine life.  
Theotokion: Our redemption doth now lie couched in a manger, suckled as an 
infant, and the Magi, the Kings from the orient, come to render homage to Him Who 
hath been born from the pure one, faithfully bearing gifts as to their God and King. 
ODE V 
Canon of the three holy youths 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Thy favored ones, the great Daniel and the three divinely wise youths, having 
learned thy Law, O Savior, were not rejected; but, having received strength of Thee, 
their Benefactor, they manfully vanquished the tyrants.  
Daniel noetically learned Thy mysteries, O Lover of mankind, for, with purity of 
mind, he beheld Thee as the King and Judge of all nations, coming as the Son of man 
upon a cloud.  
Your unity is adorned more than with sapphires, O ye children, who burned like a 
golden ray with zeal for piety, and joyfully walked about in the furnace, forming a 
universal chorus.  
Theotokion: The divine Daniel clearly described thee as a mountain, O Virgin, and 
the three youths, beholding the dew-bearing flame, praised with hymns thy divine 
Offspring as the Savior, Creator and Lord.  
Canon of the holy forefathers 
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
With divine praises let Shem, who received the blessing of his father, be honored; 
for, shown to be well pleasing before the Lord, he hath joined the choir of the 
forefathers and doth joyously rest in the land of the living.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
As the friend of God, Abraham was deemed worthy to behold the day of his 
Creator and hath become full of spiritual joy; wherefore, honoring his uprightness of 
mind, we all bless him as a divine forefather of Christ.  
Thou didst behold the Trinity, insofar as it is possible for man to do; and as a true 
servant thou didst offer it hospitality, O all-blessed Abraham. Wherefore, for thy 
strange hospitality thou didst receive a reward: to be, through faith, the father of 
countless nations.  
Theotokion: He that is full hath emptied Himself into the flesh for our sake; the 
Beginningless One received a beginning; He that is rich beggared Himself; He that is 
the Word of God lay like a babe in a manger of dumb beasts, accomplishing the 
restoration of all who have existed throughout the ages.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the three holy youths 
Irmos: The abyss of my sins and the storm of my transgressions * disquieten 
me and thrust me down * into the depths of despondency; * but do Thou 
stretch forth Thy mighty arm, * unto me as Thou didst to Peter, * and save 
me, O my Guide.  
Having mastered the passions of the soul by the power of the Word, ye became 
governors in the lands of the Chaldean peoples, for virtue knoweth to give honor 
unto those who have acquired her, O ye wise descendants of David.  
Daniel of old, vested in life-bearing mortality, slew with food the most wicked 
serpent, which the Chaldeans impiously held to be a god; and wisely did he also slay 
the impious priests.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, Virgin and Mother, implore the Judge, thy Son, the 
Redeemer from evils, that by thy supplications He be merciful unto me on the Day of 
Judgment; for on thee alone do I place all my trust.  
Canon of the holy forefathers 
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
Led up by thy father's obedience to be sacrificed, thou wast plainly an image of the 
Passion of Christ, O most blessed Isaac. Wherefore, thou wast blessed and didst truly 
show thyself to be a close friend of God, rejoicing now with all the righteous.  
Jacob was shown to be the most faithful of all of God's favored ones. Wherefore, 
he wrestled with an angel, beheld a celestial intelligence, was called a god, and, 
sleeping, saw a divine ladder, upon which God, Who put on our flesh in His 
goodness, established Himself.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Loving obedience to his father, and cast into a pit, Joseph was sold, thus becoming 
an image of Christ, Who was slain and placed in a tomb. And he became the 
dispenser of the grain of Egypt, being chaste and righteous, and a most true governor 
of the passions.  
Theotokion: He that is ever with the Father and the Spirit is known on earth as a 
little Child; and He that doth wrap the earth in darkness is wrapped in swaddling 
clothes and laid in a manger of dumb beasts. Rejoicing now, we celebrate the 
forefeast of His seedless nativity.  
Kontakion of the three holy youths, in Tone VI: 
O thrice-blessed ones, who did not honor an image wrought by hands, * but were 
defended by the indescribable Essence, * ye were glorified in your ordeal by fire; * 
and standing in the midst of unbearable flame, * ye called upon God, saying: * Speed 
Thou and make haste to our aid, O Compassionate One, * in that Thou art merciful; 
** for what Thou willest, Thou canst do!  
Ikos: Stretch forth Thy hand whereby of old the warring Egyptians and the 
embattled Hebrews were tested. Forsake us not, that death, which thirsteth after us, 
not swallow us up; and spare our souls, as Thou didst once spare Thy three children 
in Babylon, who glorified Thee unceasingly and were cast into a furnace for Thy sake, 
from whence they cried out to Thee: Speed Thou and make haste to our aid, O 
Compassionate One, in that Thou art merciful; for what Thou willest, Thou canst do!  
SYNAXARION 
Verse: Receive joy O Forefathers of old, beholding Christ the Messiah drawing 
near. 
Verse: Rejoice Abraham, for you have been shown to be the great-grandfather 
of Christ. 
The subject of the blessed Abraham is known as much by the wise men as by 
common Christians. For the Book of Genesis, written by the Prophet Moses, which 
speaks of him, is read to be heard by all Christians in the Church, during the fasting 
days of the Holy and Great Lent. Wherefore we all learn from this book, that our 
forefather Abraham was from the land of the Chaldeans, and he was a gentile. The 
Chaldeans were a nation before the Jews. And his father Terah was an idolater. The 
divine Abraham was also an idolater, but he was not prevented by this from coming 
to know the true God. Rather, we should say something strange, for the great 
Abraham even by this idolatry was led to understand the true God. When the 
renowned one understood that nothing created is God, and should not be worshiped 
as God, and having contemplated the good arrangement of things that exist, and by 
seeing these things which were made, he came to know their invisible Maker. And 
having come to know Him, he worshiped Him as God, Who upholds and governs all 
of creation, and designated these things which have come into being to be suitable 
and orderly. He was therefore ordered by God to leave his homeland and relatives, 

--- PAGE 9 ---
and go to the land of Canaan. (where also Palestine and Jerusalem are located). 
Immediately he obeyed, without having doubt in his heart, for he had much faith 
towards God. For this reason he received as a wager for his faith, a son named Isaac 
who was born to him in his old age, and he became the father of many nations. Isaac 
was born of Abraham, Jacob was born of Isaac, and from Jacob was born Judah 
(from whose tribe Christ was born) and his brother Patriarchs. For this reason 
therefore our God-bearing Fathers and Teachers, have arranged it for today to 
commemorate the divine Abraham, as the forefather from whom Christ was born. 
And they delivered this to be reckoned by us, not for a long period of many days, but 
near the birth in the flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ. This was not done simply by 
chance, but according to the divine inspiration of the Holy Spirit. For the most good 
and philanthropic Son of God, made the Patriarch Abraham and his descendants His 
forefathers according to His human nature. Thus the most divine Fathers rightly 
deemed for us to celebrate their memory as Forefathers, not long from the Lord's 
nativity according to the flesh. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the three holy youths 
Irmos: In Babylon, the pious youths did not worship the golden image, * but, 
bedewed in the midst of the fiery furnace, * they chanted a hymn, saying: * O 
supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
A pious voice sounded forth unto the Almighty from the midst of the fire, for the 
divine Azariah, forming a choir, chanted a hymn, saying: Blessed is the God of our 
fathers!  
The harp of the youths theologized concerning the Almighty, the God of all, and 
unto Him that appeared to them openly in the furnace they chanted a hymn, saying: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
The king, seeing the three children who had been cast into the furnace, beheld, as 
it were, the form of a Fourth, and he called Him the Son of God and cried out to all: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers!  
Theotokion: Possessed of a mind illumined with divine radiance, O divinely 
blessed Daniel, thou didst clearly foresee the Offspring of the Virgin formed by 
divine images; and thou didst cry aloud: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Canon of the holy forefathers 
Irmos: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children brought 
up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing in the 
midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Let Ananiah, Azariah and Misael, who quenched the fiery furnace, be hymned, to-
gether with Daniel, who stopped the mouths of the lions, for together they chanted 
unto Christ: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Having lawfully suffered amid temptations and utter tribulations, Job was called 
the favorite of God, most faithful, meek, guileless, righteous, perfect, blameless, 
crying aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
With faith let us honor Moses, Aaron and Hur, praising Joshua and the most 
sacred Levi, Gideon and Samuel, and let us cry aloud: O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Theotokion: Behold! as the prophet hath foretold, she who kneweth not wedlock 
hath conceived in her womb and manifestly cometh to Bethlehem to give birth unto 
God. To Him let us chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the three holy youths 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 
Striving to preserve the nobility of Abraham, ye acquired the foundation of faith 
and hope which was his very own, O venerable ones, and his patience and endurance 
of temptations, crying aloud: Bless ye the Master, O priests! Ye people supremely 
exalt Him throughout the ages!  
Having shone forth like beacons and made the earth heavenly, and having been 
illumined with the radiance of piety, forming a universal chorus, they chant unto the 
Master Who saved them from temptations: Ye children, bless; ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
The descendants of David, having youthfully extinguished the fiery furnace and 
shut the jaws of the lions, rejoicing, now hymn Thee, the Benefactor and King of all, 
saying: Ye children, bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
Theotokion: O most pure one, the most wise Daniel doth give instruction in the 
mysteries, and the three divinely wise youths prefigure thy birth giving, beholding 
through symbols Him that hath come forth ineffably from thy womb. Him do the 
children bless, the priests hymn and the people supremely exalt throughout all ages!  
Canon of the holy forefathers 
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so the 
fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin's womb * into which it had 
descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation bless the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Let us celebrate today the divine memory of the honored fathers of all ages past: 
Adam, Abel, Seth, Noah, Enos, Enoch and Abraham, Melchizedek and Job, Isaac and 
the faithful Jacob, crying aloud: Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Let us praise the divinely beauteous phalange of the divine fathers: Barak, Nathan 
and Eleazar, Josiah and David, Jephthah and Samuel, who honorably beheld things 
which were to come and cried out: Let all creation bless the Lord, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout the ages!  
With hymnody let us offer praise unto the prophets of God, praising Hosea and 
Micah, Zephaniah and Habbakuk, Zechariah and Jonah, Haggai and Amos, Malachi 
and Obadiah, Nahum, Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel, together with Daniel, Elijah and 
Elisha.  
Trinitarian: With threefold utterances let us hymn the all-holy Trinity: the 
beginningless Father, the Son and the most holy Spirit, the Unity of three Hypostases, 
which every breath doth glorify, crying aloud: Let all creation bless the Lord, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: O Christ, Thou hast appeared incarnate from the Virgin's blood by 
Thine ineffable word, being born in a cave as a perfect Babe in the abundance of Thy 
loving-kindness, O Jesus. And the star doth herald Thee to the astrologers from afar, 
who cry with faith: Hymn and supremely exalt Christ throughout the ages!  
ODE IX 
Canon of the three holy youths 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Ye have attained your desired end, O all-blessed youths, and ye stand in the 
mansions of heaven before Him Who is the greatest of all desires.  
Rejoicing, ye have received a sheaf as the reward of the good husbandry of your 
tears, having brought forth the grain of incorruption.  
Radiance hath now shone upon you as is meet, and gladness of heart hath 
blossomed forth, for ye have made your abode there, from whence grief hath fled 
away.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, thou didst halt the spread of death, having given birth unto 
the Lord, the Bestower of life, Who imparteth life unto those who magnify thee with 
faith.  
Canon of the holy forefathers 
Irmos: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is heaven; * 
the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in which Christ 
God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and magnify. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
By Thy might, O Lord, Thou didst empower Thy daughters of old: Hannah, 
Judith, Deborah, Huldah, Jael and Esther, Sarah, Miriam the sister of Moses, Rachel, 
Rebecca and Ruth the exceedingly wise.  
In a sacred manner let us honor the holy children who quenched the furnace, and 
with them, Daniel the prophet and all that were clearly righteous, who shone forth 
well before the Law, and under the Law were pleasing to the Lord.  
The most wise and divine prophets, being descendants of Abraham, proclaimed 
through the Spirit the Word of God, born of Abraham and Judah. By their prayers, O 
Jesus, have compassion on us all.  
All creation is sanctified by your memory and, keeping festival, doth callout, crying 
aloud as befitteth a servant: Ever offer entreaty unto the Lord, O blessed ones, that 
those who praise you may receive eternal blessings!  
Theotokion: The Word of the Father, Who hath enrobed Himself in me, cometh 
forth from the Virgin uncommingled and is born in the cave. Dance thou, O creation, 
magnifying, with thankful voices His all-holy condescension which He hath shown 
forth in His loving-kindness.  
Exapostilarion of the Resurrection; Glory ..., of the Forefathers: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
Let us praise Adam, Abel, Seth and Enos, Enoch and Noah, Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob, Moses, Job and Aaron, Eleazar and Joshua, Barak, Sampson and Jephthah, 
David and Solomon.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The great Sun, the Creator, Who shall come forth from the Virgin who knew not a 
man, doth make haste to Bethlehem to enlighten all the descendents of Adam. 
Wherefore, the wondrous event is proclaimed by the all-radiant memory of the 
forefathers.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera to the Resurrection, and the following 4 to the 
forefathers, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Let us all now celebrate * the memory of the forefathers, * hymning their life * 
which was pleasing unto God, ** for Whose sake they have been magnified. (Twice)  
Verse: Blessed art Thou, O Lord, the God of our fathers, * and praised and 
glorified is Thy name unto the ages.  
The children quenched * the power of the fire, * dancing in the midst * of the 
furnace, and hymning God ** the Almighty.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Verse: For righteous art Thou * in all which Thou hast done for us.  
Daniel the prophet, * who, imprisoned in a pit, * dwelt with wild beasts, * was 
shown forth as one who was not a victim ** of their ferocity.  
Glory ..., in Tone VII, the composition of Germanus: 
Come ye all, let us faithfully celebrate the annual commemoration of Abraham and 
those who are with him, the fathers that lived before the Law. Let us honor the tribe 
of Judah as is meet; let us praise the youths in Babylon, who, as an image of the 
Trinity, quenched the flame of the furnace, together with Daniel; and holding fast to 
the prophecies of the prophets, let us cry aloud with Isaiah: Behold, a Virgin shall 
conceive in her womb, and shall bear a Son, Emmanuel, God with us!  
Both now ..., Theotokion “Most blessed art thou ...”: 
Great Doxology, Litanies, and Dismissal.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Gospel Sticheron. 
First Hour, and the final Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 10 Troparia: 6 from the Octoechos, and 4 from ODE III of 
the canon of the holy forefathers.  
The zeal of Seth for his Creator is hymned throughout the world, for in his 
blameless life and spiritual love he was truly pleasing unto Him, and now doth cry out 
in the land of the living: Holy art Thou, O Lord!  
The wondrous Enos trusted in the Spirit and with divine wisdom began to call 
upon the God and Master of all with mouth, tongue and heart; and having lived on 
earth in a God-pleasing manner, he received glory.  
Let us bless Enoch with sacred utterances, for, having been well pleasing unto the 
Lord, he was translated in glory, being shown to be greater than death, as it hath been 
written, since he had been a most earnest servant of God.  
Theotokion: Now doth the expectation of the nations come forth from the Virgin, 
and Bethlehem doth radiantly open the shut gates of Eden, receiving the incarnate 
Word, Who, in the flesh, is laid in a manger.  
After the Entrance, the Troparia of the Resurrection: 
And that of the holy forefathers, in Tone II: 
By faith didst Thou justify the forefathers, * O Thou Who, through them, didst 
betroth Thyself aforetime to the Church * from among the nations. * The saints 
boast in glory, * for from their seed hath come a right glorious fruit, * even she that 
gaveth birth unto Thee. O Christ God, ** by their prayers have mercy upon us!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Kontakion of the holy forefathers, in Tone VI: 
O thrice-blessed ones, who did not honor an image wrought by hands, * but were 
defended by the indescribable Essence, * ye were glorified in your ordeal by fire; * 
and standing in the midst of unbearable flame, * ye called upon God, saying: * Speed 
Thou and make haste to our aid, O Compassionate One, * in that Thou art merciful; 
** for what Thou willest, Thou canst do!  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV, the hymn of the Fathers: Blessed art Thou, O Lord, 
the God of our fathers, * and praised and glorified is Thy name unto the ages.  
Verse: For righteous art Thou in all which Thou hast done for us.  
 
THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS (3:4-11) 
Brethren: when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with 
him in glory. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth; fornication, 
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is 
idolatry: for which things' sake the wrath of God cometh on the children of 
disobedience: in the which ye also walked sometime, when ye lived in them. But now 

--- PAGE 15 ---
ye also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication out of 
your mouth. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his 
deeds; and have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image 
of him that created him: where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor 
uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and in all.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Moses and Aaron among His priests, and Samuel is among 
them that call upon His name.  
Verse: They called upon the Lord, and He hearkened unto them.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (14:16-24) 
The Lord spoke a parable saying: A certain man made a great supper, and bade 
many: and sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come; for 
all things are now ready. And they all with one consent began to make excuse. The 
first said unto him, I have bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it: I 
pray thee have me excused. And another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I 
go to prove them: I pray thee have me excused. And another said, I have married a 
wife, and therefore I cannot come. So that servant came, and showed his lord these 
things. Then the master of the house being angry said to his servant, Go out quickly 
into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, 
and the halt, and the blind. And the servant said, Lord, it is done as thou hast 
commanded, and yet there is room. And the lord said unto the servant: Go out into 
the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. 
For I say unto you, That none of those men which were bidden shall taste of my sup-
per. For many are called, but few are chosen. 
 
Communion Verse: Praise ye the Lord in the heavens; praise Him in the 
highest.  
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
 
 
 
