--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 23rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER  
FOREFEAST OF THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST 
COMMEMORATION OF THE 10 HOLY MARTYRS OF CRETE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
With uprightness of mind * let us chant the hymns * of the forefeast of the nativity 
of Christ; * for, though equal in honor to the Father and the Spirit, * in His loving-
kindness * He hath clothed Himself in our substance * that in the city of Bethlehem: 
* He of Whom * the shepherds and angels hymn. ** may ineffably be born. 
Let us shout to the sound of cymbals, * let us cry aloud in hymns: * The advent of 
Christ hath come! * The predictions of the prophets have been fulfilled! * For Him of 
Whom they foretold, * would appear to mankind in the flesh * is born in the holy 
cave * and lieth as a babe in the manger; ** and wrapped in swaddling-bands as a 
babe.  
Prepare thyself, O Bethlehem! * O Eden, be thou now opened! * The all-holy one 
cometh to give birth! * Let the heavens be glad! Let mortals leap for joy! * He Who is 
our rich Life * cometh in the magnitude of His mercy * to the manger and the cave, * 
assuming the poverty of Adam ** without change or commingling.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in the same melody:  
With sacred laudations * let us praise aloud today * the divinely called ten, * the 
lamps ten times radiant, * illumining the fullness of the Church with divine 
effulgence, * the unshakable pillars, * the luminous stars, * who have rendered the 
earth heavenly ** by the splendors of their magnificent struggles.  
Let Theodulus be praised * with Zoticus and Pompey, * Basilides, Euporus, 
Agathopus and Satorninus, * Gelasius and the divine Evaristus, * and with them also 
* let Eunician be honored with hymns: * the right calm havens for the tempest-
tossed, * who denounced falsehood ** and have received the crown of victory.  
Let us render honor * to the ten holy passion-bearers, * the offspring of Crete, * 
the foundations of the Church, * the imperishable adornments of the faithful, * the 
precious and fragrant flowers of paradise, * the beauteous sacrifices * right-acceptable 
to Christ, ** the offerings of the temple of heaven.  
Glory ..., in Tone III: 
On this day of festal preparation, the feast of the martyrs hath dawned, preparing 
us for the day of the nativity of the Sun Who shineth forth from the Son, heralding 
God Who hath appeared from the Virgin in the flesh. The ten martyrs who suffered 
mightily in Crete have received crowns from heaven. To them let us cry aloud: O holy 
martyrs, ye choir elect in holiness, entreat Christ on behalf of those who with faith 
celebrate your all-honored memory!  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., in Tone III: 
Adorn thyself well, O Bethlehem, for Eden hath been opened! Prepare thyself, O 
Ephratha, for Adam hath been restored, and Eve with him: for the curse hath been 
annulled, salvation hath blossomed forth, and the souls of the righteous are adorned, 
offering hymnody instead of myrrh as their gift, and receiving salvation of soul and 
incorruption. For, lo! He Who lieth in the manger doth order those who cry out to 
chant unceasingly in spirit: Glory be to Thee, O Lord!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
In a manner past understanding the boundless wisdom of God hath made Himself 
a house from the Virgin, and incomprehensibly desireth to be born in the flesh in the 
cave, and laid in a manger of dumb beasts.  
Verse: God shall come forth out of Theman, * and the Holy One out of a 
mountain overshadowed and densely wooded .  
Thou didst reveal Thyself to the prophets as far as they were able to behold Thee, 
the Creator, O Christ; but in these latter times Thou didst show Thyself to all 
mankind, becoming a man in the city of Bethlehem. 
Verse: O Lord, I have heard Thy report, and I was afraid; * O Lord, I 
considered Thy works, and I was stricken with awe.  
The star made its transit, heralding Christ, the Sun of righteousness, to those who 
observed the stars, and in the city of Bethlehem the angels now announce glad tidings 
to the shepherds. With them let us also hasten. O ye divinely wise.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Today Crete celebrates the forefeast of the nativity of Christ at the memorial of 
the passion-bearers. Wherefore, by their supplications, O Lord, save Thou our souls!  
Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Behold! the time of our salvation hath drawn nigh! Make ready, O cave: the Virgin 
cometh to give birth! O Bethlehem, thou land of Judah, adorn thyself and be glad, for 
from thee hath our Lord shone forth! Hearken, ye mountains and hills, and ye lands 
of Judea round about, for Christ cometh forth, that He might save those whom He 
created, in that He is the Lover of mankind.  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT COMPLINE  
We chant a Triodion, the Irmos of each ODE of which we chant twice, the Troparia 
repeated to make up 6 in number. After each ODE both choirs together chant the 
Irmos of the ODE.  
Triodion, in Tone VI: 
ODE V  
Irmos: I seek Thee early in the morning, * Who for our sake didst mercifully 
empty Thyself * and willingly submit to be baptized by the hand of a servant, * 
O Word of God, * Grant Thy peace unto me the fallen one, * O Lover of 
mankind. 
Having cleansed our thoughts and purified ourselves beforehand by partaking of 
the mysteries of Thine awesome dispensation, let us go up to the city of Bethlehem in 
body and soul, to behold the Master Who is born.  
Behold, and fear not, O friends, for Herod the insane one rageth in vain, seeking 
to slay the new-born Creator. Yet as He Who hath dominion over life and death, He 
liveth and saveth the world, in that He is the Lover of mankind.  
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice), Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Today the Virgin cometh to the cave * to ineffably give birth unto the pre-eternal 
Word. * Having heard this, be glad, O thou ecumene, * and with the angels and 
shepherds glorify the pre-eternal God, ** Who is to appear as a little babe.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: The divine Children rebuked the wicked god-hating idol; * and the 
lawless Sanhedrin raged against Christ, * vainly taking council to kill Him * 
who doth hold life in the hollow of His hand, * wherefore the whole of creation 
doth bless and glorify Him throughout all ages. 
O ye faithful, let us all shake the sleep of slothfulness from our eyelids, and, 
fending off the temptations of the evil one, let us keep vigil in prayer: with the 
shepherds let us show ourselves to be beholders of the glory of the newborn Christ, 
Whom all of creation doth bless, glorifying Him throughout all ages.  
Who among men can plumb the depths of the wisdom and understanding of the 
Creator? What wise man can fathom the abyss of the judgments of God, whereby, 
having bowed down the heavens, He hath dwelt as a mortal with mankind? Him doth 
all of creation bless, glorifying Him throughout all ages.  
O ye faithful, let us arrest every vile word from leaving our lips; and having learned 
the words of God, let us now offer them unto Christ Who hath released us from 
wordlessness as He lieth in a manger of dumb beasts. Him doth all of creation bless, 
glorifying Him throughout all ages.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Let us make haste to renounce the carnal passions and the beauties of this world, 
and let us confine ourselves to spiritual Concerns, all ye divinely wise: presenting 
ourselves as worthy through our works, to the Master Whom all of creation doth 
bless, glorifying Him throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: More honorable than the cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word: * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
The pernicious command of the malicious one who troubled the nativity of Jesus 
wrought the slaughter of the innocent babes; but with faith we honor Him Who hath 
been born.  
The cruel Herod, flouting the laws of nature and casting aside the divine 
commandments, iniquitously deprived mothers of their infants, and slaughtered the 
innocent babes in place of the Life of all.  
The gates of Eden were opened to the nations when the Redeemer was born in 
the cave; and the Lord of glory poureth forth a wellspring of immortality upon those 
who thirst. Him do we magnify.  
The angels surrounded the manger as though it were the throne of the cherubim, 
for they perceived the cave to be heaven when the Master lay therein; and they cried 
out: Glory to God in the highest!  
The Irmos is repeated, followed by a prostration.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell! (Twice) 
Glory ..., that of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Both now ..., that of the forefeast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”:  
Today the Church rejoiceth, singeth and adorneth herself, celebrating the forefeast 
of the nativity; for it is truly an all-holy solemnity, and she doth therefore array herself 
for the Lord of glory, and we all cry out to Christ God: O Lover of mankind, have 
mercy upon us who hymn Thee!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., The foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Thou hast descended from the bosom of the Father, and in an ineffable 
abasement hast taken upon Thyself our poverty, O Lover of mankind; in a manner 
transcending nature Thou hast been well-pleased to make Thine abode in a cave, O 
Lord, and Thou, the Creator and Lord, art nourished as a babe from Thy Mother's 
breasts. Wherefore, the magi, guided by the star, bring gifts unto Thee as the Master 
of creation, and the shepherds and angels marvel, crying: Glory in the highest to God 
Who cometh to be born as a man on earth!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., The foregoing is repeated.  
Canon of the forefeast, with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the martyrs, 
with 6 Troparia.  
ODE I 
Canon of the forefeast, the acrostic whereof is the (Greek) alphabet, the composition 
of Joseph, in Tone VI:  
Irmos: He Who in ancient times * hid the pursuing tyrant beneath the 
waves of the sea, * is now concealed in a manger * for Herod seeketh to 
slay Him * But let us sing with the magi; chanting unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Judah shall not lack for a prince, for to him was a promise made, as hath been 
written before: Jesus Christ, the Expectation of the nations, hath come, and is born in 
a cave in His surpassing goodness.  
Be glad with great joy, O Bethlehem; for in thee is Christ the Lord born! Let the 
whole world leap up, receiving deliverance, and let all creation dance, keeping festival!  
Desiring to save the human race, the Supremely good One made His abode in the 
womb of the Virgin who knew not wedlock; and, lo! He cometh to be born. Let us 
worship Him, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Canon of the holy martyrs, the acrostic whereof is contained in the Theotokia, the 
composition of George, in Tone II:  
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought up 
out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
Today the most radiant beams of the noetic Sun have shone forth, proclaiming to 
all His effulgence and advent in the flesh.  
Today the passion-bearers have set before all a spiritual banquet of the forefeast 
which mystically nourisheth us with the radiance of the new-born Christ.  
Shining forth like radiant stars, the saints followed the noetic Sun of glory during 
their struggles, and, having now reached Him, they have been illumined.  
United in soul, the martyrs cut down hordes of the enemy, and have ineffably 
received crowns of victory from Christ Who was born in the cave.  
Theotokion: The race of mankind offereth thee the adulation of the forefeast, O 
Bride of God; and they glorify the Lover of mankind Who was born from thee, as the 
Mediator and Cause of universal joy.  
ODE III  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: When creation beheld Thee, * Who founded the whole earth upon the 
waters, * born in the cave, * it was seized with awe, crying aloud: * None is 
holy save Thee, O Lord!  
Thou didst desire to clothe Thyself in the guise of a servant, that Thou mightest 
deliver me from slavery to the evil one. I hymn Thy loving-kindness, O Word Who 
art co-beginningless and consubstantial with the Father: Glory to Thy dispensation!  
The Virgin cometh to give birth to the Lord in the cave! Come forth, O ye magi! 
Ye shepherds, come forth! Ye angels, cry out hymns from on high: The Deliverance 
of mankind hath come!  
Seeking me who have become lost and by my barren acts have been shown to be a 
den of thieves O Lover of mankind, Thou hast now arrived at the cave to be born 
today from the Virgin, O Master. Glory to Thy Nativity, O Word!  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Canon of the of the holy martyrs  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the tree, * firmly establish us in Thee, 
* and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Wrapped in swaddling-bands, the Word Who hath been born in the flesh hath rent 
asunder the garments of our ancient condemnation, and hath clothed us in 
incorruption.  
You destroyed the legion of ungodliness, O most wise ones, by the power of 
Christ God Who hath appeared in the flesh, and ye bound yourselves together with 
His love. 
Theotokion: We were released from the bonds of condemnation when the Creator 
was wrapped in swaddling-bands, and we have been re-clothed in the vesture of our 
primal beauty, O Theotokos.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Today the Virgin cometh to the cave * to ineffably give birth unto the pre-eternal 
Word. * Having heard this, be glad, O thou ecumene, * and with the angels and 
shepherds glorify the pre-eternal God, ** Who is to appear as a little babe.  
Ikos: O truly awesome wonder past all telling! He Who giveth existence to all, in 
His goodness hath entered the womb of the holy Virgin, and cometh to be born in 
the cave and to be laid in a manger. And His star is a herald from on high to the magi 
who come to do Him homage with gifts, drawing from afar those who zealously 
follow the prophecy of Balaam who said: “A star will proclaim beforehand the little 
babe, the pre-eternal God!”  
Sessional Hymn of the of the holy martyrs, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
The splendid and honorable guardians of the cities of Crete, having suffered 
mightily vanquished the serpent, the author of evil with faith, and have been lawfully 
crowned. Let us celebrate their right praiseworthy memorial today, glorifying the Lord 
of all with loud voices. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in the melody:  
Rejoice, O Sion! Adorn thyself, O Bethlehem! For the Sustainer of all, having sent 
forth a star, hath announced His infinite condescension, before Whom the hosts of 
heaven tremble: truly He Who alone is the Lover of mankind is immutably born from 
the Virgin!  
ODE IV  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Foreseeing Thine advent from the Virgin, * Habbakuk cried out in 
awe: * Thou hast come from Theman incarnate, O Redeemer * to restore 
Adam who had been expelled!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
The radiant cloud cometh forth to shine from her maternal womb Christ, the Sun 
of righteousness, Who illumineth the whole earth with the rays of divinity.  
God hath revealed Himself to be like unto men: He abaseth Himself by assuming 
flesh, that He might deify us, and is born in a cave. O ye faithful, let us receive Him 
with a pure heart.  
Behold! Christ is born in the city of Bethlehem, that He might open Eden unto us, 
which of old was closed through the disobedience initiated by the serpent: Let us 
celebrate a divine festival!  
Canon of the of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: I heard report of Thee, O Lord, * and I was afraid; * I understood Thy 
works, * and marveling cried aloud: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be filled with mystic gladness; for Christ 
hath come to restore all things!  
The ten spiritual athletes, heralding the nativity of the Creator, make glad and 
rejoice with us.  
The condescension of Christ hath divinely elevated the valiant martyrs to heaven 
by their suffering.  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, all creation doth honor thee with hymns, as the joy of 
all, celebrating the forefeast.  
ODE V  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: I seek Thee early in the morning, * Who for our sake didst mercifully 
empty Thyself * and willingly submit to be baptized by the hand of a servant, * 
O Word of God, * Grant Thy peace unto me the fallen one, * O Lover of 
mankind. 
Let the hearts of all mortals leap up, and let creation be glad! The Lord is born 
from the pure Maiden in the cave of Bethlehem, and the magi offer Him fitting gifts.  
O ye people, who of old sat in the shadow of death, behold the Light which hath 
shone forth upon us from the Virgin, and be filled with great sweetness of soul, ever 
magnifying the Word Who lowered Himself.  
Thou comest to be contained in a little cave, O Thou Who art infinite by nature, 
that, in Thy boundless mercy, Thou mightest magnify me who have made myself 
insignificant through disobedience.  
Canon of the of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
O ye faithful, let us offer faith, like gold, hymnody, like pleasing incense, and pure 
love, like myrrh, to Christ Whose good pleasure it is to be born in the flesh for our 
sake.  
The defending spiritual athletes, having gathered today into the one company of 
Christ, have set at naught the many and varied wiles of the enemy and have worthily 
received the honors of victory.  
The most wise martyrs, having manifestly come to know of the Nativity of Christ 
in the flesh, spurned carnal love. Wherefore, they suffered for love of Him.  
Theotokion: Delivered from the delusion of idolatry, O pure one, through thee we 
have come to know the one Creator and Savior. Wherefore, at His nativity we honor 
thee with love, O most pure one.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have encompassed me; * and its stormy 
waves I can endure no more, * wherefore like Jonah I cry out to Thee, O 
Master: * Lead me up from corruption. 
Transcending the laws of the flesh, O Lord, the Virgin cometh to give birth to 
Thee in the cave and to lay Thee in a manger as a babe in the flesh.  
In His mercy, the Supremely divine One, Who was born of the Maiden who knew 
not wedlock, showeth me to be a citizen of heaven, though I had become a stranger 
to God through disobedience.  
Ye mountains, hills and valleys, be glad; for the Lord is born in the flesh, restoring 
creation which had become corrupt through wicked disobedience. 
Canon of the of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable abyss 
of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
The star of the East, which shone forth from on high upon us in God's ineffable 
loving-kindness, proclaimed a greeting, announcing effulgence to those in the world.  
Illumining those who walk in the night of life, in the depths of delusion, O all-
glorious ones, by the light of Christ ye guided men to Him.  
He Who in His ineffable mercy was born in the cave, in that He is the Lover of 
mankind, drew the martyrs up from the depths of ungodliness to the heights of the 
knowledge of God.  
Theotokion: We mortals have been deemed worthy of the honor of the divine 
regeneration of Christ God, Who in a manner past understanding was born from thee 
in the flesh, O Bride of God.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Kontakion of the of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
A morning-star hath shone forth, * the honorable contest of the martyrs, * 
illumining for us beforehand * Him Who is born in the cave, ** to Whom the Virgin 
gave birth without seed.  
Ikos: Loving Christ, the Bestower of life, Who for our sake was born of the Virgin 
in the cave, the warriors raised a splendid legion to do battle against Belial; and having 
manifestly vanquished him on earth, they cast down him who of old had boasted 
without measure. Wherefore, they shine upon those in darkness as luminaries of the 
noetic Sun; for as the star stood before the magi, guiding them to Bethlehem, the city 
of Judah, so do they, through their torments, proclaim to us Him to Whom the 
Virgin gave birth without seed.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: In Babylon the Children feared not the fiery furnace; * but cast into the 
midst of the flames * they were bedewed and sang: * ‘O Lord God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou.’ 
How can the least of caves hold Thee, O Word, Who in Thine exceeding 
abasement assumed the poverty of Adam, enriching mankind with the wealth of 
divine grace?  
Hearing strange words, the shepherds hastened to Bethlehem to behold Him Who 
lieth in a manger of dumb beasts and releaseth all mankind from irrationality.  
With mouth and heart let us hasten to hymn and worship with faith Christ Who 
cometh to be born in the flesh from the Virgin Maiden, in the cave.  
Canon of the of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of the 
flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!  
By abasing Himself in the flesh, Christ hath shown the richness of His ineffable 
love for mankind; for having become man, He hath disclosed an abundance of good 
things to those who cry out unceasingly: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Noetically delighting in the divine fragrance of Christ, the passion-bearers spurned 
all sweet things, and by their suffering followed Him, crying aloud: O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Showing yourselves to be a pre-festal sacrifice to Christ, O wise ones, ye offered 
Him your fragrant suffering as it were myrrh. Wherefore, with the perfume of 
miracles He hath glorified you who cry out: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: O all-pure one, by thy supplications grant that we who hymn thee 
with faith may with pure noetic sight behold the spiritual glory and divine radiance of 
our God, Who was born in the flesh from thee in the cave.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Suffering affliction for the sake of the laws of their fathers, * the blessed 
Children in Babylon * scorned the foolish decree of the King. * Standing 
together in the midst of the flames, they remained unharmed, * and sang a 
song fitting for almighty God: * ‘O ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.’ 
Holding in thine arms, bowing down before, and kissing maternally the one Lord 
Who had become incarnate in a manner beyond all telling, and was clad in human 
likeness, O Maiden, thou didst say: “O my most sweet Child, how is it that I hold 
Thee Who holdest all creation in thy hand, while freeing it from the hand of 
bondage?”  
Make ready to chant to Him Who hath been born on earth, O divine angels! 
Guided by the star, bring ye gifts, O magi! Ye shepherds, hasten ye to behold Him 
sitting as a babe in His Mother's arms, crying out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
O cloud of the Light, thou who knewest not wedlock, how canst thou wrap in 
swaddling-bands Him Who clothes the heavens with clouds by His ineffable will?  
How canst thou lay in a manger of dumb beasts the Master Who in His boundless 
mercy doth deliver mankind from irrationality? Him Whom all creation worships with 
fear, hymning Him throughout all ages.  
Canon of the of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew children, 
* and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and supremely 
exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
All creation prepareth first-fruits for Thee Who art to be born of the pure Virgin 
in the cave, O Christ; and it chanteth the praise of the forefeast, glorifying Thee, the 
only Benefactor.  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Following Christ Who was born on earth, and having faith as a guide, like a radiant 
star, the passion-bearers beheld Him, and in their martyrdom offered Him divine 
gifts.  
Strengthened by the power of Christ, O all-wise passion-bearers, ye triumphed 
over the oppression of the enemy, and showed him to be weak, hymning Christ 
throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: He Who rested in the bosom of the Father and was born in the cave, 
found rest in thy maternal arms, O Theotokos, opening the kingdom in the heavens 
unto all who hymn thee with faith.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Be not now amazed, O Mother, * beholding as an infant Him Whom 
the Father begat from within Himself * before the morning star; * for I have 
manifestly come to restore and glorify with Me * the nature of fallen mankind, 
* who with faith and love magnifieth thee.  
Rejoice, O most pure one, thou receptacle of ineffable joy! For, lo! thou comest to 
give birth ineffably in the cave to the Master Who truly desires to restore all creation, 
which of old became corrupt through disobedience. Hymning Him with faith, we 
magnify thee.  
O all ye souls of the righteous, and those beneath the earth, rejoice! For, lo! the 
Deliverance of all hath appeared, born in the city of Bethlehem! And the star 
proclaimeth Him to the magi, who seek Him with piety; and, beholding Him in the 
cave, they are filled with joy.  
O Virgin, we hymn thee as another heaven, who in the morning shall shine forth 
the Sun of righteousness upon us from thy most pure womb, illumining those in the 
darkness of death and corruption. Wherefore, we magnify thee with praises, as is 
meet.  
Canon of the of the holy martyrs 
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to create 
Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * and Who 
took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * Him we 
faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
The army of spiritual athletes, hastening before the divine coming of the King of 
all, announce to all creation the banquet of gladness, receiving all the faithful, and 
setting forth their valiant deeds as food.  
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
O wise passion-bearers of the Lord, beholding the Faith as it were a star, and 
cleaving steadfastly to the never-setting Sun, ye were thereby guided to Christ without 
stumbling; and have offered your blood to Him as a gift.  
Gathered like flowers from the incorrupt fields of the understanding of Christ, O 
passion-bearers, suffering, ye were filled with His fragrance; and in your martyrdom 
offered yourselves to Him as most fragrant myrrh.  
Theotokion: Grace hath been poured forth among all the generations of mankind, 
O Virgin Theotokos, and the wealth of thy miracles floweth forth abundantly in the 
radiant joy of thy birth-giving, enriching those who glorify thee with faith and love.  
Exapostilarion of the of the holy martyrs:  
Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples ...”:  
With hymns let us joyously crown Theodulus and Zoticus, Agathadorus and 
Satorninus, Pompey and Eunician, the glorious Basilides and the godly Euporus, the 
glorious Gelasius and Evaristus, that by their supplications we may be delivered from 
transgressions and may receive crowns from Christ the Savior.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the forefeast: 
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”: 
A mystery hidden and untold even to the angels is soon to be wrought through the 
good pleasure of the Father and by the cooperation of the Spirit. Let us make haste, 
for the beginningless Word, receiving a beginning in time as a man, is born from the 
Virgin for the salvation of the world. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go forth, ye angels ...”: 
Thy mystery appointed beforehand by the Father * before all ages, * and 
proclaimed of old by the prophets, * hath been revealed in the latter days: * God hath 
become a man, * receiving flesh from the Virgin, * the Uncreated One of His own 
will taketh on our form, * He Who Is entereth temporal existence: * Christ cometh 
forth, ** the King of Israel.  
I hymn Thee, O King * Who art wrapped in swaddling-bands, * for thou loosest 
the bonds of my falls into sin, * and, honoring me with immortal and incorruptible 
glory, * Thou hast made me wholly the Father's own, * refashioning and restoring me. 
* Wherefore, I cry to Thee: * Christ cometh forth, ** the King of Israel.  
The magi, observers of the stars, * beholding through the star * the light which 
proceedeth from the Light * and shone forth from the Virgin upon those on earth, * 
cast off the darkness of Persia * and all the deception of astrology, * and chanted in 
joy to God Who is born: * “Blessed is our God Who hath come! ** Glory be to 
Thee!”  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Mocked by the wise magi, * Herod furiously cut down the infants as though they 
were grass, * intending to raise up against Thee * his hand befouled with murder; * 
but Thou didst go to the Egyptians, * dispelling their most profound darkness. * With 
them we chant: * Blessed is our God Who hath come! ** Glory be to Thee!  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go forth, ye angels ...”: 
Sing thou a new song, O new Israel! * Chant thou the hymnody of heaven! * Be 
glad and adorn thyself with joy; * dance thou and in splendor * bring forth the hymns 
of the forefeast! * God hath appeared in the flesh out of Theman, * and He desireth * 
to be washed in the streams of the Jordan ** as a man.  
Both now ..., in the same melody: 
Thou hast appeared on earth, * hast dwelt among men, * and been registered with 
servants at the command of Caesar; * Thou hast taken on our form without 
undergoing change, * remaining immutable, * being wholly God, even though Thou 
didst become Incarnate. * Glory, honor, praise and majesty be to Thy dispensation, * 
now and unto the ages. Amen.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Make fragrant, O Sion, * the holy manger; * for in thee the Master * will put forth 
** the rays of His divinity.  
Verse: God shall come forth out of Theman, * and the Holy One out of a 
mountain overshadowed and densely wooded.  
Faith instead of gold, * love instead of myrrh, * and good works instead of 
frankincense * let us bring these to the Creator ** Who cometh unto His own.  
Verse: O Lord, I have heard Thy report, and I was afraid; * O Lord, I 
considered Thy works, and I was stricken with awe.  
Christ approacheth, * the star shineth beforehand, * and the heavenly multitude * 
of the armies of the noetic hosts ** boweth down.  
Glory ..., the composition of the Studite, in Tone III:  
O ye valiant martyrs of the Truth, neither the violence of the tyrants, nor their 
false allurements, neither the severing of your limbs, nor the threat of death were able 
to separate you from divine love. Wherefore, as ye have boldness before Christ, Who 
is the God over all, ask ye of Him as reward for your painful sufferings, that He grant 
us great mercy.  
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Both now ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII: 
The Creator of all is born in Bethlehem; the pre-eternal King openeth Eden. He 
turneth back the flaming sword, and the middle wall of enmity is broken down. The 
hosts of heaven unite with mortals, angels and men form a mighty solemnity, the pure 
offer hymnody to the Pure One. We behold the Virgin as the cherubim's throne of 
glory, who contained God Whom naught can contain, and beareth Him Whom the 
seraphim glorify with fear, that He may grant the world great mercy.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the forefeast, 
and 4 from ODE VI of the canon of the holy martyrs.  
Thou didst desire to clothe Thyself in the guise of a servant, that Thou mightest 
deliver me from slavery to the evil one. I hymn Thy loving-kindness, O Word Who 
art co-beginningless and consubstantial with the Father: Glory to Thy dispensation! 
(Twice) 
The Virgin cometh to give birth to the Lord in the cave! Come forth, O ye magi! 
Ye shepherds, come forth! Ye angels, cry out hymns from on high: The Deliverance 
of mankind hath come!  
Seeking me who have become lost and by my barren acts have been shown to be a 
den of thieves O Lover of mankind, Thou hast now arrived at the cave to be born 
today from the Virgin, O Master. Glory to Thy Nativity, O Word!  
The star of the East, which shone forth from on high upon us in God's ineffable 
loving-kindness, proclaimed a greeting, announcing effulgence to those in the world.  
Illumining those who walk in the night of life, in the depths of delusion, O all-
glorious ones, by the light of Christ ye guided men to Him.  
He Who in His ineffable mercy was born in the cave, in that He is the Lover of 
mankind, drew the martyrs up from the depths of ungodliness to the heights of the 
knowledge of God.  
Theotokion: We mortals have been deemed worthy of the honor of the divine 
regeneration of Christ God, Who in a manner past understanding was born from thee 
in the flesh, O Bride of God.  
Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell!  
Troparion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV:  
In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, * received imperishable crowns from 
Thee, our God; * for, possessed of Thy might, * they set at naught the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. ** By their supplications save Thou our 
souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
A morning-star hath shone forth, * the honorable contest of the martyrs, * 
illumining for us beforehand * Him Who is born in the cave, ** to Whom the Virgin 
gave birth without seed.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III: 
Today the Virgin cometh to the cave * to ineffably give birth unto the pre-eternal 
Word. * Having heard this, be glad, O thou ecumene, * and with the angels and 
shepherds glorify the pre-eternal God, ** Who is to appear as a little babe.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been 
wondrous; * He hath wrought all His desires in them  
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand, that I 
might not be shaken.  
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS, §233 (6: 10-17)  
Brethren: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §106 (LK. 21:12-19)  
The Lord said to His disciples: Beware of men. They shall lay their hands on you, 
and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being 
brought before kings and rulers for my name's sake. And it shall turn to you for a 
testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall 
answer: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not 
be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, 
and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye 
shall be hated of all men for my name's sake. But there shall not a hair of your head 
perish. In your patience possess ye your souls.  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright.  
