--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 25th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
THE NATIVITY, ACCORDING TO THE FLESH, OF OUR LORD GOD & SAVIOR 
JESUS CHRIST  
At the seventh hour of the day (1 o'clock in the afternoon), all the bells are 
solemnly tolled; and having gathered in church we begin Vespers as usual.  
Deacon: Bless, master!  
Priest: Blessed is the kingdom ...,  
And after Amen the superior saith: O heavenly King ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Lord have mercy! (Twelve) Glory ..., Both now ..., O come, let us 
worship ..., (Thrice), And he readeth Psalm 103: Bless the Lord, O my soul ..., 
then the deacon intones the Great Litany.  
If it be Saturday, we chant: Blessed is the man ..., but if it be Sunday, we chant 
only the first antiphon. On any other day the Kathisma is omitted, and after the 
litany we proceed immediately to chant:  
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera, in Tone II: 
The priest performeth proskomedia, and the deacon censeth the church as usual, 
while the choirs chant the 8 Stichera of the feast.  
Come, let us rejoice in the Lord, telling of this present mystery: The middle wall of 
partition hath been demolished, the fiery sword is removed, the cherub doth 
withdraw from the gate of life, and I partake of the food of paradise, from whence I 
was driven away because of disobedience; for the immutable Image of the Father, the 
Image of His eternity, doth assume the guise of a servant, issuing forth from the 
Mother who knew not wedlock, without undergoing change, yet He remained what 
He was before - our true God; and He hath received what He was not, becoming a 
man in His love for mankind. To Him let us cry aloud: O God Who wast born of the 
Virgin, have mercy on us! (Twice) 
The composition of Anatolius: When the Lord Jesus was born from the holy 
Virgin, all things were enlightened; for when the shepherds piped, the magi offered 
homage and the angels sang, Herod was troubled, for God, the Savior of our souls, 
appeared in the flesh. (Twice)  
Thy kingdom, O Christ God, is a kingdom of all the ages, and thy dominion is for 
all generations. O Christ God Who wast incarnate by the Holy Spirit and became a 
man through the Ever-virgin Mary, Thou hast shone forth Thine advent upon us as 
light. O Light from Light, Effulgence of the Father, Thou hast illumined all creation. 
Every creature that hath breath praiseth Thee, the Image of the glory of the Father. O 
Thou Who art and ever shall be, O God Who hast shone forth from the Virgin: Have 
mercy upon us! (Twice) 

--- PAGE 2 ---
What shall we offer Thee, O Christ, in that Thou hast appeared on earth as a man 
for our sake? For every creature fashioned by Thee offereth Thee thanksgiving: the 
angels, hymnody; the heavens, a star; the magi, gifts; the shepherds, their wonder; the 
earth, a cave; the wilderness, a manger; and we, the Virgin Mother. O God Who hast 
existed from before time, have mercy upon us! (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition or Cassia the Nun, in Tone II:  
When Augustus reigned alone upon the earth, the rule of many came to an end; 
and when Thou didst become a man through the pure one, the polytheism of idolatry 
was abolished. All cities came under a single universal empire, and the nations came 
to believe in a single dominion of the Godhead. The people were registered according 
to the edict of Caesar, and we, the faithful, have enrolled ourselves under the name of 
the divinity of Thee our God, Who hast become a man. Great is Thy mercy! O Lord, 
glory be to Thee!  
Entrance with the Gospel. “O joyous light ...,” Prokeimenon of the day.  
Note: If the Eve of the Nativity of Christ falls on a Friday, we replace the 
Prokeimenon of the day with the Great Prokeimenon: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: What God is as great as our God? * Thou art God 
Who worketh wonders.  
Verse I: Thou hast made Thy power known among the peoples; with Thine 
arm hast Thou redeemed Thy people.  
Verse II: And I said: Now have I made a beginning; this change hath been 
wrought by the right hand of the Most High.  
Verse III: I remembered the works of the Lord; for I will remember Thy 
wonders from the beginning.  
And the following readings, in order, with their Troparia and verses.  
A READING FROM GENESIS  
In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth. But the earth was unsightly 
and unfurnished, and darkness was over the deep, and the Spirit of God moved over 
the water. And God said: “Let there be light!”, and there was light. And God saw the 
light, that it was good, and God divided between the light and the darkness. And God 
called the light day, and the darkness He called night; and there was evening and there 
was morning, the first day. And God said: “Let there be a firmament in the midst of 
the water, and let it be a division between water and water!”, and it was so. And God 
made the firmament, and God divided between the water which was under the firma-
ment and the water which was above the firmament. And God called the firmament 
heaven; and God saw that it was good: and there was evening and there was morning, 
the second day. And God said: “Let the water which is under the heaven be collected 

--- PAGE 3 ---
into one place, and let the dry land appear!”; and it was so. And the water which was 
under the heaven was collected into its places, and the dry land appeared. And God 
called the dry land earth, and the gatherings of the waters he called seas; and God saw 
that it was good. And God said: “Let the earth bring forth the herb of grass bearing 
seed, according to its kind and according to its likeness, and the fruit-trees bearing 
fruit, whose seed is in it, according to its kind on the earth!”; and it was so. And the 
earth brought forth the herb of grass bearing seed, according to its kind and 
according to its likeness, and the fruit-tree bearing fruit, whose seed is in it, according 
to its kind on the earth; and God saw that it was good. And there was evening and 
there was morning, the third day.  
A READING FROM NUMBERS  
The Spirit of God came upon Balaam, and he took up his parable, and said: 
“Balaam, the son of Boor saith: How goodly are thy habitations, O Jacob, and thy 
tents, O Israel! They are as shady groves, and as gardens by a river, and as tents which 
God hath pitched, and as cedars by the waters. There shall come a Man out of his 
seed, and He shall rule over many nations; and His kingdom shall be increased. God 
led Him out of Egypt; He hath as it were the glory of a unicorn: He shall consume 
the nations of his enemies, and He shall claim their marrow, and with His darts He 
shall shoot through the enemy. He lay down, and He rested as a lion, yea, even as a 
young lion. Who shall stir Him up? Blessed are they that bless Thee, and accursed are 
they that curse Thee! A Star shall rise out of Jacob; a Man shall spring forth from 
Israel, and shall crush the princes of Moab, and shall despoil the sons of Seth. And 
Edom shall be an inheritance, and Esau, His enemy, shall be an inheritance for Israel, 
and Israel wrought valiantly.”  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF MICAH  
In those days, the Lord said: “I will gather her that is bruised, and will receive her 
that is cast out and those whom I rejected. And I will make her that was bruised a 
remnant, and her that was rejected a mighty nation: and the Lord shall reign over 
them in Mount Sion from henceforth, even forever. And thou, O Bethlehem, house 
of Ephratha, art few in number to be reckoned among the thousands of Judah; yet 
out of thee shall One come forth to Me, to be a ruler of Israel; and His goings forth 
were from the beginning, even from eternity.” Wherefore, He shall appoint them to 
wait till the time of her that travaileth: she shall bring forth, and then the remnant of 
their brethren shall return to the children of Israel. And the Lord shall stand, and see, 
and feed His flock with power, and they shall dwell in the glory of the name of the 
Lord their God: for now shall they be magnified to the ends of the earth.  
Then, when we have stood on our feet, the reader lifteth up his voice, and chanteth 
this Troparion, in Tone VI:  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thou wast born secretly in the cave, but heaven proclaimed Thee to all, O Savior, 
using the star as its mouth, and led to Thee the magi, who worshipped Thee with 
faith. Have mercy upon them and upon us!  
Verse: His foundations are in the holy mountains; the Lord loveth the gates of 
Sion more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things are spoken of thee, 
O city of God. I will make mention of Raab and Babylon to them that know 
me.  
Heaven led to Thee the magi, who worshipped Thee with faith. Have mercy upon 
them and upon us!  
Verse: And lo, the foreigners and Tyre and the people of the Ethiopians, these 
were born there. A man will say: Mother Sion; and, that man was born in her; 
and the Most High Himself hath founded her.  
Heaven led to Thee the magi, who worshipped Thee with faith. Have mercy upon 
them and upon us!  
Verse: The Lord shall tell it in the writ of the peoples and the princes, even 
these that were born in her. How joyous are all they that have their habitation 
in Thee.  
Heaven led to Thee the magi, who worshipped Thee with faith. Have mercy upon 
them and upon us!  
Glory ..., Heaven led to Thee the magi, who worshipped Thee with faith. Have 
mercy upon them and upon us!  
Both now ..., Heaven led to Thee the magi, who worshipped Thee with faith. 
Have mercy upon them and upon us!  
Then the reader chanteth the Troparion in its entirety: 
Thou wast born secretly in the cave, but heaven proclaimed Thee to all, O Savior, 
using the star as its mouth, and led to Thee the magi, who worshipped Thee with 
faith. Have mercy upon them and upon us!  
And we resume the readings:  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: “There shall come forth a Rod out of the root of Jesse, and a 
blossom shall come up from his root: and the Spirit of God shall rest upon Him, the 
Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and strength; the Spirit of 
knowledge and godliness shall fill Him, the Spirit of the fear of God. He shall not 
judge according to appearance, nor reprove according to report: but He shall judge 
the cause of the lowly, and shall reprove the lowly of the earth: and He will smite the 
earth with the word of His mouth, and with the breath of His lips shall He destroy 
the ungodly one. And He shall have His loins girt with righteousness, and His sides 
clothed with truth. And the wolf shall feed with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie 

--- PAGE 5 ---
down with the kid; and the young calf and bull and the lion shall feed together; and a 
little Child shall lead them. And the ox and the bear shall feed together; and their 
young shall be together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And an Infant shall 
put His hand on the holes of asps, and on the nest of young asps. And they shall not 
hurt, nor shall they at all be able to destroy anyone on My holy mountain: for the 
whole world is filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as much water covereth the 
seas. And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, and He that shall arise to rule over 
the nations; in Him shall the nations trust; and His rest shall be glorious.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF BARUCH  
This is our God, and there shall none other be accounted of in comparison with 
Him. He hath found out all the way of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob His 
servant, and to Israel His beloved. Afterward did He show Himself upon earth) and 
dwelt with men. This is the book of the commandments of God, and the law that 
endureth forever: all they that keep it shall come to life; but such as leave it shall die. 
Turn thee, O Jacob, and take hold of it, walk in the presence of the light thereof, that 
thou mayest be illumined. Give not thine honor to another, nor the things that are 
profitable unto thee to a strange nation. O Israel, blessed are we: for things that are 
pleasing to God are made known unto us.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF DANIEL 
Daniel said to Nebuchadnezzar: “Thou, O king, hast seen. Behold, an image: and 
that image was great, and the appearance of it excellent, standing before thy face; and 
the form of it was awesome. It was an image, the head of which was of fine gold, and 
its hands and breast and arms of silver, its belly and thighs of brass, its legs of iron, its 
feet, part of iron and part of earthenware. And thou didst see when a Stone was cut 
out of a mountain without the aid of men's hands, and It smote the image upon its 
feet of iron and earthenware, and utterly reduced them to powder. Then once for all 
the earthenware, the iron, the brass, the silver, the gold, were ground to powder, and 
became as chaff from the summer threshing-floor; and the violence of the wind 
carried them away, and no place was found for them: and the Stone which had 
smitten the image became a great Mountain, and filled all the earth. This is the dream; 
and we will tell the interpretation thereof before the king. The God of heaven shall 
set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed: and His kingdom shall not be left to 
another people, but it shall beat to pieces and grind to powder all other kingdoms, 
and it shall stand forever. Whereas thou sawest that a Stone was cut out of a 
mountain without the aid of men's hands, and It beat to pieces the earthenware, the 
iron, the brass, the silver, the gold; the great God hath made known to the king what 
must happen hereafter: and the dream is true, and the interpretation thereof sure.  
Then the reader chanteth this Troparion, in Tone VI:  
Thou hast shone forth from the Virgin, O Christ, Thou noetic Sun of 
righteousness, and the star showed Thee, the Uncontainable One, contained within 

--- PAGE 6 ---
the cave. Thou didst lead the magi to worship Thee. And with them we magnify 
Thee: O Bestower of life, glory be to Thee!  
Verse: The Lord is King, He is clothed with majesty; the Lord is clothed with 
strength and He hath girt Himself. For He established the world which shall 
not be shaken. Thy throne is prepared of old; Thou art from everlasting.  
Thou didst lead the magi to worship Thee. And with them we magnify Thee: O 
Bestower of life, glory be to Thee!  
Verse: The rivers have lifted up, O Lord, the rivers have lifted up their voices. 
The rivers will lift up their waves, at the voices of many waters.  
Thou didst lead the magi to worship Thee. And with them we magnify Thee: O 
Bestower of life, glory be to Thee!  
Verse: Wonderful are the surgings of the sea, wonderful on high is the Lord. 
Thy testimonies are made very sure. Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, 
unto length of days.  
Thou didst lead the magi to worship Thee. And with them we magnify Thee: O 
Bestower of life, glory be to Thee!  
Glory ..., Thou didst lead the magi to worship Thee. And with them we magnify 
Thee: O Bestower of life, glory be to Thee!  
Both now ..., Thou didst lead the magi to worship Thee. And with them we 
magnify Thee: O Bestower of life, glory be to Thee!  
And the reader chanteth the Troparion again, in its entirety:  
Thou hast shone forth from the Virgin, O Christ, Thou noetic Sun of 
righteousness, and the star showed Thee, the Uncontainable One, contained within 
the cave. Thou didst lead the magi to worship Thee. And with them we magnify 
Thee: O Bestower of life, glory be to Thee!  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
A Child is born to us, and a Son is given to us, Whose government is upon His 
shoulder: and His name is called the Angel of great Counsel: for I will bring peace 
upon the princes, and health to Him. His government shall be great, and of His peace 
there is no end: it shall be upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to 
establish it, and to support it with judgment and with righteousness, from henceforth 
and forever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts shall perform this.  
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH  
The Lord again spake to Ahaz, saying: “Ask for thyself a sign of the Lord thy God, 
in the depth or in the height.” And Ahaz said: “I will not ask, neither will I tempt the 
Lord.” And Isaiah said: “Hear now, O house of David: Is it a little thing for you to 
contend with men? And how do ye contend against the Lord? Therefore the Lord 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Himself shall give you a sign: Behold, a Virgin shall conceive in the womb, and shall 
bring forth a Son, and they shall call His name Emmanuel. Butter and honey shall He 
eat, before He knoweth either to prefer evil, or choose the good. For before the Child 
shall know good or evil, He refuseth evil, to choose the good. And the Lord said to 
me: “Take to thyself a volume of a great new scroll, and write in it with a man's pen 
concerning the making of a rapid plunder of spoils; for it is near at hand. And make 
Me witnesses of faithful men: Uriah the priest and Zachariah the son of Barachiah.” 
And I went in to the prophetess; and she conceived, and bore a son. And the Lord 
said to me: “Call his name, Spoil quickly, Plunder speedily. For before the child shall 
know how to call his father or his mother. One shall take the power of Damascus and 
the spoils of Samaria before the king of the Assyrians.” God is with us! Know, ye 
nations, and be conquered; hearken ye, even to the ends of the earth: He conquered, 
after ye have strengthened yourselves; for even if ye should again strengthen 
yourselves, ye shall again be conquered. And whatsoever counsel ye take, the Lord 
shall bring it to naught; and whatsoever word ye shall speak, it shall not stand among 
you: for God is with us! 
Then, the Little Litany; and after the exclamation, the Trisagion.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: The Lord said unto Me: * Thou art My Son, this day 
have I begotten Thee.  
Verse: Ask of Me, and I will give Thee the nations for Thine inheritance, and 
the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 303 (HEB. 1: 1-12)  
Brethren: God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto 
the fathers by the prophets, Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, Whom 
He hath appointed heir of all things, by Whom also He made the worlds; Who being 
the brightness of His glory, and the express image of His Person, and upholding all 
things by the word of His power, when He had by Himself purged our sins, sat down 
on the right hand of the Majesty on high: Being made so much better than the angels, 
as He hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they. For unto which 
of the angels said He at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? 
And again, I will be to Him a Father, and He shall be to me a Son? And again, when 
He bringeth in the first-begotten into the world, He saith, And let all the angels of 
God worship Him. And of the angels He saith, Who maketh His angels spirits, and 
His ministers a flame of fire. But unto the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, is for 
ever and ever: a scepter of righteousness is the scepter of Thy kingdom. Thou hast 
loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed 
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And, Thou, Lord, in the beginning 
hast laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the works of Thine hands: 

--- PAGE 8 ---
They shall perish; but Thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as doth a garment; 
And as a vesture shalt Thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: but Thou art 
the same, and Thy years shall not fail.  
Alleluia, in Tone V: The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, 
until I make Thine enemies the footstool of Thy feet.  
Verse: A scepter of power shall the Lord send unto Thee out of Sion.  
Verse: From the womb before the morning-star have I begotten Thee.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 5 (LK. 2: 1-20)  
In those days, there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus that all the world 
should be taxed. (And this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of 
Syria) And all went to be taxed, every one into his own city. And Joseph also went up 
from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judaea, unto the city of David, which is 
called Bethlehem; (because he was of the house and lineage of David). To be taxed 
with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child. And so it was, that, while they 
were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered. And she 
brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him 
in a manger; because there was no room for them in the inn. And there were in the 
same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night. 
And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone 
round about them: and they were sore afraid. And the angel said unto them, Fear not: 
for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For 
unto you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And 
this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, 
lying in a manger. And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly 
host praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good 
will toward men. And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into 
heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and 
see this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us. And 
they came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger. 
And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying which was told them 
concerning this child. And all they that heard it wondered at those things which were 
told them by the shepherds. But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her 
heart. And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that 
they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.  
Then, the rest of the Liturgy of Saint Basil. Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant 
“In thee doth all creation rejoice ...”  
Communion Verse: Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the 
highest. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 After the dismissal of the Liturgy, the paraecclesiarch lighteth a candle and 
setteth it in the middle of the church. And the members of both choirs, 
standing together, chant aloud the Troparion & Kontakion of the feast: 
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Thy nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shone forth the light of knowledge upon 
the world; * for thereby they who worshiped the stars, * were instructed by a star, * to 
worship Thee the Son of righteousness, * and to know Thee the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Kontakion of the feast, in Tone III:  
Today the Virgin giveth birth to Him Who is transcendent in essence; * and the 
earth offereth a cave to Him Who is unapproachable. * Angels with shepherds give 
glory; * with a star the Magi do journey; * for our sake a young Child is born, Who is 
pre-eternal God. 
 
 When the chanting of the Kontakion is concluded, the Many Years is intoned 
for the civil, ecclesiastical and monastic authorities. The faithful then procede to 
eat a meal of food cooked with oil. Fish is not eaten, but we drink wine, giving 
thanks to God.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
AT GREAT COMPLINE  
When the Eve of the Nativity falleth on any day other than Saturday or Sunday, 
at the tenth hour of the night (i.e., 4 o'clock in the morning), a bell is tolled to 
announce the service, and then all the bells are rung. When the priest and 
deacon have vested, they begin the service as they do all the feasts of the Lord.  
The deacon saith: Bless, master!  
Priest: Blessed is our God ...,  
And while the priest censeth, we recite Great Compline from the beginning:  
Glory to Thee, O God, glory to Thee. O heavenly King ..., Trisagion through 
Our Father ..., and the rest. In due course we chant “God is with us! ...” with 
hymnody. In place of the usual Troparia (“Enlighten mine eyes ...” and the 
rest), we chant the Troparion of the feast.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
 Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. 
And instead of the Troparia “Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us ...,” 
we chant the Kontakion of the feast: 
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone III:  
Today the Virgin giveth birth to Him Who is transcendent in essence; * and the 
earth offereth a cave to Him Who is unapproachable. * Angels with shepherds give 
glory; * the Magi journey with a star; ** for our sake a young Child is born, Who is 
the pre-eternal God. 
After the Doxology “Glory to God in the highest ...,” we go forth to the exo-
narthex, chanting the Stichera of the Litiya, the composition of John the Monk, 
in Tone I: 
Heaven and earth are glad today, as the prophets said, and angels and mortals keep 
spiritual festival, for God hath appeared in the flesh, born of the Virgin, to those who 
sit in darkness and shadow: the cave and the manger have received Him; the 
shepherds proclaim the wonder; the magi from the East bring gifts to Bethlehem; and 
with our unworthy lips we offer Him the praise of the angels: Glory to God in the 
highest, and on earth peace! For the expectation of the nations hath come, and 
coming hath saved us from slavery to the enemy.  
Heaven and earth have now joined together today since Christ hath been born. 
Today God hath come to earth and man hath ascended to the heavens. Today He 
Who is invisible by nature is seen in the flesh for mankind's sake. Wherefore, 
exclaiming in glorification, let us cry out to Him: Glory to God in the highest, and on 
earth peace: for Thou hast given us Thine advent! O our Savior, glory be to Thee!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
“Glory to God in the highest!” is heard from the incorporeal ones in Bethlehem 
today, addressed to Him Who was well pleased to become Peace on earth. Now the 
Virgin hath become more spacious than the heavens, for Light hath shone forth upon 
the darkened and lifted up the lowly who chant with the angels: Glory to God in the 
highest!  
Beholding that which He had created according to His image and likeness 
corrupted by disobedience, Jesus descended, bowing down the heavens, and made 
His abode in the Virgin's womb without undergoing change, that in her He might 
restore Adam Who had become corrupt, yet crieth: Glory to Thine appearance, O my 
Redeemer and God!  
Glory ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone V:  
The magi, kings of Persia, manifestly recognizing the King of heaven Who was 
born on earth, arrived in Bethlehem, led by the radiant star, bearing choice gifts of 
gold, frankincense and myrrh; and falling down, they offered worship, for they beheld 
the Timeless One lying in the cave as a babe.  
Both now ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone VI:  
Today all the angels hold chorus in heaven, and mankind rejoices, and all creation 
leapeth for joy because of the Lord and Savior born in Bethlehem. For all the 
delusion of idolatry hath ceased, and Christ reigneth forever.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
A great and most glorious wonder is wrought today: A Virgin giveth birth, yet her 
womb suffereth no corruption! The Word is incarnate, yet is not separated from the 
Father! Angels give glory in company with shepherds; and with them we cry aloud: 
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward mankind!  
Verse: From the womb before the morning star have I begotten Thee. The 
Lord hath sworn and will not repent.  
In Tone III: Today the Virgin giveth birth to the Creator of all. Eden offereth a 
cave, and the star showeth forth Christ the Sun to those in darkness. The magi, 
illumined by faith, have offered homage with gifts, and the shepherds have beheld a 
wonder as the angels chant and say: Glory to God in the highest!  
Verse: The Lord said unto my Lord: * Sit Thou at My right hand.  
The composition of Anatolius: When the Lord Jesus was born in Bethlehem of 
Judea, magi, arriving from the East, worshipped God Who had become a man, and 
eagerly disclosing their treasures, they offered Him precious gifts: pure gold, as to the 
King of the ages; frankincense, as to the God of all; and myrrh to Him Who is 
immortal, as to one three days dead. Come, all ye nations, let us worship Him Who 
hath been born, that He may save our souls!  
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., the composition of John the Monk, in Tone IV:  
Rejoice, O Jerusalem! Hold festival, all ye who love Sion! Today the ancient bonds 
of Adam's condemnation have been loosed! Paradise hath been opened unto us! The 
serpent hath been destroyed! He who deceived our first mother of old hath now seen 
a woman become the Mother of the Creator! O the depths of the richness, wisdom 
and understanding of God! The vessel of sin which brought death upon all flesh hath 
become the beginning of salvation for the whole world because of the Theotokos! 
For the most perfect God hath been born of her as a babe, and He sealeth her 
virginity by His nativity. And loosing the bonds of sin by His swaddling-bands, He 
healeth Eve's pangs of labor through His becoming an infant! Let all creation then 
join chorus and leap up, for Christ hath come to restore it and to save our souls.  
Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
Thou didst make Thine abode within a cave, O Christ God. The manger received 
Thee, and shepherds and magi offered Thee homage. Then was the preaching of the 
prophets fulfilled, and the angelic hosts marveled, crying out and saying: Glory to Thy 
condescension, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind!  
Then: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant..., Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
 And the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
 Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. (Thrice) 
Then, Blessed be the name of the Lord ..., (Thrice), and Psalm 33:  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
 Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. (Thrice) 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
For our sake Thou wast laid in a manger of dumb beasts, O long-suffering Savior, 
having become a babe of Thine own will; and the shepherds hymned Thee with the 
angels, crying aloud: “Glory and praise to Christ our God, Who hath been born on 
earth and deified the nature of mortals!”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
O Theotokos, thou didst bear in thy womb, in the flesh, the one uncommingled 
Godhead of the Trinity, the pre-eternal and unapproachable One, Who is equally 
everlasting with the invisible Father. Thy grace hath shone forth in the world, O all- 
hymned one. Wherefore, we cry out unceasingly: Rejoice, O pure Virgin Mother!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify Thee, O Christ, Bestower of life, 
Who for our sake hast now been born in the flesh of the most pure Virgin 
Mary who knew not wedlock.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Shout with jubilation unto the Lord all the earth. 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
Come, ye faithful, let us behold where Christ was born, and let us follow whither 
the star goeth with the magi, the kings of the East. There the angels unceasingly hymn 
Him, and the shepherds play a fitting song on the pipes, singing: Glory in the highest 
to Him Who hath been born of the Virgin Theotokos in a cave in Bethlehem of 
Judea!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Song of Ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: From the womb before the morning-star have I 
begotten Thee. * The Lord hath sworn and will not repent.  
Verse: The Lord said to my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make 
Thine enemies the footstool of Thy feet.  
Let every breath praise the Lord. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW, § 2 (MT 1: 18-25)  
The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When, as His Mother, Mary, was 
espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy 
Spirit. Then Joseph, her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a 
public example, was minded to put her away privately. But while he thought on these 
things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying: «Joseph, 
thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary, thy wife; for that which is 
conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit. And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shalt 
call His name Jesus; for He shall save His people from their sins. Now all this was 
done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, 
saying: “Behold, the Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they 
shall call His name Emmanuel, (which, being interpreted, is: God is with us.) Then 
Joseph, being raised from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and 
took unto him his wife, and knew her not until she had brought forth her first-born 
Son; and he called His name Jesus.  
After Psalm 50, instead of “Through the prayers ...,” we chant:  
Glory ..., All things are filled with joy today! Christ hath been born of the 
Virgin!  
Both now ..., All things are filled with joy today! Christ hath been born in 
Bethlehem!  
Then the Sticheron: “Have mercy on me, O God ...”:  
Then this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace! Today Bethlehem receiveth Him 
Who is ever seated with the Father. Today the angels glorify as God the Babe Who 
was born. Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will among men!  
Two canons, the Irmos of each being chanted twice, and the Troparia repeated to 
make up the number 12.  
ODE I  
Canon I, the acrostic whereof is: “Having become man, Christ remaineth God as He 
was before”, the composition of Cosmas of Maiuma, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye 
Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the Lord, * 
and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
That which, though fashioned in the image of God, became wholly corrupt 
through transgression, having fallen away from the divine life, hath the wise Creator 
restored, for He hath been glorified.  
The Creator, seeing mankind, whom He had fashioned with His own hands, 
perishing, descended, bowing down the heavens, and becoming truly incarnate, taking 
upon Himself all the essence of man, through the pure and divine Virgin, for He hath 
been glorified.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Christ God, being the wisdom, Word, Power, Effulgence and Son of the Father, 
having made Himself unknowable to the powers of heaven, and even more so to 
those on earth, hath become a man and restored us, for He hath been glorified.  
Canon II, the composition of John of Damascus, in Tone I: 
Irmos: The Master saved His people by working a wonder, * making solid the 
watery waves of the sea of old; * and having willingly been born of the Virgin, 
* He hath set before us a path leading to heaven. * Let us glorify Him Who is 
by nature equal to both the Father and mankind.  
Thy sacred womb, which was clearly depicted by the bush which burned without 
being consumed, bore the Word, mingling God with the form of a mortal man and 
loosing the wretched womb of Eve from the ancient bitter curse. Let us glorify Him, 
O ye mortals!  
The star plainly showed to the magi, Thee the merciful Word, existent before the 
sun, Who came to bring an end to sin, and wast wrapped in swaddling bands in a 
meager cave, and rejoicing, they beheld the very Lord Himself, as a man.  
Katavasia: The first choir chanteth the Irmos of Canon I, whereupon the second 
choir chanteth the Irmos of Canon II:  
ODE III 
Canon I  
Irmos: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before all 
ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * to 
Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art Thou, 
O Lord. 
Adam, fashioned of dust, partook of a higher inspiration, yet he was led to stumble 
into corruption through a woman's deceit, seeing Christ born from a woman, he cried 
aloud: O Thou Who for my sake hast become like me, holy art Thou O Lord!  
O Lord Christ, mingling with clay, Thou didst conform Thyself thereto, imparting 
Thy divine essence to vile flesh by participating therein, becoming earthly, yet 
remaining God, and lifting up our horn: holy art Thou O Lord!  
O Bethlehem, thou king of the princes of Judah, be glad! For Christ Who doth 
shepherd Israel, seated on the shoulders of the cherubim, hath manifestly come forth 
from thee, and, having lifted up our horn, hath established His reign over all.  
Canon II.  
Irmos: Look upon the hymns of Thy servants, O Benefactor, * and humble the 
vaunted pride of the enemy; * bearing far above sin those who hymn Thee * 
making them unshakably firm by the foundation of faith, * O Thou Good One 
Who seest all.  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Having been deemed worthy to behold the supremely rich Offspring of the most 
pure Bride, which passeth understanding, the chorus of shepherds bowed down in 
awe-filled homage; and the ranks of incorporeal beings hymned Christ the King, Who 
became incarnate without seed.  
In His tender compassion, He Who reigneth over the heights of heaven became 
like us through the unwedded Maiden; the Word Who before was immaterial, was 
later clothed in material flesh, that He might draw to Himself the first-formed man, 
who had fallen.  
Sessional Hymn of the feast, in Tone VIII:  
The first-fruits of the nations hath heaven brought to Thee Who liest as a babe in 
the manger, summoning the magi by the star; and they were in awe to see, not 
scepters or thrones, but utter poverty. For what is more lowly than a cave? What is 
more humble than the swaddling bands, wherein the richness of Thy divinity hath 
shone forth? O Lord, glory be to Thee!  
ODE IV 
Canon I  
Irmos: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, * 
O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 
O Christ Thou art He Whom Jacob foretold of old, as the expectation of the 
nations, and Who hath shone forth from the tribe of Judah, and come to overthrow 
the power of Damascus and the plunder of Samaria, transforming falsehood into 
godly faith. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Shining forth, a Star out of Jacob, O Master, Thou hast filled with joy the wise 
observers of the stars, the followers of the words of Balaam, the soothsayer of old; 
manifestly receiving the first-fruits of the nations who have entered in to worship 
Thee. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Like drops of rain falling upon the earth, and like the gentle rain upon the fleece, 
O Christ, Thou hast descended upon the womb of the Virgin. Ethiopia and Tharsis, 
the islands of Arabia and Saba, and they who rule all the land of the Medes, have 
fallen down before Thee, O Savior. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Canon II  
Irmos: The renewal of the human race was hymned of old * and proclaimed 
beforehand by the Prophet Habbakuk, * who having ineffably been deemed 
worthy to behold in image; * the Word coming forth from the mountain, * the 
Virgin, as a little Babe, * for the restoration of the people.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Willingly receiving flesh from the Virgin, the Most High hath issued forth as equal 
to men, to cleanse us of the venom of the serpent's head, leading all from the sunless 
gates of Hades to life-bearing light, in that He is God.  
The nations who of old were overwhelmed by corruption, having escaped the 
greatest enemy, lift up their hands with hymns of praise, honoring the one Christ as 
Benefactor, Who hath come to us in His mercy.  
Having sprouted forth from the root of Jesse, O Virgin, thou didst transcend the 
laws of human nature, giving birth to the pre-eternal Word of the Father, in that He 
Himself was well pleased to pass through thy sealed womb in His strange abasement.  
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
Submitting to be recorded among Thy servants at the command of Caesar, Thou 
hast freed us slaves from the enemy and sin, O Christ; and having abased Thyself for 
us, Thou hast rendered our nature divine through Thy union and sharing therein.  
Behold, the Virgin hath conceived in her womb, as was foretold of old, and hath 
given birth to God made man, yet remaineth a virgin. O ye sinners who for her sake 
have been reconciled with God, faithfully hymn her as the true Theotokos.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Christ Who art our cleansing, come unto us, * who out of the night of 
the deeds of gloomy delusion, * valiantly hymn Thee as a Benefactor, * grant-
ing us an expeditious path, * ascending upon which we find glory.  
By His coming in the flesh the Master hath again cut down the cruel enmity 
directed against us, that He might destroy the soul-destroying ruler, uniting the world 
with the immaterial beings, making the Begetter accessible to creation.  
The people who of old were darkened have finally seen the light of the radiance of 
the Most High; and the Son bringeth the nations to the Father as an inheritance, 
bestowing ineffable grace where sin once flourished exceedingly. 
ODE VI 
Canon I 
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Christ our God, Whom the Father begat before the morning star, hath come forth 
incarnate, from a womb. He Who ruleth over the most pure powers lieth in a manger 
of dumb beasts and is wrapped in swaddling-bands, loosing the knotted bonds of 
transgressions.  
A young Child, a Son, is born of the clay of Adam and given to the faithful: He is 
the Father and Prince of the age to come, and is called the Angel of great Counsel. 
He is the mighty God Who exerciseth dominion over all creation.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Dwelling in the uttermost depths of the sea, * Jonah besought Thee to 
come and still the tempest; * and I, pierced by the arrow of the tyrant, * chant 
unto Thee, O Christ * Thou Destroyer of evil, * do Thou come quickly unto 
my slothfulness!  
God the Word, Who from the beginning was with God, now strengtheneth that 
which of old was seen to be weakened, that he may preserve that which He Himself 
shares with us, straightway showing it to be free from the passions.  
He Who dwelleth in light, and, contrary to His dignity, hath now been well pleased 
to dwell in a manger, cometh forth from the loins of Abraham for the sake of us who 
have fallen into the deep darkness of transgressions, that, for the salvation of 
mankind, He might raise up His fallen children.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Today the Virgin giveth birth to Him Who is transcendent in essence; * and the 
earth offereth a cave to Him Who is unapproachable. * Angels with shepherds give 
glory; * the Magi journey with a star; ** for our sake a young Child is born, Who is 
the pre-eternal God. 
Ikos: Bethlehem hath opened Eden! We have found Joy in a secret place: come, 
and let us receive the things of paradise within the cave. There the unwatered Root 
hath blossomed, bearing forgiveness as its fruit. There an unfailing Wellspring hath 
been found, from whence David of old longed to drink. There the Virgin hath given 
birth to the Babe, straightway quenching the thirst of Adam and David. Wherefore, 
let us hasten to this place where now is born a young Child, the pre-eternal God!  
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children brought 
up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing in the 
midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
 The piping shepherds received an awesome vision of light; for the glory of the 
Lord shone round about them, and an angel cried aloud: Sing ye, for Christ, the 
blessed God of your fathers, is born!  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Suddenly, at the voice of the angel, the armies of heaven cried out: “Glory to God 
in the highest, and on earth peace, good-will among men! Christ hath shone forth: the 
blessed God of your fathers!”  
“What words are these?” said the shepherds; “Let us go and see what hath become 
of the blessed Christ!” And hastening to Bethlehem, they bowed down in worship 
with the Theotokos, chanting: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”  
Canon II  
Irmos: Captured by the love of the King of all, * the children reviled the 
uncontrollable rage and ungodly blasphemies of the tyrant, * and the great fire 
submitted to them as they spake unto the Master saying: * Blessed art Thou 
throughout the ages  
The furnace which had been raised to a sevenfold heat savagely burnt the minions, 
but spared the youths who were wholly consumed with the fear of God; for the flame 
crowned them when the Lord freely granted them dew for the sake of their piety.  
O Christ our Helper, using Thine ineffable incarnation as a bulwark of defense, 
and having taken on our form, Thou hast put to shame the adversary of mankind, 
bearing the richness of Thy deification, which we hope for, having fallen from the 
heights into the darkness of the uttermost depths.  
Thou hast most mightily cast down sin, which is exalted in evil without restraint, 
frenzied from the perversion of the world; and those whom it formerly attracted hast 
Thou saved from its snares today, having become incarnate of Thine own will, O 
Benefactor.  
ODE VIII 
Canon I 
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so the 
fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin's womb * into which it had 
descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation bless the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The daughter of Babylon carried off the captive children of David from Sion to 
herself; but now she hath sent her own children, the magi bearing gifts, to the God-
pleasing daughter of David, who prayeth. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all 
creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
 The harps refused to play their sad songs, for the children of Sion would not sing 
in a strange land; but Christ, shining forth in Bethlehem, hath destroyed all the 
delusion of Babylon and her musical instruments. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: 
Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Babylon received the plunder of the kingdom of Sion and its captive riches; but 
Christ hath drawn its treasures to His Sion, guiding the star-observing kings by a star. 
Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Canon II  
Irmos: The children who in the time of the Old Covenant * were cast into the 
fire, * prefigured the unconsumed womb of the Maiden, * which hath supra-
naturally given birth yet remaineth sealed; * and both wondrously working as a 
single miracle * moveth the people to hymn the Grace of each. 
Mankind, having fled the destructive delusion of becoming divine, unceasingly 
hymneth the Word Who hath abased Himself, and like the youths and all creation, 
with fear and trembling offereth meager praise, being corrupt, but wisely enduring.  
Thou hast come, O Restoration of the nations, to bring lost human nature back 
from the hills of the wilderness to the flowered pastures; that Thou mightest 
extinguish the violent power of the manslayer, having by providence appeared as God 
and man.  
At ODE IX, the brethren light the candles and lamps. 
 We do not chant the Magnificat, but chant instead the refrain of the feast: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable and more glorious than the armies on high!  
ODE IX 
Canon I  
Irmos: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is heaven; * 
the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in which Christ 
God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and magnify. 
Then the second choir chanteth the same refrain, and the irmos. To each of the 
remaining 6 refrains we assign a Troparion.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, God Who was born in the flesh of the Virgin.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the King Who was born in the cave.  
The magi beheld the excellent course of the strange star which had newly 
appeared, illumining the heavens and marking the birth of Christ the King in 
Bethlehem, for our salvation.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, God Who is worshipped by the magi.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, Him Who was proclaimed to the magi by the star.  
The star revealed the newborn infant King to the magi who said: “Where is He, 
for we have come to worship Him?” But Herod who fought against God, enraged, 
was troubled, seeking to slay the Christ.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the only pure Virgin Theotokos, who gave birth 
to Christ the King.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Refrain: The magi and shepherds have come to worship Christ Who hath been 
born in the city of Bethlehem.  
Herod inquired concerning the time of the star, following whose course the magi 
worshipped Christ with gifts in Bethlehem; but, guided thereby to their homeland, 
they left the cruel murderer of the infants behind in mockery.  
Then the first choir chanteth the refrain of Canon II:  
Refrain: Today the Virgin giveth birth to the Master within the cave.  
Irmos: From fear it may be easier, * for us to prefer silence, * for though not 
fraught with danger, O Virgin, * it is difficult to fashion hymns fittingly 
wrought for thee. * Yet, O Mother, grant us the power to chant in such a way, 
* insofar as it is our will.  
The second choir chanteth the refrain 
Refrain: Today the Master is born as a babe of the Virgin Mother.  
And it likewise chanteth the Irmos: 
Irmos: From fear it may be easier ..., 
Then the refrains are chanted with the Troparia, as follows:  
Refrain: Today the shepherds see the Savior wrapped in swaddling-bands and 
lying in a manger.  
Refrain: Today the Master, Who is intangible is wrapped in rags as a babe.  
Refrain: Today all creation rejoiceth and is glad, for Christ is born of the Virgin 
Maiden.  
O pure Mother, having beheld the indistinct images and dim shadows of the Word 
Who hath newly appeared through the closed gates, but mindful now of His true 
radiance, we bless thy womb as is meet.  
Refrain: The heavenly hosts proclaim to the world the Savior, Lord and Master 
Who hath been born.  
Instead of Glory ..., Magnify, O my soul, the might of the indivisible Godhead 
in three Hypostases!  
Instead of Both now ..., Magnify, O my soul, her who hath delivered us from 
the curse.  
Having attained their desire and been deemed worthy to see the advent of God, 
the people who delight in Christ are now consoled by this, insofar as thou bestowest 
life-bearing grace to those who worship this glory, O pure Virgin.  
Then both choirs, having come down together, chant the first refrain of the feast, and 
the Irmos of Canon I, and afterward the first refrain of Canon II, and its Irmos. And 
all bow down. As follows: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable and more glorious than the armies on high!  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Katavasia I: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is 
heaven; * the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in 
which Christ God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and 
magnify. 
Refrain: Today the Master is born as a babe of the Virgin Mother.  
Katavasia II: From fear it may be easier, * for us to prefer silence, * for though 
not fraught with danger, O Virgin, * it is difficult to fashion hymns fittingly 
wrought for thee. * Yet, O Mother, grant us the power to chant in such a way, 
* insofar as it is our will.  
Exapostilarion of the feast:  
From on high our Savior, the Dayspring of the East hath visited us and we who 
are in shadowy darkness have truly found Him; for the Lord hath been born from the 
Virgin. (Thrice)  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, by Andrew of Jerusalem, in Tone IV: 
Be glad, O ye righteous! Rejoice, O heavens! Leap up, ye mountains for Christ 
hath been born! The Virgin sitteth, holding the incarnate Word of God in her bosom, 
like unto the cherubim. Shepherds marvel at Him Who hath been born; the magi 
offer gifts to the Master; and the angels say, chanting: O unapproachable Lord, glory 
be to Thee!  
O Virgin Theotokos having given birth to the Savior, thou hast abolished the 
ancient curse of Eve; for thou didst become the Mother of Him in Whom the Father 
is well pleased bearing the incarnate Word of God in thy bosom. This mystery is not 
subject to testing but with faith alone we all glorify it, crying out with thee and saying: 
O ineffable Lord, glory be to Thee!  
Come let us hymn the Mother of the Savior, who even after giving birth wast 
revealed to be a Virgin. Rejoice O animate city of God the King, wherein Christ 
making His abode, hath wrought salvation! We chant with Gabriel and offer up glory 
with the magi saying: O Theotokos, entreat Him Who became incarnate from thee, 
that we be saved!  
The Father was well pleased; the Word became flesh; the Virgin gave birth to God 
incarnate; the star proclaimeth Him; the magi offer Him worship; the shepherds 
marvel, and creation rejoiceth.  
Glory ..., the composition of Germanus, in Tone VI: 
When the time arrived for Thy coming to earth, the first census of the whole 
world took place, Thou didst then make ready to enroll the names of those who 
believed in Thy nativity. For this cause, Caesar proclaimed such a decree; for Thy 
timeless and eternal kingdom was restored by Thy birth. Wherefore we offer unto 
Thee, as that surpassing our tribute payment, the abundant wealth of Orthodox 
theology, as to the God and Savior of our souls.  

--- PAGE 23 ---
Both now ..., by John the Monk, in Tone II:  
Today Christ is born from the Virgin in Bethlehem! Today the Beginningless One 
beginneth to be, and the Word assumeth flesh! The hosts of heaven rejoice, and on 
earth mankind is gladdened! The magi offer gifts to the Master, and the shepherds 
marvel at Him Who hath been born! And we cry out unceasingly: Glory to God in 
the highest, and on earth peace, good will among all peoples!  
Great Doxology. Trisagion through Our Father ..., Troparion of the feast. Litanies. 
Dismissal.  
And the superior anointeth the faithful with holy oil from the holy lamp which 
burneth by the icon of the feast, while we chant the Sticheron of the feast. First 
Hour, and final dismissal.  
 
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
AT LITURGY  
THE FIRST ANTIPHON 
Verse I: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, I will tell of all Thy 
wonders. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Verse II: In the Council of the upright and in the congregation, great are the works 
of the Lord. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Verse III: Sought out in all the things that He hath willed. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Verse IV: Confession and majesty are His works, and His righteousness abideth 
unto ages of ages. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
 THE SECOND ANTIPHON 
 Verse I: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His commandments shall he 
greatly delight. 
Refrain: O Son of God Who wast born of the Virgin, save us who sing to 
Thee: Alleluia. 
Verse II: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth; the generation of the upright 
shall be blessed. 
Refrain: O Son of God Who wast born of the Virgin, save us who sing to 
Thee: Alleluia. 
Verse III: Glory and riches shall be in his house, and his righteousness abideth 
unto ages of ages. 
Refrain: O Son of God Who wast born of the Virgin, save us who sing to 
Thee: Alleluia. 
Verse IV: There hath risen up in darkness a light for the upright; he is merciful and 
compassionate and righteous. 
Refrain: O Son of God Who wast born of the Virgin, save us who sing to 
Thee: Alleluia. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. 
O only-begotten Son and Word of God, Who art immortal, yet didst deign for our 
salvation to be incarnate of the Holy Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, and without 
change didst become man, and was crucified, O Christ God, trampling down death 
by death. Thou Who art one of the Holy Trinity, glorified with the Father and the 
Holy Spirit, save us. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
 THE THIRD ANTIPHON 
Reader: Verse I: The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand. 
Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Verse II: Until I make Thine enemies the footstool of Thy feet.  
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Verse III: A scepter of power shall the Lord send unto Thee out of Zion; rule 
Thou in the midst of Thine enemies. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Verse IV: With Thee is dominion in the day of Thy power, in the splendor of 
Thy saints. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Instead of “O come let us worship ...,” the Choir chanteth the entry verse (Introit): 
Introit: From the womb before the morning star have I begotten Thee. The 
Lord hath sworn and will not repent: Thou art a priest forever, after the order 
of Melchizedek. Amen. 
And immediately after that, the choir chanteth the Troparion of the feast again. 
 Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Kontakion of the Feast, in Tone III: 
Today the Virgin giveth birth to Him Who is transcendent in essence; * and the 
earth offereth a cave to Him Who is unapproachable. * Angels with shepherds give 
glory; * the Magi journey with a star; ** for our sake a young Child is born, Who is 
the pre-eternal God. 
Instead of the Trisagion: As many as have been baptized into Christ have put 
on Christ. Alleluia. (Thrice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Have put on Christ. Alleluia. 
As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Alleluia. 
  
 

--- PAGE 26 ---
The Prokeimenon, in the VIII Tone: Let all the earth worship Thee and chant 
unto Thee; * let them chant unto Thy name, O Most High. 
Verse: Shout with jubilation unto the Lord all the earth; chant ye unto His 
name, give glory in praise of Him. 
 
 
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, § 209 (GAL. 4: 4-7) 
Brethren: When the fullness of time was come God sent forth His Son, made of a 
woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might 
receive the adoption of sons. And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit 
of His Son into your hearts crying: Abba, Father! Wherefore, thou art no more a 
servant, but a son; and if a son then an heir of God through Christ. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands.  
Verse: Day unto day poureth forth speech, and night unto night proclaimeth 
knowledge. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 3 (MT. 2: 1-12)  
When Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, 
there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem, Saying, Where is He that is born 
King of the Jews? For we have seen His star in the east, and are come to worship 
Him. When Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem 
with him. And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people 
together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born. And they said unto 
him, In Bethlehem of Judea: for thus it is written by the prophet. And thou 
Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, art not the least among the princes of Judah: for out 
of thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule My people Israel. Then Herod, when he 
had privily called the wise men, enquired of them diligently what time the star 
appeared. And he sent them to Bethlehem and said, Go and search diligently for the 
young Child; and when ye have found Him, bring me word again, that I may come 
and worship Him also. When they had heard the king, they departed; and, 1O, the 
star, which they saw in the east, went before them, till it came and stood over where 
the young Child was. When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. 
And when they were come into the house, they saw the young Child with Mary His 
mother, and fell down and worshipped Him: And when they had opened their 
treasures, they presented unto Him gifts; gold, and frankincense and myrrh. And 
being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they departed 
into their own country another way.  
 

--- PAGE 27 ---
In place of “ Meet it is” we chant the following  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable and more glorious than the armies on high!  
Katavasia I: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is 
heaven; * the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in 
which Christ God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and 
magnify. 
 
Communion Verse: The Lord hath sent redemption unto His people.  
 
On this feast the faithful eat sumptuously. Even if the feast of the Nativity of 
Christ fall on a Wednesday or a Friday, layfolk are permitted to eat meat, and 
monastics are allowed to eat cheese and eggs. It is permitted to eat these foods 
every day: between the feast of the Nativity and the Eve of Holy Theophany.  
 
