--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 22nd DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER  
FORE FEAST OF THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY GREAT-MARTYR ANASTASIA, THE 
DELIVERER FROM BONDAGE  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the forefeast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Beholding the condescension of God, * all the earth is glad: * the magi bring Me 
gifts; * the sky proclaimeth it from on high with a star; * the angels render glory; * the 
shepherds, piping, are amazed; * the manger holdeth Me like a fiery throne. ** Seeing 
these things, O Mother, rejoice!  
O my beginningless Son, * ineffable Offspring * of the beginningless Father, * clad 
in the likeness of mine aspect, * Thou hast come, the Light of revelation for the 
nations. * For Thou comest to make humanity rich * which became poor through the 
poverty in which Thou art clad. ** I hymn Thy tender compassion, O Lord!  
Beholding Me as a Babe * resting in thine arms, O Mother, * be thou glad; for I 
have come * to take away all the pain of Adam, * which he suffered because of the 
evil counsel of the serpent, * tasting of the tree, finding himself removed * from the 
sweetness of paradise, ** and prey to corruption.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy great-martyr, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we call you ...”: 
Disdaining the beautiful things of the world * and sparing not thy flesh for them, 
O honored one, * thou didst commit thyself wholly * to minister to the saints in a 
godly manner, * patiently tending their sores * amid their sufferings, * and most 
wisely urging them with thy wise words * to be courageous. ** Pray thou, that our 
souls be saved.  
Thou didst dispense thy transitory wealth * to those in need, O honored one, * 
fervently seeking those things which are eternal, * and following the divine steps of 
Christ * with undaunted faith, thou didst cry out: * “I have been wounded with desire 
for Thee, O Immortal One! * Show me to be a partaker * Of the divine glory of Thy 
sufferings, ** as Thou art compassionate and the Lover of mankind.  
Having endured a blessed suffering, O Anastasia, * thou dost truly ever cleanse 
our sufferings * with the outpourings of thy healings. * Wherefore, we call thee 
blessed, as is meet; * and we lovingly celebrate * thy memory, * bowing down before 
thy relics, * and drawing forth sanctity therefrom. ** Pray thou, that our souls be 
saved.  
Glory ..., of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II: 
Having suffered at the tribunal, thou didst receive the gift of resurrection, O all-
praised Anastasia. For, routing a multitude of demons, thou didst commit them to the 
sea, O right-wondrous spiritual athlete and martyr.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Adorn thyself, O Bethlehem! Sing thou, O city of Sion! Rejoice, O wilderness, 
betrothing thyself beforehand unto joy! For the star shall come to Bethlehem, 
announcing Christ Who is to be born; the cave shall receive Him Whom nothing can 
contain; and the manger is ready to accept Life everlasting. To Him let us all chant 
and cry aloud: Save Thou our souls, O Jesus our God, Who hast become incarnate 
for our sake!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Christ cometh * to crush the evil one, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and to 
loose those in bonds. ** Let us go forth to meet Him!  
Verse: God shall come out of Theman, * and the Holy One out of a mountain 
overshadowed and densely wooded.  
Dance, O Sion! * Adorn thyself well, O cave! * Make ready, O Bethlehem! * For, 
lo! the Virgin cometh ** to give birth unto the Christ!  
Verse: O Lord, I have heard Thy report, and I was afraid; * O Lord, I 
considered Thy works, and I was stricken with awe.  
Sing praise and glory, * ye nations of the gentiles! * Ye magi, make haste * in 
earnest, bearing gifts, ** while the shepherds pipe.  
Glory ..., of the holy great-martyr, the composition of the Studite, in Tone IV: 
As the namesake of the life-bearing resurrection of Christ, thou didst most 
excellently fulfill thy calling with an honorable life, strengthening thy nature. 
Acquiring courage through wisdom, thou didst weave for thyself a robe dyed purple 
in thy blood; and, bearing the Cross royally, like a scepter, thou dost reign with God 
the Savior, O all-blessed Anastasia. Him do thou entreat, that He illumine us with His 
divine glory.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Rejoice, O Isaiah, receiving the word of God; and prophesy unto the maiden 
Mary, that she is the bush which burned with fire yet was not consumed by the 
radiance of the Divinity. Adorn thyself well, O Bethlehem! Open wide thy gates, O 
Eden! Ye magi, come see Salvation wrapped and laid in the manger! The star of the 
life-giving Lord Who saveth our race hath shone upon the roof of the cave.  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Anastasia O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the forefeast, in the same tone:  
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT COMPLINE  
Canon of the forefeast, the acrostic whereof is: “I chant the hymn of great Thursday”, 
in Tone VI; The Irmos is chanted twice, followed by 6 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Irmos: The Red Sea was parted by a blow from the staff of Moses, * and the 
deep with its waves became dry, * becoming a path to the unarmed people of 
Israel, * but to the fully armed ones it became a grave. * A hymn of Praise 
well-pleasing to God was sung: * gloriously hath Christ our God been 
glorified. 
The all-accomplishing and omnipotent Life, the infinite Wisdom of God, hath 
made for Himself a habitation of the pure Mother who kneweth not a man; for, clad 
in a bodily dwelling, Christ our God hath gloriously glorified Himself.  
Mystically leading forth the magi, the Wisdom of God calleth forth the first-fruits 
from among the nations; and to nurture mystically the irrational ones He layeth a 
mystical meal in the manger of dumb beasts. And with the star shining before them 
they make haste thereto, journeying with gifts.  
Let us now listen to the words of the prophets which are fulfilled by the Spirit; for 
the Virgin, conceiving in her womb, cometh forth to give birth to Him Who 
transcendeth being. As a Babe borne in arms have the heavens shown Him forth to 
the magi, the angels to the shepherds.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord Thou art the God and Creator of all, * becoming poor, Thou 
hast united Thyself * without passion to a creature, * and as a Babe borne in 
the flesh, * art worshiped in a poor manger, crying aloud: * Eat ye My body, * 
and ye shall be firmly established in the faith. 
Exhibiting beforehand the madness of Pilate, Herod is eager to quickly slay Christ 
Who is come now to shed His own blood as deliverance for the world. Wherefore, in 
his murderous savagery he slaughtered a multitude of infants.  
The foolish man hath said: There is no God. And he who is filled with utter 
insanity is sick with lust for the murder of the Messiah. Having fallen low in his 
audacious intent, he armed himself fully for the murder of innocent babes and hath 
defiled the earth with their blood. 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Foreseeing Thine ineffable mystery, O Christ, * the Prophet cried 
aloud: * ‘Thou hast manifested the power of  Thy love, O merciful Father, * for 
in Thy goodness * Thou hast sent Thine only-begotten Son * to cleanse the 
world from sin.” 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 
Descending upon the fleece like rain, and upon her who gaveth birth to Thee like 
dew upon the ground, O Lord, in Thy mercy Thou comest to be born and to dwell 
with us; for the Father hath sent Thee, the Only-begotten, into the world for its 
cleansing.  
Thou sharest in human flesh through the seed of Abraham, O Christ, and comest 
to bestow grace upon grace and to save Thine image and render it incorrupt; for the 
Father hath sent Thee, the Only-begotten, into the world for its cleansing.  
The new Drink, which of old David desired to partake, thirsting after it, cometh 
forth to be poured out in the cave of Bethlehem, quenching the long-standing thirst 
of both Adam and David, from whom Christ is born in the flesh.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Bound with the bond of love, * the apostles, having offered themselves 
to Christ, the Master of all, * had their comely feet cleansed by Him, * 
proclaiming peace unto all.  
The Wisdom of God, Who holdeth the unrestrainable waters in their chambers, 
Who bridleth the deep and restraineth the seas, descending like rain upon a fleece, 
made His abode within the Virgin's womb.  
By a star Christ calleth to wisdom the magi, disciples of the magus Balaam; He 
Who clotheth heaven with clouds is wrapped in swaddling bands; He before Whom 
the cherubim tremble lieth in a manger; and He Who filleth all things is contained by 
a cave.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have encompassed me; * and its stormy 
waves I can endure no more, * wherefore like Jonah I cry out to Thee, O 
Master: * Lead me up from corruption. 
The heavens, knowing Thee to be the Lord, now declare Thy glory with a star, O 
Savior, calling forth the magi with gifts to come to acknowledge Thee and to accord 
Thee divine worship.  
Let him who putteth away defilement open wide, and thus, pure, let him touch 
Christ, the pure Infant Who lieth in the manger and cleanseth the depths of men's 
hearts.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In Babylon the Children feared not the fiery furnace; * but cast into the 
midst of the flames * they were bedewed and sang: * ‘O Lord God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou.’ 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
His mental faculties disturbed, Herod, foreseeing dire things, was shaken, and 
sought an opportunity to slay the God of life and death, Who is the Lord of all and 
the Master of creation.  
As many of you as are friends of Christ, flee ye with Him Who is escaping to 
Egypt; and, worshiping Him as is meet, cry out in a godly manner and glorify Him 
together.  
He who is not with Me worketh against Me, saith Christ; he who doth not gather 
with Me is like unto one who scattereth. Wherefore, let us stand in awe of His 
descent unto the flesh.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Suffering affliction for the sake of the laws of their fathers, * the blessed 
Children in Babylon * scorned the foolish decree of the King. * Standing 
together in the midst of the flames, they remained unharmed, * and sang a 
song fitting for almighty God: * ‘O ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.’ 
O ye divinely wise who have come to the Word in Bethlehem, let us gaze with 
wonder with the angels and shepherds, sending up glory to God in the highest, Who 
bestoweth His good will and peace upon mankind, and let us supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages.  
Holding fast to the law of love, let us embrace the intent of brotherly love, 
establishing peace one with another, and oneness of mind; for Christ, the Bestower of 
peace, cometh, bringing peace to all things and saving those who cry out: Hymn the 
Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Instead of Glory ..., We bless Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord ...,  
With false words the iniquitous Herod payeth homage to the new-born Christ, 
telling the magi to render homage on his behalf in his name; but he was not ashamed 
to persecute the coming Messiah, neither did he have pity on the infants; and he knew 
not how to cry out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages!  
Then both choirs chant together: We praise, we bless, and we worship the 
Lord: praising the Lord and exalting Him supremely unto the ages!  
And we chant again the Irmos: Suffering affliction for the sake of the laws  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Having before, in the lowly cave, * delighted in the hospitality of the 
Master * and the feast of immortality, * let us now hasten to the Jordan, * and 
behold the strange mystery * which hath brought down the effulgence from on 
high.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
“Come and seek out the Babe; and when ye shall find Him, tell me quickly of 
Him,” Herod said to the chief among the magi, devising deceit in his heart; but the 
deceiver was foiled, plotting his iniquity in vain.  
The Creator, Who is begotten of the Father from before all ages, is born of the 
Virgin, being the Wisdom, Word and Power of God. Wherefore, knowing Him to be 
the only Son, we magnify the God-man.  
Thou didst reveal Thyself to be a man in essence, not in semblance, O Savior, and, 
through the nature which Thou didst take upon Thyself, Thou didst show Thyself to 
be God. Wherefore, honoring Thy divine advent through the Virgin, we magnify 
Thee.  
And we chant again the Irmos: Having before, in the lowly cave ... 
And a prostration. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”: 
Creation hath illumined itself, for, in His ineffable mercy, the Creator cometh 
forth to be born in the cave. Ye shepherds, come together with haste, beholding the 
awesome wonder. Come, ye magi bearing gifts in your arms, say: Glory to the new-
born King! Glory to Him Who hath led us on our journey! We worship Him in the 
flesh as the King of all!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
All creation rejoiceth today in a godly manner; for Christ the Lord, the Son of 
God, is born of the pure Virgin, rendering the whole race of mankind immortal, and 
annulling the curse of our first mother Eve. Wherefore, let us offer hymnody unto 
our Benefactor.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Hope of the world ...”:  
Of old, the kings brought gold, myrrh and frankincense from Persia to the new-
born King and God; and now, celebrating with divine honor and wisdom the 
forefeast of His nativity with all our soul, we offer Him hope, faith and love, hymning 
the Virgin.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Hymning the Virgin who giveth birth to the pre-eternal Word, the righteous 
Joseph cried out: “I perceive thee to be the temple of the Lord, who bearest Him 
Who is come to save all mankind and Who, in His loving-kindness, shall show forth 
as temples of God those who chant hymns unto Him!”  
Two canons: that of the forefeast, with 8 Troparia, and that of the holy great-martyr, 
with 6 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the forefeast, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory.  
Jesus our enlightenment, the great Sun, hath shone forth upon us through the 
cloud of the Virgin; and we who are in darkness chant unto Him, brightly illumined 
with His splendors.  
The King of peace, the expectation of the gentiles, cometh to slay the enemy. Let 
us make haste to meet Him Who is born in Bethlehem for our salvation.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
The divine sayings of the prophets are fulfilled which foretold the awesome 
appearance of Christ; for the ewe-lamb draweth nigh to give birth unto the Lamb, the 
Redeemer and Lord of all  
Theotokion: With faith we call thee blessed, O blessed of God, pure dove of the 
Master, honored and immaculate and most comely among women, in that thou hast 
given birth to the God of all.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “I hymn thee with love, O 
martyr Anastasia”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
Let us send up hymnody unto God, Who desireth to be born in the flesh of the 
Virgin in the city of Bethlehem, and to be laid in an infant's manger as a babe, that He 
may save the human race.  
Seeking the only desirable beauties, those of Christ, O glorious martyr Anastasia, 
with steadfast character thou didst pass by the beauties of the world and wast deemed 
worthy to inherit immortality.  
Enlightened by the effulgence of the Spirit, thou didst pass intently through the 
night of the gloom of deception, O honored one, and hast now made thine abode 
where the divine splendor of the uncreated Trinity doth shine.  
Theotokion: The invisible God hath appeared, born of thee supra-naturally in His 
great loving-kindness, O Virgin Mother. The Rich One hath beggared Himself, that 
He might enrich the race of mankind with immortality.  
ODE III  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Christ Who stretched out the heavens by His word entereth the cave to recline in a 
manger of dumb beasts, desiring, in His tender compassion, to deliver us from folly.  
The prophet manifestly crieth aloud: “This is our God, and there is none other 
who can take His place! Uniting Himself to mankind, He hath disclosed every way of 
knowledge.”  
The cherubim cannot bear to gaze upon Thee, O Lord Who lovest mankind. How 
then can the manger hold Thee Who art infinite in nature but born for our sake from 
the Virgin in Thy great loving-kindness?  
Theotokion: Daniel the prophet once foresaw thee, O Theotokos, all-pure Bride of 
God, as the mountain from whence the Stone was cut which crushed and destroyed 
the temples of idolatry.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
The untouchable Lord desireth to be seen lying in the manger, an infant wrapped 
in swaddling-bands. Leap up, O ye mountains, and, filled with light, array yourselves 
in divine joy, O ye hills!  
Enriched by the Savior's words, with the boldness of piety thou didst blunt the 
darts of the persecutors' burning words, O Anastasia, governing the movements of 
thy soul with divine love.  
Thou didst simply cry out, O martyr: “I seek the Lord to Whose love alone I have 
bound my soul! With most desired simplicity, I go to be richly illumined by His all-
pure splendors.”  
Theotokion: O Maiden who knewest not wedlock, thou didst bear within thy 
womb incarnate, Him Who holdeth all creation in His hand, the pre-eternal Babe 
Who, when He is born, Thou wilt lay in a manger.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Today the Virgin cometh to the cave * to ineffably give birth unto the pre-eternal 
Word. * Having heard this, be glad, O thou ecumene, * and with the angels and 
shepherds glorify the pre-eternal God, ** Who is to appear as a little babe.  
Ikos: O wonder truly awesome and beyond all telling! He Who hath given 
existence unto all things hath, in His goodness, entered into the womb of the holy 
Virgin, and cometh to be born in a cave, and to be laid in a manger. From above the 
star heralds Him to the Magi who come to render Him homage with gifts, drawn 
from afar, following with care the prophecy of Balaam, who said: A star will 
announce beforehand the young Child, the pre-eternal God. 
Sessional Hymn of the holy great-martyr, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
 We praise thee as a bride of Christ, O virgin, and we honor thee like the honored 
Thecla, as is meet. Wherefore, rivers of healings pour forth by the power of the Spirit 
on the day of thy commemoration; for thou hast received grace, in that thou didst 
keep the commandments of the Lord.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded ...”:  
Celebrating the days of the forefeast of the nativity of Christ, let us hold festival, O 
ye faithful; and bearing the virtues as the magi did gifts, let us all worthily go forth to 
chant the greeting and new hymn of the angels to our God Who hath been born in 
Bethlehem from the divine Maiden and Virgin without seed. Him do all things glorify.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE IV  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Behold! the star which wast proclaimed of old by Jacob, hath shone forth from 
afar. The infinite God, becoming a man, is seen wrapped in swaddling-bands.  
The Lord, the deliverance of all, is seen as a Babe, sitting in the bosom of the 
Virgin: He Who, as the Son, resteth in the bosom of the Father.  
Open wide, O Eden, which once wast closed to me because of the theft of the 
fruit! For now, in Bethlehem, He is born Who hath clad Himself in me and hath set 
me apart to share in thy painless delights.  
Theotokion: The prophet Habbakuk foresaw thee in the Spirit, O Virgin, as the 
mountain overshadowed with the virtues, from whence He Who illumineth our souls 
hath appeared unto us.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Already fulfilled are the sayings of those who prophesied in the divine Spirit; for 
the Virgin cometh to give birth in the cave to the all-perfect One.  
Seeking after the glory of martyrdom with love, thou didst receive it, suffering 
steadfastly, with a fearless will, O thou who art patient of soul.  
When thy body was stripped, O all-praised spiritual athlete and martyr, thou wast 
truly vested in a robe of grace woven from on high.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, the King of heaven cometh forth from thy light-
bearing womb as a mortal, laying in a manger as though on a royal throne.  
ODE V  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
O Bethlehem, thou house of Ephratha, the Prince shall issue forth from thee unto 
Israel, summoning the rejected gentiles, as Micah foretold, illumined by the Spirit.  
Jesus alone is born of the Virgin, to shepherd His flock with strength. Unto the 
end of the earth is He magnified, thus proclaimed the divinely eloquent prophet of 
old.  
The spirit of wisdom, the spirit of God, the spirit of strength and counsel, of 
knowledge and understanding, the spirit of the fear of God filled the Son Who was 
incarnate from thy womb, O Virgin.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: Of a truth, O most pure, all-immaculate one, thou didst cause all the 
weaponry of the enemy to utterly fail; for thou hast given birth unto the God of all, 
Who with a spear hath brought low his savagery.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 
The star of Judah hath shone forth from the land of Chaldea, moving the magi to 
worship, as it was written.  
Lawfully didst thou contend, vanquishing the iniquitous with the power of the 
Spirit, O all-glorious martyr.  
As is thy name, so didst thou show forth the resurrection of God, cursing the 
invisible foe, O all-praised one.  
Theotokion: Christ cometh to be born of the Virgin in a subterranean cave, that all 
things maybe glad.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Behold! Christ cometh to His own. We are made His by grace and godly virtues, O 
faithful; and, illumined in soul and heart, we receive Him.  
The root of Jesse hath sprouted forth, and our God hath come forth from thence, 
the hope of the nations, their peace and honor, as Isaiah, divinely illumined, foretold 
of old.  
Incarnate, O my Jesus, Thou didst make Thyself poor, enriching me who have 
become grievously impoverished through evil, and loosing the bonds of my many sins 
by Thy being wrapped in swaddling clothes.  
 
Theotokion: The winter of adverse thoughts doth beset my lowly heart with 
assaults of evil spirits, O right beloved Lady, tame it by thy mediations.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
The Compassionate One, Who doth form babes in their mothers' wombs, took 
human nature from us and is seen as a babe; and wrapped in swaddling bands, He is 
laid in the manger, loosing the intricate bonds of my passions by grace.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Patiently following the struggles of the holy martyrs for Christ's sake, ministering 
to their needs, and cleansing their sores, O venerable one, thou wast most splendidly 
enriched, illumining them with glory.  
Thou pourest forth drops of healing with showers of divine gifts, and dost hold 
in-check the rivers of the passions, helping those who are in cruel misfortune, O all-
glorious martyr of Christ, thou namesake of the divine resurrection.  
Theotokion: Healing human nature which had become corrupt through the 
ancient transgression, a new Babe is born without corruption; and He sitteth in thy 
womb, as upon a throne, O unwedded one, without leaving the throne that He shares 
with the Father in His divinity.  
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”: 
When those who have recourse to thy temple, * find themselves in temptations 
and sorrows, * they receive precious gifts through the divine grace which dwelleth 
within thee, * O Anastasia. ** For thou ever pourest forth healings upon the world.  
Ikos: As thou art the namesake of the resurrection of Christ, O martyr, by thy 
supplications, raise me up who have now fallen, letting the drops of thy miracles fall 
upon my soul, quenching the burning of grievous sin; for thou dost ever save the 
world from a multitude of sins, of which I am also tempted, for pouring forth 
healings upon the world, thou dost grant them abundantly to all.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
The most Perfect One is born as a babe, and wrapped in swaddling bands; and the 
Beginningless One receiveth a beginning in time from the Virgin, seeking to deify that 
which He had taken upon Himself. Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad!  
Clad in the flesh as in a robe of royal purple, The King of peace cometh forth 
from thy womb, O Maiden, destroying His enemies, in that He is almighty, and 
bringing peace to our stormy life.  
God Who is with us is revealed to be incarnate! Understand, O ye hostile nations, 
and submit, withdrawing from our life! lo! our Restoration desireth to lay in the 
manger of Bethlehem as a babe!  
Theotokion: The King Who made His abode within thy womb chose thee out of 
all generations to be His undefiled palace, O Maiden. To Him we now piously chant: 
O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages'.  
The choirs of the incorporeal ones give glory on high, and we on earth render 
homage, beholding Thee Who hast made Thyself like unto us mortals and liest in a 
manger, O Christ, Thou God of all.  
Thou didst reduce the fire of deception to ashes, partaking of the flame as did the 
children. And thou didst show forth thy fervent love, O divinely wise one, which 
thou didst have for thy Master and Bridegroom.  
Thou pourest forth showers of healings, assuaging the fever of illness, ever causing 
the people to chant: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: A wonder which amazeth the mind hath been wrought in thee, O 
Virgin Mother: thou shalt give birth to God and lay in a manger Him Who is 
unapproachable even to the cherubim and is infinite in His being.  
ODE VIII 
 Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
The sayings of the divinely eloquent prophets are now fulfilled: the Virgin draweth 
nigh to give birth to the Lord. Let all the earth joining chorus, be glad, and let it 
rejoice throughout all ages!  
Shining with beams of divine grace and abolishing the shadow of the law, Christ 
the Bestower of light hath shone forth. O ye who are in darkness, behold the great 
Light!  
O Lord Who wast born in the cave, show me to be a temple of Thee and of the 
Father and Thy divine Spirit, even though I have become a lair of brigands, that I may 
glorify Thee throughout all ages.  
Theotokion: A heavenly Star hath shone forth from thy womb; and the astrologers 
have been moved to look upon it, illumined by the Spirit through the knowledge 
thereof, O most pure Virgin who art ever blessed.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely eloquent 
children sang: * 'Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord'. 
The cave holdeth the New-born, before Whom thousands and myriads of angels 
stand on high. O ye works Hymn Him unceasingly as Lord!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Thou wast shown to be a temple of the Trinity when in the temples of God thou 
didst exercise thyself in fasting and supplication, O Anastasia, crying aloud: Bless the 
Lord, ye works of the Lord!  
Strengthening Chrysogonus with thy fortifying words, O passion-bearer, thou 
didst trample upon the feeble cruelty of the idols, suffering valiantly.  
Theotokion: O Maiden who held God within thyself: thou hast given birth unto 
the Babe Who created time, the immutable Lord Who, in His ineffable mercy, is born 
in the city of Bethlehem.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Behold! Christ, the restoration, cleansing, salvation and power of all, is come! the 
priceless Treasure is hidden within the cave! And the magi, enriched thereby, offer 
Him gold, as to a king.  
Keep watch, O shepherds of Christ, and come ye noetically to the city of 
Bethlehem; and cry out to God in the highest: Glory and majesty be unto Him Whose 
good pleasure it hath been to reveal Himself as a babe for our sake, in His goodness! .  
Wrapped in swaddling clothes in the flesh, O Thou Who dost shroud the earth in 
darkness and settest bounds for the sea with sand, thou hast broken the bonds of 
mine evil deeds and with righteousness hast girded those who have become weak 
through the assaults of the enemy.  
Theotokion: O chamber and throne of the Ruler, mountain of God, chosen city, 
garden of paradise, most radiant cloud of the Sun: illumine my soul, dispelling the 
cloud of my manifold iniquities, O divinely joyous one.  
Canon of the holy great-martyr 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Leap up in gladness, ye mountains, and gird yourselves about with joy, O ye hills! 
The Virgin now draweth nigh to give birth unto the Lord.  
Today, creation offereth thee gladness, O Anastasia, glorifying the memory of the 
Word Whom thou didst glorify with thy blood.  
Illumined now with a most pure light, O right noble martyr, by thy supplications 
ask that we all receive illumination from on high.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Theotokion: Let all creation now rejoice in splendor! The Theotokos cometh to 
give birth to God the Word Who hath become a man through the will of God.  
Exapostilarion of the holy great-martyr:  
Spec. Mel.: “By the Spirit in the sanctuary ...”: 
Thou didst minister unto Chrysogonus when he was imprisoned in the dungeon, 
O Anastasia, and, submitting to his words, thou didst finish the course of martyrdom 
in God. And receiving the grace of healing from Him, thou dost heal the infirmities 
of all.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the forefeast, in the same melody:  
Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad! Be enlightened, O cave! O 
manger, receive Him Who created us with His own hand and is born as a babe from 
the Virgin! Ye multitude of angels, cry out clearly: Glory to God in the highest!  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Come forth, ye angelic hosts ...”:  
Now have the ancient manifestations been resolved: * for a Virgin hath conceived 
in her womb; * the Stone hath been cut from the mountain, * the rod of Jesse hath 
sprouted forth, * and the dew of Gideon * hath now been poured forth upon the 
earth. * O ye people, let us cry aloud: * Christ, the King of Israel, ** cometh forth!  
Now are the strange aspects of a strange birthgiving seen. * How doth He Who 
sitteth with the Father in the highest * desire to be laid in a manger of dumb beasts? * 
How is He Whom no one can touch * wrapped in swaddling-clothes? * How is He 
Who is everywhere present * contained in a cave? * Ye people, let us cry aloud: * 
Christ, the King of Israel, ** cometh forth!  
He Who worketh miracles, * smiting Egypt with plagues * and raining manna 
down upon His foolish people, * is incarnate and nurtured with milk. * And, seen as a 
babe, He fleeth the tyrant Herod, * borne by His Virgin Mother, * as upon a cloud, ** 
as Isaiah of most godly sight foresaw.  
The Child Who hath been King from before all ages * is born of His own will! * A 
Son hath been given us! * Hearken, ye nations! * Pay heed, O Israel! * Understand 
and submit yourselves! * For He is with us Who will grind down and wipe from the 
earth * every kingdom and principality ** which doth not obey Him!  
Glory ..., in the same melody: 
With a staff of iron wilt thou be shepherded, O Judea, * for thou hast not 
submitted * and hast not believed the prophets; * for when the Son is born * the 
Father will give to the gentiles the inheritance * and dominion over all the world, * 
and will drive thee out, O vile murderer, * for thou wilt not submit to cry out: ** 
Christ, the King of Israel, cometh forth!  

--- PAGE 17 ---
 
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Come forth, ye angelic hosts ...”:  
Leap up, O David, * for Christ is sprung forth from within thee! * Rejoice, O 
Jesse, * of thy root He hath blossomed forth! * From thy loins, O Judah, shall the 
Lord come forth, * according to the prophecy of Balaam! * Behold, ye nations, 
following the great Isaiah: * Lo! the all-pure Virgin * giveth birth to the Babe 
Emmanuel!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Christ draweth nigh, * the star shineth before Him, * the heavenly multitude * of 
the army of the noetic hosts ** bendeth low to see.  
Verse: God shall come out of Theman, * and the Holy One out of a mountain 
overshadowed and densely wooded.  
Rejoice, O Bethlehem! * The Shepherd hath arisen, * Who saveth Israel! * No 
longer shalt thou be the least ** among the princes of Judah!  
Verse: O Lord, I have heard Thy report, and I was afraid; * O Lord, I 
considered Thy works, and I was stricken with awe.  
Come, ye mortals, * and let us form a choir * with the angels! * Let us cry out to 
God: ** Glory in the highest!  
Glory ..., of the holy great-martyr, the composition of Byzantius, in Tone V:  
The day of the forefeast of the nativity of Christ God, the feast of the all-praised 
martyr Anastasia, hath shone forth today. Lo! the Virgin draweth nigh to Bethlehem 
to lay her Babe, wrapped in swaddling-clothes, in a manger of dumb beasts: Him 
Who hath freed us from the ancient curse and saveth our souls.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone V: 
“Be not dour at the sight of my womb, O Joseph; for thou shalt see the One born 
from me, and shalt rejoice and worship Him as God!” said the Theotokos to her 
betrothed when she was about to give birth unto Christ. Let us cry out to her, saying: 
Rejoice, O divinely joyous one! The Lord is with thee; and, because of thee, He is 
with us as well!  

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the forefeast, and 
4 from ODE VI of the canon of the holy great-martyr.  
Christ Who stretched out the heavens by His word entereth the cave to recline in a 
manger of dumb beasts, desiring, in His tender compassion, to deliver us from folly. 
(Twice) 
The prophet manifestly crieth aloud: “This is our God, and there is none other 
who can take His place! Uniting Himself to mankind, He hath disclosed every way of 
knowledge.”  
The cherubim cannot bear to gaze upon Thee, O Lord Who lovest mankind. How 
then can the manger hold Thee Who art infinite in nature but born for our sake from 
the Virgin in Thy great loving-kindness?  
The Compassionate One, Who doth form babes in their mothers' wombs, took 
human nature from us and is seen as a babe; and wrapped in swaddling bands, He is 
laid in the manger, loosing the intricate bonds of my passions by grace.  
Patiently following the struggles of the holy martyrs for Christ's sake, ministering 
to their needs, and cleansing their sores, O venerable one, thou wast most splendidly 
enriched, illumining them with glory.  
Thou pourest forth drops of healing with showers of divine gifts, and dost hold 
in-check the rivers of the passions, helping those who are in cruel misfortune, O all-
glorious martyr of Christ, thou namesake of the divine resurrection.  
Theotokion: Healing human nature which had become corrupt through the 
ancient transgression, a new Babe is born without corruption; and He sitteth in thy 
womb, as upon a throne, O unwedded one, without leaving the throne that He shares 
with the Father in His divinity.  
Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell!  
Troparion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone IV:  
Thy ewe-lamb Anastasia O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, 
O my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am 
crucified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Kontakion of the holy great-martyr, in Tone II:  
When those who have recourse to thy temple, * find themselves in temptations 
and sorrows, * they receive precious gifts through the divine grace which dwelleth 
within thee, * O Anastasia. ** For thou ever pourest forth healings upon the world.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III: 
Today the Virgin cometh to the cave * to ineffably give birth unto the pre-eternal 
Word. * Having heard this, be glad, O thou ecumene, * and with the angels and 
shepherds glorify the pre-eternal God, ** Who is to appear as a little babe.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the well-springs of Israel.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS, §208 (GAL 3:23-29)  
Brethren: But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the 
faith which should afterward be revealed. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to 
bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, 
we are no longer under a schoolmaster, for ye are all the children of God by faith in 
Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on 
Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither 
male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's then are ye 
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise.  
Alleluia, in Tone I: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was 
attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Verse: And He brought me up out of the pit of misery, and from the mire of 
clay.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, §33 (LK 7:36-5O)  
At that time: One of the Pharisees desired Jesus that he would eat with him. And 
he went down into the Pharisee's house, and sat down to meat. And behold, a woman 
in the city, which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee's 
house, brought an alabaster box of ointment, and stood at his feet behind him 
weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of 
her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment. Now when the 
Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spake within himself, saying, This man, if 
he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is that 
toucheth him; for she is a sinner. And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have 
somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on. There was a certain creditor 

--- PAGE 20 ---
which had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. And 
when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me, therefore, 
which of them will love him most? Simon answered and said, I suppose that he, to 
whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged. And he 
turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into 
thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath washed my feet with 
tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head. Thou gavest me no kiss: but this 
woman, since the time I came in, hath not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil 
thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment. 
Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved 
much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little. And he said unto her, Thy 
sins are forgiven. And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, 
Who is this that forgiveth sins also? And he said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved 
thee; go in peace.  
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
