--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 21st DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER  
FOREFEAST OF THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST 
 COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR JULIANA OF NICOMEDIA  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
“He is our God, * and none other shall take His place!” * the prophet exclaimed in 
the Spirit; * “He hath found every path of knowledge, * and thereby hath made 
Himself like unto mortals, * arraying Himself in flesh; * for He cometh to be born of 
the divine Maiden and Virgin. * He Who is unapproachable in essence ** becometh 
accessible to me.”  
Thy womb, O all-immaculate Theotokos, * is shown to be a cluster of flour, * 
ineffably bearing the uncultivated Wheat * in a manner transcending understanding * 
and all telling. * Thou hast given birth in the cave of Bethlehem * to Him Who will 
nurture all creation * with divine understanding and grace, ** and deliver mankind 
from soul-destroying famine.  
The unblemished heifer, * bearing the fatted Calf within her womb, * cometh to 
the holy cave * to give birth to Him in a most glorious manner, * to wrap Him as a 
man in swaddling bands, * and to lay Him in a manger as a babe. * Celebrate the 
forefeast, O creation, * joyfully magnifying ** Him Who hath wrought such glorious 
things on earth.  
And 3 Stichera of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Having dyed for thyself * a robe of salvation * in the stain of thy blood, O all-
praised one, * and illumined thyself in spirit, * thou didst betroth thyself to the 
immortal King * Who preserveth thee incorrupt and undefiled * unto the ages of 
ages, * as a virgin adorned and unsullied ** in the mansions of heaven.  
Having received wounds * and been cast into the fire, * having endured the 
rending of thy flesh, * and valiantly borne the boiling cauldron, * thou wast not 
vanquished in resolve, * and didst not sacrifice to graven images; * but, bowing thy 
neck unto death, * thou didst ascend to the heavens as a crown-bearer ** through 
martyrdom by the sword.  
Adorned with drops of thy blood, * thou wast manifestly resplendent, * like the 
sun, O all-praised martyr Juliana, * dispelling the gloom * of ungodliness by grace; * 
and illumining the faithful * who honor thy valiant struggles * and thy splendid and 
radiant memory, ** which is salvific for all.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone VI:  
Hold festival, O Sion! Be glad, O Jerusalem! O city of Christ God, receive the 
Creator, Who is contained by the cave and the manger! Open thy gates unto me, that, 
entering through them, I may see Him Who holdeth creation in His hand wrapped as 
a babe in swaddling-bands, Whom the angels hymn with unceasing songs: the Lord, 
the Bestower of life, Who saveth our race.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
The predictions of all the prophets * are now fulfilled; * for Christ is born * from 
the pure divine Maiden ** in the city of Bethlehem.  
Verse: God shall come forth out of Theman, * and the Holy One out of a 
mountain overshadowed and densely wooded.  
O honored Bethlehem, * thou glory, joy and boast * of mortal mankind, * divine 
metropolis: ** receive thy Creator.  
Verse: O Lord, I have heard Thy report, and I was afraid; * O Lord, I 
considered Thy works, and I was stricken with awe.  
The Word of the Father, * by Whom all things came into being, * is seen as a 
single Hypostasis * in two natures, ** dispassionately and unchangeably.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the composition of Byzantius, in Tone VI:  
O Virgin who knewest not wedlock, from whence hast thou come? Who gave 
birth to thee? Who was thy mother? How is it thou holdest the Creator in thine arms? 
How is it that thy womb hath not experienced corruption? O the most glorious and 
awesome mysteries wrought in thee, which we see performed on earth, O all-holy 
one! On earth we prepare for thee thy due as is meet: the cave; and from the heavens 
we ask that a star be given. The magi come from the lands of the East to those of the 
West, to behold the salvation of mankind wrapped in swaddling-bands in the manger.  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
Thy ewe-lamb Juliana O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the forefeast, in the same tone:  
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT COMPLINE  
We chant a Triodion, the Irmos of each ODE of which we chant twice, the Troparia 
repeated to make up 6 in number. After each ODE both choirs together chant the 
Irmos of the ODE.  
Triodion, the acrostic whereof is: “To the fourth”, in Tone II: 
ODE III  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I sing: 
* There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than Thee, O 
Lord. 
In vain doth the vile and murderous company assemble at the command of Herod, 
to slay Christ our newborn Lord; unto Him do we chant: Thou art our God, and 
there is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!  
The cruel counsel of Herod, who in soul is opposed to God, is set at naught, for 
he desired to slay Christ the Master with the infants. To Him do we chant: Thou art 
our God, and there is none more righteous than Thee, O Lord!  
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice) Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone II:  
Beholding Him Who holdeth the whole world in His hands * wrapped in 
swaddling bands in Bethlehem, * let us offer up hymns of the forefeast to her who 
gave birth to Him; * for she rejoiceth maternally, ** holding the Son of God at her 
bosom.  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Whereas the command of the tyrant prevailed, * and the furnace of old 
was heated sevenfold, * the flames did not burn the Children, * who having 
trampled underfoot the decree of the king, cried aloud: * ‘O all ye Works of the 
Lord, * praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.’ 
Shedding tears like myrrh for Christ Who is born for our sake, therewith we wash 
away our defilements, approaching the Most pure one in purity, and crying: Hymn the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely throughout all ages!  
With tears of compunction let us avoid tears for the coming dread torments, 
following the steps of Christ Who is placed in swaddling bands as a babe, and crying: 
Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely throughout all 
ages!  
Knowing that deliverance would be wrought in sanctity from within our midst, 
and· having washed ourselves beforehand for Christ in a fountain of tears, O ye 
faithful, let us approach Him Who in the flesh is born in the cave, crying: Hymn the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and exalt Him supremely throughout all ages!  

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
ODE IX 
Irmos: With pure souls and undefiled lips, * come let us magnify the undefiled 
and most holy Mother of Emanuel, * and through her let us bring our prayer to 
the Child she hath born: * Spare our souls, O Christ God, and save us. 
Let there be no foolish person, no wicked model of jealousy, among those who 
now offer to God pleasing gifts instead of myrrh, gold and frankincense-the sweet 
fragrance of the virtues, and who chant unto Christ Who is born: Take pity on our 
souls, O Christ God, and save us!  
Herod said to the wise magi when they arrived: “Go and search for the King Who 
is now born, and when ye have found Him, tell me,” for the cruel one harbored 
murder in his vile and murderous heart. Take pity on our souls, O Christ God, and 
save us!  
O blind and vile murderer, O most audacious one, whereby thou didst earn 
oblivion, for no one lifteth his hands to slay God! Aflame with rage, thou dost 
savagely slaughter the infants, O Herod. Take pity on our souls, O Christ God, and 
save us!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell! (Twice) 
Glory ..., that of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
Thy ewe-lamb Juliana O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Both now ..., that of the forefeast.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “The noble Joseph ...”: 
Our unapproachable God, of His own will becoming approachable in His loving-
kindness, cometh to be born as a man in the flesh from the Virgin Maiden in 
Bethlehem. Let us earnestly hasten to receive him, crying out with fear: Glory be to 
Thee, O Lord!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., another Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
He Who bowed down the heavens and made His abode within the Virgin cometh 
in the flesh, to be born in the cave of Bethlehem as was written, and He Who imparts 
life to babes in the womb, is to be seen as a babe. Wherefore, rejoicing, let us now 
greet Him with uprightness of heart.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
O Bethlehem, prepare thyself to greet the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God; for, lo! 
she cometh to thee, bearing the infant Christ, Who is co-beginningless with the 
Father and the Spirit. She will give birth to Him in the cave, and after giving birth will 
be shown to remain yet a virgin.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., another Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
A most glorious miracle is seen today! For our Savior now hasteneth to be born in 
the flesh from the Virgin for our sake, in the cave. The magi pay homage to Him with 
gifts as to a King, and the shepherds and angels glorify Him. And with them we also 
cry aloud: Glory be to Him Who became a man for our sake!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Canon of the forefeast, with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos; and that of the holy 
martyr, with 4 Troparia. Canon of the forefeast, the acrostic whereof is the (Greek) 
alphabet, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV: 
ODE I  
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
Rejoice, O heaven, and be glad, O earth! For our God, having taken on flesh, is 
born of the Virgin Maiden and is wrapped in swaddling bands, breaking the bonds of 
our transgressions, in that He is compassionate.  
The pure Queen giveth birth in a manner past understanding to the King of all 
Who openeth the kingdom on high to the faithful and utterly removeth the sin which 
ever accursedly reigneth within us.  
The writings of the prophets have attained their end; for, lo! Christ Whom they 
proclaimed beforehand is revealed, incarnate, in the city of Bethlehem. Let us now 
hasten today to celebrate the forefeast of His nativity with uprightness of mind.  
Canon of the holy martyr, the acrostic whereof is: “May God confer me the grace to 
hymn thee, O martyr”, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness. 
Manifestly resplendent with the radiance of martyrdom, thou dost rejoice in God, 
deified in sanctity, O all-praised one, bestowing by thy supplications illumination 
upon those who hymn thee.  
Thou wast wounded by the most sweet love of Christ, O all-praised one, and, 
having put away the carnal passions and thy corruptible bridegroom, thou didst 
betroth thyself to Him Who created thee, O immaculate and pure virgin.  
God, the Creator of all, illumining thy mind with beauties of manifest brilliance, 
hath deemed thee worthy to join the choir of virgins in the mansions of heaven, O 
divinely wise martyr.  
Theotokion: The Virgin cometh to give birth in the cave to the Creator of nature 
Who hath ineffably and supra-naturally taken flesh from her hypostatically, that He 
might deify mankind.  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE III  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Likened to a barren woman * the Church from among the nations hath 
given birth, * and the assembly abundant in children, hath grown weak. * Let 
us cry out to our wondrous God: * Holy art Thou, O Lord!  
Daniel beheld Thee, O Word, as the Stone cut from the mountain of the Virgin, 
which broke the temples of the idols in pieces by Thy might. Wherefore, we glorify 
Thee with fear.  
Guided to Thee by the star, O Christ, Thou King of all, the magi from the East 
bring gifts; myrrh, gold and frankincense-marveling at Thy condescension.  
The unploughed field beareth the life-bearing Grain; Mary cometh to give birth in 
the city of Bethlehem to Him Who feedeth the souls of all who cry: Holy art Thou, O 
Lord!  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Thou didst make thy soul the most holy temple of God, O glorious one, ever 
continuing in the temples of God with hymnody and supplication.  
Desiring to obtain the greatest of gifts, O most honored one, thou didst endure 
the pangs of the flesh as if in another body.  
With the drops of thy blood thou didst extinguish the fire, and water the thoughts 
of the faithful, O Juliana.  
Theotokion: Delivering mankind, the Redeemer is born in Bethlehem from the 
pure one, being wrapped as a babe in swaddling-bands.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Rendered wholly pure by the beauties of virginity, * and having now been crowned 
with wreaths of martyrdom, * O virgin Juliana, thou grantest healing and salvation 
unto those * who are in need and affliction, and approach thy shrine; ** for Christ 
poureth forth divine grace and life everlasting.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Having come to love the Bridegroom, Creator and God, thou didst forsake thy 
corruptible bridegroom, O honored martyr, and, rejoicing, thou didst endure 
torments, laceration and fiery torture. Wherefore, thou hast entered into the divine 
bridal-chamber wearing a crown, asking forgiveness of sins for all.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...,”: 
Be ye filled with joy, O ye ends of the earth; for the Theotokos draweth nigh to 
give birth to the King of all. O the ineffable mystery! The Beginningless One hath a 
beginning! The Incorporeal One becometh incarnate! The cave receiveth Him Who 
holdeth all things! Rejoice, O Bethlehem, and dance, O creation, on this day of His 
forefeast!  
ODE IV  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
The holy phial of precious sanctity cometh to pour forth in the city of Bethlehem 
Him Who imparteth sanctity unto all of us who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!  
O divinely eloquent Isaiah, beholding the fulfillment of thine honored prophesies, 
rejoice and be glad! For without seed the Virgin hath given birth in the flesh to the 
Uncontainable One in the cave of Bethlehem.  
Jesus is born in the flesh; the Timeless One is seen as an infant in time, and by His 
ineffable abasement deifieth me who, have become poor through corrupting 
disobedience.  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  
Having acquired a mind stretching out toward the Lord of all, stretched in the 
flesh and cruelly wounded thou didst in nowise reject Him, O goodly virgin Juliana.  
The love of the Master succeeded in casting the flesh into darkness, O all-praised 
martyr; wherefore, thou didst despise riches, thy bridegroom and multifarious 
tortures.  
Rending thee, the unblemished ewe-lamb, with wounds, like jackals O martyr, the 
torturers made thee a divine Lamb of God, a whole and unblemished sacrifice for 
God.  
Theotokion: Beholding thy virginity sealed after birth giving, O Theotokos, and 
held fast by awe, thou didst cry aloud: “O my Child, how is it that I now wrap thee 
Who girdest the sea with sand, with swaddling bands?”  
ODE V  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father's divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
God Emmanuel is born from the Virgin, and laid in a manger; of His own will He 
worketh our restoration. Wherefore, we piously celebrate the forefeast of His nativity.  
O Thou Who art the beginningless Word, equal in essence with the Father, having 
been laid in a manger of dumb beasts thou hast released from irrationality us who 
piously celebrate the forefeast of Thy nativity.  
Blessed was the root of Jesse which produced the pure one who beareth the divine 
Flower, Christ the Lord. And, rejoicing, we celebrate the forefeast of His nativity.  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
With the outpourings of thy blood unjustly shed thou hast dried up the stream of 
wicked ungodliness, O martyr, quenching the fire of delusion.  
Thou didst offer thyself wholly unto God, having dyed the purple robe of thy 
virginity most splendid with the dye of thy blood.  
Wounded in soul by Thy beauty, O Master, the virgin passed over visible beauties, 
splendid in her suffering.  
Theotokion: O new wonder! The most pure Virgin cometh to the cave of 
Bethlehem to give birth to God Who hath become a man.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 
Having been born for us as a little babe on earth, O Thou Who shone forth 
ineffably from the Father before all ages, free all from the ancient disobedience, in 
that Thou art compassionate.  
Strange and most glorious things were heard in the city of Bethlehem when Thou 
wast born, O beginningless Word; for with the angels, shepherds offered up hymnody 
to Thee as Master.  
The star of righteousness ineffably proclaimeth to the magi the Sun Who hath 
been born, and, rejoicing, we now celebrate the forefeast of His honored nativity.  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons' * by 
the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 
Wounded by divine desire, thou didst cry aloud: “I go forth to reach Christ Who is 
comely in beauty! Wherefore, I endure tortures, rejoicing with unwavering resolve!”  

--- PAGE 10 ---
The evil tyrant commanded that the ewe-lamb of the Lord, whose mind was set on 
Christ, be mercilessly stretched out and broken with iron rods.  
Thou didst rise early unto Christ, the never-setting Sun, O divinely wise one, and 
with His splendors didst illumine thy soul and heart; and hast therefore been 
translated to everlasting light.  
Theotokion: The Creator Who of His own will hath wrapped the sea in mist, is 
born from the Virgin Maiden; He Who delivereth the world hath deigned to be 
wrapped in swaddling bands as an infant.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Seeking the highest ...”:  
Beholding Him Who holdeth the whole world in His hands * wrapped in 
swaddling bands in Bethlehem, * let us offer up hymns of the forefeast to her who 
gave birth to Him; * for she rejoiceth maternally, ** holding the Son of God at her 
bosom.  
Ikos: Holding the Son of God in her arms, and kissing Him with maternal 
tenderness, the Virgin exclaimed: “I knew not seed in conceiving, and I have not 
undergone corruption in giving birth! I am as pure now, after giving birth, as before! 
Wherefore, I proclaim Thy surpassing tender compassion, O my Child, and the 
unapproachable majesty which Thou hast shown forth upon me! Therefore, I rejoice, 
holding the Son of God at my bosom!”  
ODE VII  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: The three youths in Babylon, * regarded the tyrant's command as 
foolishness, * and cried aloud in the midst of the flame: * Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God of our fathers!  
How can a cave contain Thee, the Uncontainable One, Who cometh to be born 
for our sake? How can the Virgin give suck to Thee, Who art the Nourisher of all, O 
compassionate Jesus?  
Following the words of the magus Balaam, the magi hastened to pay homage to 
Christ with gifts, perceiving that He is the One Who reigneth over all creatures.  
O human nature, barren of any of the virtues, rejoice and dance! For Christ 
cometh to be born in the flesh of the Virgin, that He might show thee to be right 
fruitful in good works.  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Pitilessly the judge mindlessly cast thee into the heated cauldron, O martyr; but by 
an angel the Lord preserved thee unharmed, for thou didst worship Him.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Undaunted, O all-honored martyr, with manly mind thou didst enter the fire, 
sensing only coolness, and crying aloud: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, 
O Lord!  
Thou didst offer thy Bridegroom, like a wreath, the people who had come to 
believe on Him, and with thy radiant miracles thou didst cut through the gloom of 
delusion.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O Virgin Mother, thou dwelling-place of the Uncontainable 
One, desiring for our sake to give birth in a cave, O most pure one, to Him Who 
guideth all creation by His hand as a mortal man.  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
In Thine ineffable loving-kindness, to save me who through my great disobedience 
have become a den of thieves, O Christ, it was Thy will to be born in a cave of the 
pure Virgin.  
Signing a writ of complete remission for me, Thou, the Author of creation, didst 
register Thyself with servants in accordance with the edict of Caesar. O Master, I 
hymn the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness!  
O radiant palace of the Master, how is it that thou hast entered the least of caves 
to give birth to the Lord and King Who became incarnate for our sake, O all-holy 
Virgin Bride of God?  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Having thine eyes and mind lifted up to God Who is able to save, by the grace of 
the divine Spirit thou didst extinguish the boiling of the cauldron, O martyr, chanting 
with faith the hymn of the children: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Obeying the words of the wicked tyrant, the vain-minded ones who were worthy 
of fire cast thee alive into the fire, O martyr; yet, bedewed by the love of thy 
Bridegroom, thou wast not consumed by the fire, honoring Him, O God-bearer.  
Thou didst stand before the tribunal, professing Christ to be the immortal God 
Who hath endured crucifixion and slain delusion, granting immortal life to the faithful 
who cry aloud: Hymn the Lord, all ye works!  
Theotokion: Setting the clouds for His ascent, through the cloud of the Virgin the 
Lord cometh to be born for us, that He might dispel the dark cloud of sin from the 
souls of us who cry out to Him: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE IX  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
O ye faithful, let us dance, leap up and cry aloud together: The Salvation of all 
cometh! The Lord draweth nigh to be born, that He might save those who with godly 
wisdom celebrate His nativity!  
Take up thy psaltery and harp, O holy David, and chant in hymnody: O house of 
Ephratha, be glad! For He Whom the Father begat from within Himself is most 
radiantly born in thee, incarnate of the Virgin!  
Like a downpour, like a mighty rainfall hath the Master descended into thy womb, 
O Virgin Mother and Birthgiver of God, and He hath watered lands hardened by 
dark ungodliness, drying up the seas of falsehood.  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
The angels marveled at the struggles which the God-bearing Juliana undertook for 
the Faith: how in her feminine nature she put to shame him who had brought death 
to our first mother in paradise.  
As a passion-bearer exceedingly adorned and a most excellent virgin thou hast 
lawfully received the crown of righteousness, having in thy flesh trampled underfoot 
the incorporeal foe, and emerged triumphant.  
We honor thee, the noetic swallow, the incorrupt turtle-dove and dove, whose 
wings were gilded by thy witness, and who, soaring aloft, found rest in God.  
Thou didst blossom forth like a lily in the vales of martyrdom, O passion-bearer 
Juliana, and in virginity thou wast as fragrant as a rose, becoming a divine perfume for 
thy comely Bridegroom.  
Theotokion: Bearing Him Who upholdeth all things, the Virgin cometh to 
Bethlehem to give birth to Him, and to lay in a manger, as a babe, Him Who doth 
excellently accomplish the restoration of mankind.  
Exapostilarion of the forefeast:  
Spec. Mel.: “He hath visited us ...”: 
Come, O ye faithful, let us all offer up hymns of the forefeast of the nativity! 
Christ already cometh to be born in Bethlehem, that He might save the world, in that 
He alone is the Lover of mankind.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., another Exapostilarion:  
O Bethlehem, land of Judah, adorn thy gates! For the Virgin Theotokos already 
approacheth to give birth within thee, in a cave and a manger, to my Lord and God.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go forth, ye angelic hosts ...”: 
The creative Wisdom now cometh forth! * The clouds of prophecy are parted! * 
Grace doth flourish, * and Truth hath shone forth! * The shadows of indistinct 
images cease to be! * The gates of Eden have opened! * Dance thou, O Adam! * God 
our Creator ** hath of His own will taken on our form!  
Fulfilling the sayings and visions of the prophets, * the Word is born in the flesh, * 
clothed in coarse matter * and, having been born, lieth in a manger of dumb beasts. * 
Lo! the extreme condescension! * Behold the awesome dispensation, * for which sake 
we chant: * Christ, the King of Israel, ** hath now arrived!  
Behold, in a manner transcending understanding and all telling, * the pure one 
giveth birth to the Son of God * Whom the prophets of old proclaimed; * foreseeing 
through the Holy Spirit, * Who preserved her undefiled, * and released Adam from 
sin. * O ye people, let us say: * Christ our King ** hath now arrived in the flesh!  
Without leaving the bosom of the Father, * Thou didst reveal Thyself as a man, * 
and held in the arms of the Virgin, * Thou didst summon the magi from Persia by a 
star, * who worshipped Thee as King and God. * Thou dost destroy the ungodly 
princes of the heathen with the spirit of Thy lips, * and dost shepherd the people ** 
whom Thou hast brought into existence.  
Glory ..., in the same melody: 
The Word Who is consubstantial with the Father, * receiving human form * from 
the precious blood of the Virgin, * taketh form * and groweth with the passing of 
time; * and He is born in the cave. * Great is the awesomeness! * The angels chant, 
and man clap their hands: ** Christ, the King of Israel, cometh forth!  
Both now ..., in the same melody: 
The prophecies of Balaam the magus * receive their fulfillment; * for those who 
were filled with Persian miracles, * illumined with the brilliance of the unusual star * 
by Christ Who was incarnate in Bethlehem, * the neversetting Sun, * indicate by their 
bestowal of gifts * God the King, Who of His own will ** became a mortal man.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
The star shineth forth, * signaling beforehand * Him Who is born in the cave. * O 
ye shepherds and angels, ye magi with gifts, ** make haste to come forth!  
Verse: God shall come forth out of Theman, * and the Holy One out of a 
mountain overshadowed and densely wooded.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
That He might fulfill * the predictions of the prophets, * the Lord is born * in 
Bethlehem, and He openeth Eden ** unto the descendents of Adam.  
Verse: O Lord, I have heard Thy report, and I was afraid; * O Lord, I 
considered Thy works, and I was stricken with awe.  
O Bethlehem, * with myrrh do thou anoint * the holy manger; * for the Master will 
put forth ** the rays of His divinity.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody  
Come, O ye mortals, * and let us together * unceasingly hymn * Mary, the Virgin 
Theotokos, ** from whom Christ is born!  
 
 
AT LITURGY 
 
Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell!  
Troparion of the holy martyr, in Tone IV: 
Thy ewe-lamb Juliana O Jesus, crieth out with a loud voice: * “Thee do I love, O 
my Bridegroom, * and, seeking Thee, I endure suffering. * In Thy baptism I am cru-
cified and buried with Thee. * I suffer for Thy sake, that I may reign with Thee; * I 
die for Thee, that I may live with Thee. * Accept me, who with love sacrifice myself 
for Thee, * as an unblemished offering!” ** By her supplications, in that Thou art 
merciful, save Thou our souls.  
Kontakion of the holy martyr, in Tone III:  
Rendered wholly pure by the beauties of virginity, * and having now been crowned 
with wreaths of martyrdom, * O virgin Juliana, thou grantest healing and salvation 
unto those * who are in need and affliction, and approach thy shrine; ** for Christ 
poureth forth divine grace and life everlasting.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III: 
Today the Virgin cometh to the cave * to ineffably give birth unto the pre-eternal 
Word. * Having heard this, be glad, O thou ecumene, * and with the angels and 
shepherds glorify the pre-eternal God, ** Who is to appear as a little babe.  
