--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 21st DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
FOREFEAST OF THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS PETER, 
METROPOLITAN OF KIEV & ALL RUSSIA  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Thou didst emulate the ranks of heaven, O God-bearing Peter, holy hierarch of 
Christ, and on earth wast revealed to be a sanctified vessel and a habitation of the 
Holy Spirit. Wherefore, we call thee blessed and, rejoicing today, celebrate thy holy 
repose with honor. (Twice)  
Thou art the joy of the ranks of heaven, the boast of hierarchs on earth, the glory 
of priests, the rule of monastics and the confirmation of the Church, O wise Peter. 
Wherefore, we beseech thee: Fail not to aid us, thy servants, who have recourse unto 
thee.  
As thou dwellest in the heavens, O father, accept now the praise of thy children 
who with honor celebrate the memory of thy repose. Grant unto them their hearts' 
desires, O Peter, favorite of Christ, and earnestly entreat His most pure Mother, that 
He save our souls from misfortunes.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
The divine grace which abideth in the memory of thy repose, overshadowing those 
who have recourse to the shrine of thy relics, doth impart the healing of infirmities, O 
holy hierarch Peter our father; pray thou on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in the same tone: 
Hymn the Lord Who hath been born of the Virgin! Sing hymns, O ye armies of 
heaven! Ye people on earth, clap your hands! For God is come among mankind, 
bestowing upon us the gift of divinity. Lo! a mystery is wrought among us today: 
Christ, the King of Israel, cometh forth!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
 Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Through the operation of the Holy Spirit * hath Peter been shown to be * the 
dwelling-place of the Spirit, * wherefore, now assembling, ** let us sing unto him.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy righteous shall 
rejoice.  
Rejoice, O Peter, * boast of hierarchs, * glory of priests, * rule of monks, and 
confirmation ** of the Church!  
Verse: The saints shall boast in glory, * and they shall rejoice upon their beds.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Accept now the hymnody * of thy children, * O father, * and grant thou the 
common petitions ** of those who love thee.  
Glory ..., Noth now ..., in the same melody: 
O house of Ephratha, * holy city, * glory of the prophets: * adorn the house 
wherein ** the Divine One is born.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Be glad now, O earth that before wast barren! * For, lo! Christ hath shown forth 
within thee a luminary * who shineth forth clearly in the world * healing our 
infirmities and ailments. * Wherefore, join chorus and rejoice with boldness; * for it is 
the high priest of the Most High ** who doeth these things.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the forefeast, in the same tone:  
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 3 of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
With uprightness of mind * let us utter beforehand * hymns of the forefeast of the 
nativity of Christ; * for He Who is equal in honor * with the Father and the Spirit, * 
having in His tender compassion clothed Himself in our nature, * desireth to be born 
in Bethlehem, * His ineffable nativity ** do the shepherds hymn with the angels.  
Let us lift up our voices with cymbals * and proclaim in hymns: * The appearance 
of Christ hath been shown forth! * That which the prophets foretold hath been 
fulfilled! * For He Whom they prophesied * hath appeared in the flesh unto mankind; 
* He is born in the holy cave; * He lieth in a manger as a babe, ** and as an infant is 
wrapped in swaddling bands.  
Prepare thyself, O Bethlehem! * Throw thyself open now, O Eden! * The most 
holy one cometh to give birth! * Let the heavens be glad; * let men leap up! Life lieth 
in a manger; * He Who is rich resteth in a cave! * He cometh in the magnitude of His 
mercy, * assuming the poverty of Adam ** without change or commingling.  
And 5 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone II 
Spec. Mel.: “With what wreaths of praise ...”: 
With what wreaths of praise shall we crown the holy hierarch: the crown of the 
priesthood the instiller of piety, the brilliant ornament of the Church, the 
inexhaustible well-spring of divine healings, the river of many wonders: Peter, who 
maketh the land of Russia glad with torrents of miracles, our fervent intercessor and 
guardian? (Twice)  
With what humble mouths shall we hymn the holy hierarch, who dwelleth with the 
incorporeal ones and is wondrous in miracles who was sanctified from earliest 
infancy: The unshakable pillar of the Church, the source of gladness for our land, the 
standard of righteousness, the feeder of orphans, the defender of the oppressed and 
physician of the sick who exacted no fee? (Twice)  
Come, ye assemblies of the faithful, and let us clap our hands as say the psalms, 
hymning the divine Peter, the consolation of the grieving and the helper of the 
desperate, the boast of the Russian land and adornment of the whole priesthood, the 
river of mercy, who was truly a lover of the divine humility of Christ, Who granteth 
great mercy to the world.  
Glory ..., in Tone I: 
Enlightened from on high with the radiance of the manifestation of God, O Peter, 
with firmness of mind thou didst avoid the laws of nature as though they were. 
shadows, for thou wast bedewed with true grace, O thou who art all-wise. Wherefore, 
as a receptacle of the most holy Spirit, thou didst receive the gift of miracles, and dost 
enrich thy children therewith. And now, standing before Christ with the primates of 
the Churches, pray thou on behalf of our souls.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone I: 
O manger, receive Him Whom Moses the law-giver foresaw in the bush on Horeb 
and Who is now born of the Virgin through the divine Spirit. She is the one who was 
spoken of in the law; she is the seal of the prophets, who revealeth God in the flesh 
unto those who are subject to corruption. Him do we worship.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three lessons:  
A READING FROM PROVERBS  
The memory of the just is praised, and the blessing of the Lord is upon his head. 
Blessed is the man who hath found wisdom, and the mortal who knoweth prudence. 
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver. And she is more 
valuable than precious stones: no precious thing is equal to her in value. For length of 
existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and 
glory: out of her mouth righteousness proceedeth, and she carrieth law and mercy 
upon her tongue. Hearken to me, O children, for I will speak solemn truths. Blessed 
is the man who shall keep my ways; for my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in 
them is prepared favor from the Lord. Ye, O men, do I exhort; and utter my voice to 
the sons of men. I, wisdom, have built up; upon counsel, knowledge and 
understanding have I called. Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and 
strength is mine. I love those that love me they that seek me shall find grace. O ye 
simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge. Hearken 
unto me again; for I will speak solemn truths. For my throat shall meditate truth; and 
false lips are an abomination before me. All the words of my mouth are in 
righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse. They are all evident to 
those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge. For I will instruct you 
in truth, that your hope may be in the Lord, and ye may be filled with the Spirit.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet will he be in rest. Thus the 
righteous one who hath died shall condemn the ungodly that are living. For they will 
see the end of the righteous, and will not understand what God in His counsel hath 
decreed of him. For the Lord shall cast the ungodly down headlong, that they will be 
speechless; and He shall shake them from the foundations; and they will be utterly 
laid waste, and be in sorrow; and their memorial will perish. And when they cast up 
the account of their sins, they will come with fear: and their own iniquities will 
convict them to their face. Then shall the righteous man stand in great boldness 
before the face of such as have afflicted him and made no account of his labors, 
when they see it, they will be troubled with terrible fear, and will be amazed at the 
strangeness of his salvation. And they, repenting and groaning from anguish of spirit, 
will say within themselves: “This was he whom we held betimes in derision, and as a 
proverb of reproach. We fools accounted his life madness, and his end to be without 
honor! How is he numbered among the children of God; and how is his lot among 

--- PAGE 5 ---
the saints? Therefore have we strayed from the path of truth, and the light of 
righteousness hath not shined unto us, and the sun of righteousness rose not upon us. 
We wearied ourselves in the way of wickedness and destruction. Yea, we have gone 
through deserts, where there lay no way: but as for the way of the Lord, we have not 
known it.”  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
The mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom; the lips of wise men know grace. 
The mouth of wise men meditateth wisdom, and righteousness shall deliver them 
from death. At the death of a just man, his hope doth not perish. A righteous son is 
born for life; and a good man shall eat of the fruits of righteousness. The righteous 
always have light, and with the Lord they find grace and glory. The tongue of the wise 
knoweth what is good; there is wisdom in the good heart of a man. The Lord loveth 
holy hearts, and pleasing to Him are all the undefiled in the way. The wisdom of the 
Lord enlighteneth the countenance of the prudent; for she overtaketh those who 
desire her, in making herself first known unto them, and is easily seen of them that 
love her. Whoso seeketh her early shall have no great travail; and whoso watcheth for 
her shall quickly be without care. For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of 
her, and showeth herself favorably to them in the ways. Vice shall not prevail against 
wisdom. For this cause was I a lover of her beauty; and I loved her, and sought her 
out from my youth. I desired to make her my bride, for the Master of all Himself 
loved her. For she is privy to the mysteries of the knowledge of God, and a discloser 
of His works. Her labors are virtues: for she teacheth chastity and prudence, justice 
and fortitude, which are such things, as men can have nothing more profitable in their 
life. If a man desireth much experience, she knoweth things of old, and conjectureth 
aright what is to come. She knoweth subtleties of speech, and can expound obscure 
dreams; she foreseeth signs and wonders, and the events of seasons and times. She is 
a good ally unto all, for immortality is in her, and in communing with her in speech, a 
good report. Wherefore, I spake with the Lord, and besought Him, and with my 
whole heart I said: God of my fathers and Lord of mercy, Who hast created all things 
by Thy word, and fashioned man by Thy wisdom, that he should have dominion over 
the creatures which Thou hast made, and order the world according to equity and 
righteousness: give me wisdom which sitteth by Thy throne, and reject me not from 
among Thy children, for I am Thy servant and the son of Thy handmaid. O, send her 
from the heavens, out of Thy holy habitation, and from the throne of Thy glory, that, 
being with me, she may teach me what is well-pleasing in Thy sight, may guide me to 
understanding and preserve me in her glory. For the thoughts of mortal men are 
miserable, and their ponderings sinful.  
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera of the holy hierarch:  
In Tone IV: Today the Church is splendidly adorned, and it rejoiceth, crying aloud: 
My beauty is more luminous than all others; for the glorious Peter, the ornament of 
holy hierarchs, hath ascended to heaven, to the King Who reigneth above all kings! 
Come, ye assemblies of the Orthodox who love the feasts of the Church, and let us 
offer up hymns and praises unto Him, crying aloud: O adornment of hierarchs, 
entreat Christ God that He deliver the Christian people from all sorrow, and save our 
souls!  
In Tone VI: The divine grace of the Spirit hath revealed thee to be a holy hierarch 
and hath shown thee to be an excellent teacher. Wherefore, rebuking the darkness of 
ungodliness, thou didst enlighten the people with teachings of the knowledge of God, 
O divinely wise and holy hierarch Peter, thou art the glory and adornment of 
hierarchs, and wast for all an excellent model of teachings. As thou hast boldness 
before Christ God, ever pray that our souls be saved.  
The fruit of thy noble works enlightened the hearts of the faithful, O sacred father. 
For who hath heard of thy boundless humility and is not amazed at thy patience, and 
at thy kindness toward the poor and mercy toward the sorrowful? Thou didst teach 
all in a godly manner, O holy hierarch Peter, and crowned now in the heavens with a 
wreath which withereth not, pray thou on behalf of our souls. 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O thrice-blessed, venerable and sacred father, good shepherd, disciple of Christ the 
Chief Shepherd, who laid down thy soul for thy sheep: O all-famed and holy hierarch 
Peter, by thy prayers entreat Him, that He grant us great mercy.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone VI: 
Hold festival, O Sion! Be glad, O Jerusalem! O city of Christ God, receive the 
Creator, Who is contained by the cave and the manger! Open thy gates unto me, that, 
entering through them, I may see Him Who holdeth creation in His hand, wrapped as 
a babe in swaddling-bands, He Whom the angels hymn with unceasing songs: the 
Lord, the Bestower of life, Who saveth our race.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”:  
Seeing the Creator held in thine arms, O all-pure one, thou didst exclaim: “O my 
sweet Child, how is it that I behold Thee as a babe, and am now unable to understand 
Thine unapproachable condescension? I hymn Thy might and worship Thy loving-
kindness, for which cause Thou hast come to save the world!”  
Verse: God shall come forth out of Theman, * and the Holy One out of the 
mountain overshadowed and densely wooded.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
O Mother who knewest not wedlock, He Who is invisible hath appeared, incarnate 
of thee, born in a cave, and seen of the divine ranks of heaven; for He hath come to 
deliver man from the deception of the serpent. Be not amazed at thy birthgiving 
which transcendeth nature, O most immaculate one!  
Verse: O Lord, I have heard Thy report, and I was afraid; * O Lord, I 
considered Thy works, and I was stricken with awe.  
“I behold Thee, the all-perfect Babe, lying in the manger, and I cannot fathom the 
ineffable depths of .this mystery! How have I remained incorrupt after giving birth, 
transcending the laws of nature? What manner of praise shall I offer Thee? How shall 
I glorify Thee?” the Virgin Maiden exclaimed.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Come, all ye faithful, and together let us hymn the all-blessed Peter, the lamp of 
piety, the rule of abstinence, the pillar of patience, the treasury of simplicity, the 
abundant river of humility, the consolation of the poor, the receiver of strangers, the 
truly blessed husbandman of the true love of Christ. For, having lived and passed 
over to heaven, he hath been shown to be a helper and savior of all, a physician of 
illnesses and incurable sufferings, and a liberator from all manner of perils, and he 
entreateth Christ to save our souls.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone VIII: 
O Bethlehem, become thou the metropolis of God: for the never-waning Light 
cometh to be born within thee! Ye angels, marvel in heaven! Ye men, render up glory 
on earth! Ye magi, bring a most glorious gift out of Persia! Ye shepherds, piping, 
sweetly sing the thrice-holy hymn: Let every breath praise Him Who accomplisheth 
all!  
After the blessing of the loaves: 
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Be glad now, O earth that before wast barren! * For, lo! Christ hath shown forth 
within thee a luminary * who shineth forth clearly in the world * healing our 
infirmities and ailments. * Wherefore, join chorus and rejoice with boldness; * for it is 
the high priest of the Most High ** who doeth these things. (Twice) 
Troparion of the forefeast, in the same tone:  
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell! (Once) 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Be it known that when the service to Saint Peter the Metropolitan is celebrated, we 
chant the canon of the Martyr Juliana at Compline, together with the Triodion, to 
which we append the Stichera of the martyr.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell! (Twice) 
Glory ..., that of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Be glad now, O earth that before wast barren! * For, lo! Christ hath shown forth 
within thee a luminary * who shineth forth clearly in the world * healing our 
infirmities and ailments. * Wherefore, join chorus and rejoice with boldness; * for it is 
the high priest of the Most High ** who doeth these things.  
Both now ..., that of the forefeast.  
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Let the great hierarch of Christ, the godly Peter, be hymned: the pillar of light 
illumining us with the splendors of miracles, the moist cloud extinguishing the flame 
of the passions and bedewing the thoughts of the faithful.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in the same melody:  
He Who bowed down the heavens and made His abode within the Virgin cometh 
in the flesh, to be born in the cave of Bethlehem as was written, and He Who imparts 
life to babes in the womb, is to be seen as a babe. Wherefore, rejoicing, let us now 
greet Him with uprightness of heart.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
With love we all cry out to thee, the merciful favorite of Christ, guileless and meek; 
and we earnestly pray: Bring an end to the civil strife of our passions, set at naught 
the ungodly wiles of the Moslems and make them subject to the Orthodox, O ever-
blessed one, and deliver from all temptations those who hymn thee with love.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in Tone I: 
Be glad, O Bethlehem! Make ready, O Ephratha! For, lo! The ewe-lamb, bearing 
the great Shepherd within her womb, cometh to give birth; and, seeing the divine star 
beforehand, the magi rejoice in uprightness of heart, singing with the shepherds.  
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We magnify thee, O holy hierarch Peter, and 
we honor thy holy memory; for thou dost entreat Christ God on our behalf.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice)  

--- PAGE 10 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
With the effulgence of Orthodoxy thou hast enlightened those heavy laden with 
sins as ones lying in darkness; and thou hast repulsed all the wiles of the evil spirits, 
revealing thyself to be a worker of miracles, glorified by the providence of the Most 
High. Wherefore, we honor thee with faith, O holy hierarch Peter, who dwellest in 
company with the apostles and patriarchs.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in the same melody:  
O Bethlehem, prepare thyself to greet the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God; for, lo! 
she cometh to thee, bearing the infant Christ, Who is co-beginningless with the 
Father and the Spirit. She will give birth to Him in the cave, and after giving birth will 
be shown to remain yet a virgin.  
Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world.  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN, § 35, (JN. 10: 1-8) 
The Lord said to the Jews who came to Him: “Verily, verily, I say unto you: He 
that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the 
same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of 
the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his 
own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, 
he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a 
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of 
strangers.” This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things 
they were which He spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: “Verily, 
verily, I say unto you: I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before Me are 
thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them.  
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI:  
When the time came for thy precious body to fall asleep, O father, a multitude of 
the faithful, surrounding thy bier, accompanied thee with compunction. One of them, 
beholding thee blessing the people, was astonished, and Prince John cried out, 
weeping: “O master, what shall I render unto thee for the benefactions which thou 
hast given us, having received grace from God?” Wherefore, O holy hierarch Peter, 
earnestly beseech Christ our God, that thy city be preserved unassailed.  
Canon of the forefeast, with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos; and two canons of the 
saint, with a total of 8 Troparia.  
Canon of the forefeast, with the alphabet acrostic, by Joseph, in Tone IV:  

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE I  
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the mighty 
strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as on a timbrel 
* I may chant a hymn of victory. 
Rejoice, O heaven, and be glad, O earth! For our God, having taken on flesh, is 
born of the Virgin Maiden and is wrapped in swaddling bands, breaking the bonds of 
our transgressions, in that He is compassionate.  
The pure Queen giveth birth in a manner past understanding to the King of all 
Who openeth the kingdom on high to the faithful and utterly removeth the sin which 
ever accursedly reigneth within us.  
The writings of the prophets have attained their end; for, lo! Christ Whom they 
proclaimed beforehand is revealed, incarnate, in the city of Bethlehem. Let us now 
hasten today to celebrate the forefeast of His nativity with uprightness of mind.  
Canon I of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto our 
God and Redeemer let us sing. 
O divinely wise father, holy hierarch Peter, open thou mine unworthy lips, that I 
may hymn thee; and accept as incense of sweet savor that which, unworthy though I 
am, I offer unto thee out of my poverty.  
Let us all hymn Peter, the great hierarch. Let us honor the helper and confirmation 
of the land of Russia, whom the Lord hath given to the city of Moscow as a vigilant 
guardian.  
Thou didst follow the saving commandments of Christ, O most wise and holy 
hierarch Peter, and wast an intercessor for widows and orphans, and the great defense 
of the Russian land.  
Theotokion: O most pure Theotokos, who hast given birth unto the Creator and 
Savior of all who hymn thee, from misfortunes save thy city, unceasingly praying to 
thy Son and our God for us.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye 
Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the Lord, * 
and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
Taking the grace of the Spirit into thy heart, O father, holy hierarch of Christ, 
illumine the tongue and enlighten the heart of those who hymn thee, that with 
splendor we may hymn thy memory, O venerable Peter.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
The great Peter, the mighty pastor of the Church, summoneth shepherds and the 
flock, and the whole Church, to his memorial. Wherefore, having assembled let us 
with splendor keep the festival of our common father.  
Even though thy corrections are beyond our words and thoughts, O father Peter, 
yet do thou accept with love the spiritual offering which we make unto thee according 
to our strength, O right wondrous one; for none of us are able to fashion fitting 
hymns for thee.  
Theotokion: The radiant Sun cometh, appearing from the gates which were shut; 
for His appearance hath abolished the night, and the day draweth nigh. Wherefore, O 
our corrupt nature, receive from the Virgin the Master Who is become man for thy 
sake.  
Katavasia according to the Typicon. 
ODE III  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Likened to a barren woman * the Church from among the nations hath 
given birth, * and the assembly abundant in children, hath grown weak. * Let 
us cry out to our wondrous God: * Holy art Thou, O Lord!  
Daniel beheld Thee, O Word, as the Stone cut from the mountain of the Virgin, 
which broke the temples of the idols in pieces by Thy might. Wherefore, we glorify 
Thee with fear.  
Guided to Thee by the star, O Christ, Thou King of all, the magi from the East 
bring gifts; myrrh, gold and frankincense-marveling at Thy condescension.  
The unploughed field beareth the life-bearing Grain; Mary cometh to give birth in 
the city of Bethlehem to Him Who feedeth the souls of all who cry: Holy art Thou, O 
Lord!  
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
By thy prayers to our Creator and God crush the Moslems and all our godless 
adversaries, O venerable Peter, show forth their power, which warreth against us, as 
impotent; and put down their wicked savagery.  
O Master, in a generation gone by Thou didst show forth a wonder-worker, the 
holy hierarch Peter, the confirmation of the Russian land, the upright rule of Thy 
Church, the leader of the priestly rank.  
The man who touched thee while thou wast in thy coffin was counted worthy to 
receive healing, O holy one; for by the grace of God thou didst grant that he be able 
to stretch forth his arms, which were bent in upon his breast.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: Be thou for me a refuge and haven, an unassailable rampart and 
helper, O most pure Virgin who hast given birth in the flesh unto God, the most 
compassionate Redeemer and Savior of those who hymn thee, O Bride of God.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before all 
ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * to 
Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art Thou, 
O Lord. 
God, Who knoweth all things, knew thee in the womb before thou wast conceived, 
O God-bearer. And when thou wast born, He sanctified thee and made thee a great 
shepherd of His sheep; for He entrusted His sheep to thee, as He did to the Apostle 
Peter.  
Parting the sea of the passions with the staff of abstinence, O blessed one, like 
Moses thou didst ascend the mountain of dispassion, and, having received noetic 
tablets, thou didst teach thy flock the law of God.  
Thou wast shown to be humble, meek and gentle, O Peter; wherefore, the grace of 
the Spirit, abundantly poured forth upon thee, revealed thee to be a great man who 
shineth over our land with rays of miracles.  
Theotokion: God, Who is strong and mighty, hath now revealed Himself to those 
who are in the darkness of the shadow of death. O ye faithful, behold the great Light-
Christ-in the cave, Who is to be born of the Virgin in an awesome manner. Let us 
hymn her with faith.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Today the Virgin cometh to the cave * to ineffably give birth unto the pre-eternal 
Word. * Having heard this, be glad, O thou ecumene, * and with the angels and 
shepherds glorify the pre-eternal God, ** Who is to appear as a little babe.  
Ikos: O truly awesome wonder past all telling! He Who giveth existence to all, in 
His goodness hath entered the womb of the holy Virgin, and cometh to be born in 
the cave, and to be laid in a manger. And His star is herald from on high to the magi 
who come to do Him homage with gifts, drawing from afar those who zealously 
follow the prophecy of Balaam, who said: “A star will proclaim beforehand the little 
babe, the pre-eternal God!”  
Sessional Hymn of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Thou hast been revealed to the world to be a resplendent beacon, illumining the 
thoughts of the faithful with the brilliance of thy discourses, O holy hierarch Peter 
our father; wherefore, with joy we all celebrate thy sacred and divine memory today.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in the same melody:  
O virgin, begin ye beforehand the joy of virgins; ye mothers, praise the coming 
forth of the Mother of Christ our God; rejoice, O magi, with the angels, and ye 
shepherds with us! For the Virgin cometh to give birth in the city of Bethlehem to a 
Son, the pre-eternal God, Who saveth the world from corruption.  
ODE IV  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
The holy phial of precious sanctity cometh to pour forth in the city of Bethlehem 
Him Who imparteth sanctity unto all of us who cry: Glory to Thy power, O Christ!  
O divinely eloquent Isaiah, beholding the fulfillment of thine honored prophesies, 
rejoice and be glad! For without seed the Virgin hath given birth in the flesh to the 
Uncontainable One in the cave of Bethlehem.  
Jesus is born in the flesh; the Timeless One is seen as an infant in time, and by His 
ineffable abasement deifieth me who, have become poor through corrupting 
disobedience.  
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
With the grace of the Spirit thou wast anointed a high priest, O most excellent 
Peter; for thou didst put on Christ because of thy pure life. Wherefore, thou didst 
teach all to glorify the one God in Trinity.  
Deliver thy flock from the storm of sin, from tribulations and sorrows, O 
venerable hierarch Peter, leading us to the calm harbor of the divine will of Christ.  
Thou wast shown to be a favorite of Christ, O most sacred father Peter; 
wherefore, cease thou never to pray to the Lord, that He deliver thy flock from perils, 
misfortunes and sorrows, and from violent trials.  
Theotokion: The assemblies of hierarchs and the choirs of the venerable glorify 
thee in a sacred manner; for thou didst bear in thine arms, as an infant, the Creator of 
all, the Son and Word of God.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, * 
O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Bowing to the laws of the Spirit from earliest childhood, O venerable one, thou 
didst pass over the laws of the flesh, which by mighty asceticism thou didst mortify in 
thy life. Wherefore, thou hast been given to the faithful as a great wonder-worker, O 
blessed Peter.  
Thou gavest neither sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, until the 
Creator of all found thy heart to be a tranquil place. And, having fittingly purified it, 
the eternal King and God showed it to be His habitation of glory.  
Slay thou the incurable sensual knowledge of my flesh, O most wise one, and as 
thou art mighty and powerful, guide me to the divine ways. Make me subject to good 
laws, O blessed one, and show me, who art enslaved to cruel passions, to be a servant 
of Christ.  
Theotokion: As it is written, the Lord hath now sent deliverance unto peoples, 
tribes and nations; for He maketh all peoples for Himself, that they may worship the 
one incarnation of the Son and confess thee to be the Theotokos.  
ODE V  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father's divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
God Emmanuel is born from the Virgin, and laid in a manger; of His own will He 
worketh our restoration. Wherefore, we piously celebrate the forefeast of His nativity.  
O Thou Who art the beginningless Word, equal in essence with the Father, having 
been laid in a manger of dumb beasts thou hast released from irrationality us who 
piously celebrate the forefeast of Thy nativity.  
Blessed was the root of Jesse which produced the pure one who beareth the divine 
Flower, Christ the Lord. And, rejoicing, we celebrate the forefeast of His nativity.  
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Standing round about thy shrine, O venerable hierarch Peter, we have thee as a 
mediator before God, a help and an unshakable confirmation for the land of Russia.  
As thou wast merciful to the poor, O all-famed one, ask now the mercy of the 
Spirit; for in exercising almsgiving, O holy father Peter, thou didst set up a radiant 
lamp.  
Thou wast truly the habitation of the Holy Spirit, O blessed Peter, and wast well 
enriched by the divine gifts revealed in Him.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Theotokion: O most pure one, we call thee the myrrh, in that thou hast given birth 
in the flesh unto God, the gracious Myrrh poured forth upon all who have recourse 
to thy protection.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
The great wealth of thy compassions hath been shown forth in our land as an 
infinite outpouring of thy mercy, O servant of Christ; for thou dost answer those who 
petition thee, and dost strive to fulfill their requests, O blessed one.  
Thou wast shown to be meek and humble in deed and word, and thereby drew all 
to thee. With love and good works thou didst subdue all, and by thy miracles thou 
didst gladden the hearts of those strengthened by thee.  
Christ, the great Shepherd of all, showed thee forth as the shepherd and teacher of 
His reason-endowed sheep, O blessed one. As a compassionate shepherd, seek me 
out now, who am thy sheep lost in the mountains of perdition.  
Theotokion: In the abyss of His ineffable compassions, the great Shepherd of 
mankind and High Priest came forth as a man from the Virgin. Prepare thyself, O 
Bethlehem! Ye shepherds, raise a hymn proclaiming unto the ends of the earth our 
common exaltation!  
ODE VI  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many sins 
hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O Greatly-
merciful One. 
Having been born for us as a little babe on earth, O Thou Who shone forth 
ineffably from the Father before all ages, free all from the ancient disobedience, in 
that Thou art compassionate.  
Strange and most glorious things were heard in the city of Bethlehem when Thou 
wast born, O beginningless Word; for with the angels, shepherds offered up hymnody 
to Thee as Master.  
The star of righteousness ineffably proclaimeth to the magi the Sun Who hath 
been born, and, rejoicing, we now celebrate the forefeast of His honored nativity.  
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Thou didst make thy life chaste, O thou who art manifest in sanctity, adorning 
thyself with righteousness and uniting to thyself the virtues by manliness of mind, O 
most blessed and holy hierarch Peter.  
Preserve thy city from the predations of the ungodly infidels and from civil strife, 
O most blessed hierarch Peter, unceasingly entreating Christ the Master to grant 
peace to thy flock.  
Glorified even after thy death as one living, thou workest miracles for the infirm 
and by the grace of God givest healing unto those who are crippled; for the Lord 
saith: I will glorify him who glorifieth Me.  
Theotokion: Thou wast more exalted than the heavenly hosts, having conceived 
the ineffable Word of God, Who hath accomplished all things by His word, and Who 
was begotten of the Father before all ages. Him do thou never cease to entreat, O 
pure one.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
Thou wast truly a father to orphans and a helper of widows, O glorious one, the 
sweet consolation of the grieving and those in sorrow, the healer of sufferings of soul 
and body; wherefore, we call upon thee to be our intercessor amid our adverse 
circumstances.  
Joyfully celebrating thy memorial with the people today, sacred peoples keep 
festival, O father, and together with them true hermits and simple folk hymn thee in 
common as their intercessor and teacher.  
I alone am become a wicked child through vile passions, O glorious father, and for 
this cause am unworthy to participate in thy goodly and beautiful celebration; yet, 
having washed away the defilement of my soul and body, O venerable one, show me 
forth as worthy of thy festival.  
Theotokion: O true wonder! Wonder surpassing all telling and all understanding! 
The Virgin is acknowledged to be both Virgin and Mother, and Him Who was born 
of her to be both God and man. Celebrating the forefeast of His radiant nativity, we 
sing hymns of joy.  
Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “To thee, the champion leader ...”:  
Unto thee, the chosen and wondrous wonderworker of our land, * do we flee 
today with love, weaving hymns, O God-bearer, * as thou hast boldness before the 
Lord, * deliver us from multifarious evil circumstances that we may cry to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O confirmation of our city!  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Ikos: Thou hast been revealed to be a new wonder-worker, imparting healings 
unto all who fervently approach thee in humility of heart. And, invisibly visiting the 
Christian people, O God-bearer, thou dost enlighten our land, that together we may 
cry out to thee thus: Rejoice, abode of the light of dispassion; Rejoice, dispeller of 
dark passions! Rejoice, thou who hast set at naught the wiles of the demons; Rejoice, 
thou who hast gladdened the ranks of the angels! Rejoice, summit of the pure vision 
of God; Rejoice, depths of humility, washing sicknesses away! Rejoice, for thou didst 
behold invisible things; Rejoice, for thou hast joined the choir of holy hierarchs! 
Rejoice, pastor and teacher of the Russian land; Rejoice, excellent boast of bishops! 
Rejoice, thou for whose sake God hath shown forth great miracles; Rejoice, thou in 
whom God is glorified! Rejoice, thou confirmation of our city.  
ODE VII  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: The three youths in Babylon, * regarded the tyrant's command as 
foolishness, * and cried aloud in the midst of the flame: * Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God of our fathers!  
How can a cave contain Thee, the Uncontainable One, Who cometh to be born 
for our sake? How can the Virgin give suck to Thee, Who art the Nourisher of all, O 
compassionate Jesus?  
Following the words of the magus Balaam, the magi hastened to pay homage to 
Christ with gifts, perceiving that He is the One Who reigneth over all creatures.  
O human nature, barren of any of the virtues, rejoice and dance! For Christ 
cometh to be born in the flesh of the Virgin, that He might show thee to be right 
fruitful in good works.  
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: 'O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.' 
Open unto me the gates of repentance, O most blessed hierarch Peter, that I may 
wash away the defilement of my wretched soul and body, directing all my senses and 
my conscience to chant unto God: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
We, thy servants, have thee as a fervent helper and the unassailable rampart and 
confirmation of thy city of Moscow; and we fear not the adverse foe, but vanquishing 
them by the power of Christ, we chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Thou didst confirm the rules of the fathers, and with the magnificence of the 
priesthood didst build an all-beauteous church for the most holy Mother of God; and 
by thy teachings instructed the people to chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou!  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Theotokion: Having thee now as a haven of salvation, O Virgin Theotokos, we 
flee the misfortunes and storms of life; and, escaping to the harbor of thy tranquility, 
we cry out to thy Son: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children brought 
up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing in the 
midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Together our land and other countries proclaim thy wonders, O father, teaching all 
to chant unto Christ most joyously: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The Bridegroom Who surpasseth all the sons of mankind in beauty, as it is written, 
showed thee forth to His bride, the Church, as a most comely bridegroom who bore 
the likeness of His image.  
Having adorned thy life with almsgiving, meekness and true love, thou wast shown 
to be an excellent emulator of the good Shepherd, having chosen well His virtues.  
Theotokion: The Master cometh to be born in the cave as a man. Let us go forth 
to greet the pure Virgin, O ye faithful, chanting unto her with joy: Rejoice, joy of the 
world! Rejoice, O Virgin Mother of Christ!  
ODE VIII 
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All ye 
works bless and hymn the Lord. 
In Thine ineffable loving-kindness, to save me who through my great disobedience 
have become a den of thieves, O Christ, it was Thy will to be born in a cave of the 
pure Virgin.  
Signing a writ of complete remission for me, Thou, the Author of creation, didst 
register Thyself with servants in accordance with the edict of Caesar. O Master, I 
hymn the unfathomable abyss of Thy loving-kindness!  
O radiant palace of the Master, how is it that thou hast entered the least of caves 
to give birth to the Lord and King Who became incarnate for our sake, O all-holy 
Virgin Bride of God?  
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the mystery of the 
Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning bush: * praise ye and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Though I have been overcome by the enemy through many transgressions due to 
the tumults of life, like Manasseh I approach Thee with faith, O Christ, and cry out to 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Thee in repentance: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages!  
O most blessed one, earnestly make supplications and entreaties unto God for thy 
servants, for, having thee as helper and ally amid griefs, we are saved from 
misfortunes, hymning the Lord and supremely exalting Him throughout the ages.  
The children of Hagar are arming themselves against thy humble people, O all-
honored hierarch, father Peter. Crush them with the invisible power of thy prayers to 
the Master on behalf of us, thy faithful servants, who hymn the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: O most pure and most glorious Virgin Lady, with the holy hierarch 
Peter earnestly entreat thy Son and King, that from all need and tribulation He deliver 
thy loyal city of Moscow, which blesseth thee with faith, O Sovereign Lady, and doth 
hymn and supremely exalt thee throughout the ages.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so the 
fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin's womb * into which it had 
descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation bless the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
By thy supplication nurture this thy flock which is great in number; by thy prayers 
still thou the storm of contrary winds, both physical and spiritual; deliver us from all 
temptations and troubles, and preserve us utterly unharmed.  
The descendents of Hagar, who rise up against us and desire to vex thine 
inheritance, have fallen, vanquished by thy supplications, and are become a mockery 
and a byword, bewailing their fall; but we joyously hymn thy sacred memory.  
Ineffable is thy love for thy children, surpassing paternal love, O father; wherefore, 
thou dost ever invisibly visit us, by thy constant supplications asking salvation for us, 
and giving us joy and tranquility, O Peter.  
Theotokion: Not disdaining that which He created in His own image-me who am 
wholly fallen and have perished, O pure Virgin Theotokos, God hath wholly restored 
me through thee. Wherefore, all creation continually hymneth thee, the cause of our 
salvation, saying: Blessed art thou among women, O all-immaculate Lady.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
O ye faithful, let us dance, leap up and cry aloud together: The Salvation of all 
cometh! The Lord draweth nigh to be born, that He might save those who with godly 
wisdom celebrate His nativity!  
Take up thy psaltery and harp, O holy David, and chant in hymnody: O house of 
Ephratha, be glad! For He Whom the Father begat from within Himself is most 
radiantly born in thee, incarnate of the Virgin!  
Like a downpour, like a mighty rainfall hath the Master descended into thy womb, 
O Virgin Mother and Birthgiver of God, and He hath watered lands hardened by 
dark ungodliness, drying up the seas of falsehood.  
Canon I of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Like the harlot, the thief and the publican I cry unto Thee from the depths of my 
heart: I have sinned! Forgive me my many offenses, O Master, and deliver me from 
all Thine anger through the prayrs of the holy hierarch Peter, that I may unceasingly 
magnify Thee.  
Come, all ye people of Moscow! And, gathering at the tomb of the blessed 
hierarch Peter, cry out unto God with tears, saying: O Lord, deliver Thy people from 
misfortunes, that we may magnify Thee forever!  
Thine own city of Moscow greatly rejoiceth in thee, O all-honored father, holy 
hierarch Peter, having thee as an ally and helper. Depart not now in spirit from us, O 
master, making supplication for us to God, that He deliver us from the violence of 
the ungodly Moslems, our enemies, that we may ever magnify thee.  
Theotokion: O all-pure Mary, Sovereign Lady, by thine entreaties cleanse my 
defiled heart and soul, and make me an heir to life everlasting; and, remembering not 
my countless evils, beseech thy Son and God for me, wretch that I am, and preserve 
those who hymn thee, O most holy one.  
Canon II of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is heaven; * 
the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in which Christ 
God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and magnify. 
It is not possible to hymn thy glory as is meet; for thou grantest a multitude of 
miracles and abundant healings unto those who with ardent faith approach thee, O 
holy hierarch Peter, thou boast of our land.  
Christ hath set thee as the foundation of His Church and a mighty tower forever 
unshakable, protecting and making steadfast thy city, that it might remain utterly 
unshaken and unassailed by its enemies.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Let all of us; bishops, priests and monks, and all the people, men and women, the 
old and the young, of every age and every dignity, splendidly celebrate the memory of 
our holy hierarch.  
Theotokion: Let us hasten to behold the greatest of wonders! For the Virgin 
cometh, bearing in her womb the Babe Who giveth life to babes. Angels join in 
common hymnody with shepherds, proclaiming the salvation made manifest in the 
cave.  
Exapostilarion of the forefeast:  
Spec. Mel.: “He hath visited us ...”:  
Come, O ye faithful, let us all offer up hymns on the forefeast of the nativity! 
Christ already cometh to be born in Bethlehem, that He might save the world, in that 
He alone is the Lover of mankind.  
Glory ..., Exapostilarion of the holy hierarch: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, ye women ...”:  
The Holy Spirit anointed thee a hierarch, O most blessed Peter, to tend the flock 
of Christ in the fields of salvation; wherefore, thou didst strive to guide the people 
along the straight paths. For this cause thou hast now received twofold crowns from 
the Bestower of crowns.  
Both now ..., Another Exapostilarion of the forefeast: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! Adorn thy houses! For unto thee doth the Virgin 
come, bearing the infant Christ, Who with the Father is equally without beginning, for 
He hath come to save the human race.  
On the Praises, 8 Stichera: 4 of the forefeast in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go forth, ye angelic hosts ...”:  
The creative Wisdom now cometh forth! * The clouds of prophecy are parted! * 
Grace doth flourish, * and Truth hath shone forth! * The shadows of indistinct 
images cease to be! * The gates of Eden have opened! * Dance thou, O Adam! * God 
our Creator ** hath of His own will taken on our form!  
Fulfilling the sayings and visions of the prophets, * the Word is born in the flesh, * 
clothed in coarse matter * and, having been born, lieth in a manger of dumb beasts. * 
Lo! the extreme condescension! * Behold the awesome dispensation, * for which sake 
we chant: * Christ, the King of Israel, ** hath now arrived!  
Behold, in a manner transcending understanding and all telling, * the pure one 
giveth birth to the Son of God * Whom the prophets of old proclaimed; * foreseeing 
through the Holy Spirit, * Who preserved her undefiled, * and released Adam from 
sin. * O ye people, let us say: * Christ our King ** hath now arrived in the flesh! 
  

--- PAGE 23 ---
Without leaving the bosom of the Father, * Thou didst reveal Thyself as a man, * 
and held in the arms of the Virgin, * Thou didst summon the magi from Persia by a 
star, * who worshipped Thee as King and God. * Thou dost destroy the ungodly 
princes of the heathen with the spirit of Thy lips, * and dost shepherd the people ** 
whom Thou hast brought into existence.  
And 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O venerable father Peter, * while yet in thy mother's womb * thou didst receive a 
calling to be a bishop * which was uttered by God. * From childhood thou didst love 
Christ, * receiving from Him the flock of His reason-endowed sheep, * and thou 
didst shepherd well the Church of God. * Wherefore, we celebrate thy dormition and, 
rejoicing, ** we magnify Christ. (Twice)  
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation of my heart shall be 
of understanding.  
Praying for us, O venerable hierarch Peter, * by thy supplications unto God beg 
confirmation for the Church, * care and guidance for the bishop of the flock, * 
victory for the nation over the Moslems * and triumph over all enemies, * an 
unshakable and unassailable existence for thy city, * and remission of sins for all the 
faithful people * who have recourse unto the shrine of thy relics, ** O holy hierarch.  
Verse: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, * and his tongue 
shall speak of judgment.  
O venerable and divinely wise father, * thou hast truly revealed thyself, * guiding 
unto the way of truth the hearts of those * who have been deceived. * Thou wast the 
defender of the poor and widows, * the steadfast chastening of nobles. * O holy one, 
ask thou remission of sins * for all the faithful ** who have recourse unto the most 
pure Mother of God.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Every city and land rejoiceth, celebrating today with the glorious city of Moscow; 
for the great Peter, our wondrous physician and savior, doth offer us doses of 
heavenly medicine. He hath lovingly called all to his free cures, which are not wrought 
by human skill or by bindings, but through the activity of the Holy Spirit, imparting 
supra-natural healing of soul and body. And receiving this in abundance, we of every 
generation and age glorify Christ God, Who for the sake of His favored one 
bestoweth great mercy upon those who sing his praises.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go forth, ye angelic hosts ...”: 
The prophecies of Balaam the magus * receive their fulfillment; * for those who 
were filled with Persian miracles, * illumined with the brilliance of the unusual star * 
by Christ Who was incarnate in Bethlehem, * the neversetting Sun, * indicate by their 
bestowal of gifts * God the King, ** Who of His own will became a mortal man.  
Great Doxology. Troparia. Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour.  
Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Be glad now, O earth that before wast barren! * For, lo! Christ hath shown forth 
within thee a luminary * who shineth forth clearly in the world * healing our 
infirmities and ailments. * Wherefore, join chorus and rejoice with boldness; * for it is 
the high priest of the Most High ** who doeth these things.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell!  

--- PAGE 25 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the forefeast, 
and 4 from ODE VI of Canon I of the holy hierarch.  
Daniel beheld Thee, O Word, as the Stone cut from the mountain of the Virgin, 
which broke the temples of the idols in pieces by Thy might. Wherefore, we glorify 
Thee with fear. (Twice) 
Guided to Thee by the star, O Christ, Thou King of all, the magi from the East 
bring gifts; myrrh, gold and frankincense-marveling at Thy condescension.  
The unploughed field beareth the life-bearing Grain; Mary cometh to give birth in 
the city of Bethlehem to Him Who feedeth the souls of all who cry: Holy art Thou, O 
Lord!  
Thou didst make thy life chaste, O thou who art manifest in sanctity, adorning 
thyself with righteousness and uniting to thyself the virtues by manliness of mind, O 
most blessed and holy hierarch Peter.  
Preserve thy city from the predations of the ungodly infidels and from civil strife, 
O most blessed hierarch Peter, unceasingly entreating Christ the Master to grant 
peace to thy flock.  
Glorified even after thy death as one living, thou workest miracles for the infirm 
and by the grace of God givest healing unto those who are crippled; for the Lord 
saith: I will glorify him who glorifieth Me.  
Theotokion: Thou wast more exalted than the heavenly hosts, having conceived 
the ineffable Word of God, Who hath accomplished all things by His word, and Who 
was begotten of the Father before all ages. Him do thou never cease to entreat, O 
pure one.  
After the entrance, the Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell!  
And that of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Be glad now, O earth that before wast barren! * For, lo! Christ hath shown forth 
within thee a luminary * who shineth forth clearly in the world * healing our 
infirmities and ailments. * Wherefore, join chorus and rejoice with boldness; * for it is 
the high priest of the Most High ** who doeth these things.  
 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Glory ..., the Kontakion of the holy hierarch, in Tone VIII:  
Unto thee, the chosen and wondrous wonderworker of our land, * do we flee 
today with love, weaving hymns, O God-bearer, * as thou hast boldness before the 
Lord, * deliver us from multifarious evil circumstances that we may cry to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O confirmation of our city!  
Both now ..., that of the forefeast, in Tone III: 
Today the Virgin cometh to the cave * to ineffably give birth unto the pre-eternal 
Word. * Having heard this, be glad, O thou ecumene, * and with the angels and 
shepherds glorify the pre-eternal God, ** Who is to appear as a little babe.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: My mouth shall speak wisdom, * and the meditation 
of my heart shall be of understanding.  
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 318 (HEB. 7: 26-8: 2) 
Brethren, such a High Priest became us, Who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens; Who needeth not daily, as those 
high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for His own sins, and then for the people's: for 
this He did once, when He offered up Himself. For the law maketh men high priests 
which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the 
Son, Who is consecrated for evermore. Now of the things which we have spoken this 
is the sum: We have such a High Priest, Who is set on the right hand of the throne of 
the Majesty in the heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, 
which the Lord pitched, and not man.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: The mouth of the righteous shall meditate wisdom, and his 
tongue shall speak of judgment.  
Verse: The law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not be tripped.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (LK. 6: 17-23) 
At that time Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre 
and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who 
were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude 
sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He 
lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: 'Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the 
kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye 
that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when 

--- PAGE 27 ---
they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your 
name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, 
behold, your reward is great in heaven. 
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
