--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 23rd DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
COMMEMORATION OF SAINT NAHUM,  
EQUAL OF THE APOSTLES & WONDER-WORKER OF OKHRID  
AT LITTLE VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera of the holy hierarch, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
As a man of active prayer, in mind thou didst behold the noetic hosts, laying up 
divine words in thy heart, wherein thou didst also set up ascents like a ladder, O 
venerable Nahum our father. Pray thou now, that peace and great mercy be granted 
to our souls. (Twice)  
O most venerable Nahum, from childhood thou didst rest thy life upon Christ our 
God; and, strengthened by Him, thou didst make the passions of the flesh subject to 
thy mind, causing that which is baser to submit to that which is higher. Wherefore, 
pray thou, that He grant peace and great mercy to our souls.  
O our divinely wise father, thou wast shown to be a beacon most great, 
enlightening the world with the effulgence of miracles and divine works. Wherefore, 
the unapproachable Light received thee after thou didst fall asleep. Pray now, that He 
grant peace and great mercy to our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
The fruit of thy divine labors made steadfast the hearts of the faithful, O venerable 
father; for thou gavest no slumber to thine eyelids until thou didst send forth the glad 
tidings of Orthodox. Wherefore, assembling, we all hymn thy memory, O Nahum. 
Therein watch over us, interceding with boldness before Christ, and ask that we be 
delivered from evils.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in Tone VIII:  
O Bethlehem, become thou the metropolis of God: for the never-waning Light 
cometh to be born within thee! Ye angels, marvel in heaven! Ye mortals, render up 
glory on earth! Ye magi, bring a most glorious gift out of Persia! Ye shepherds, 
piping, sweetly sing the thrice-holy hymn: Let every breath praise Him Who 
accomplisheth all!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the forefeast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...” ,  
“Bearing gifts of frankincense, myrrh and gold * unto Thee, O Son, * the kings of 
the East have arrived, * knowing that Thou wast to be born; * and, lo! they stand 
beyond the doors! * Give Thou the command * that they behold Thee * as an infant 
held in mine arms, ** Who art far older than ancient Adam!”  
Verse: God shall come forth out of Theman, * and the Holy One out of a 
mountain overshadowed and densely wooded.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
“Come ye, and enter with haste,” * the Virgin said to the magi of old, * “and 
behold the Invisible One * Who hath become visible * in becoming a babe!” * And 
they came in with ardor * and rendered homage * and offered gifts, ** fulfilling the 
divine prophecies.  
Verse: O Lord, I have heard Thy report, and I was afraid; * O Lord, I 
considered Thy works, and I was stricken with awe.  
“In mine arms I bear Thee as a babe, * Who holdest all things, * and I am 
amazed,” * said she who knew not wedlock. * “How can I feed with milk * Thee 
Who feedest all, O my Son and Creator? * I glorify Thy boundless condescension 
toward men, ** whereby Thou savest the world which is perishing!”  
Glory ..., of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV: 
Thy good works have shone forth like the sun on earth and in heaven, O blessed 
servant of Christ, for in Mresia thou didst preach the truest immaculate Faith of 
Christ in an Orthodox manner. Wherefore, pray thou, O all-blessed and God-bearing 
Nahum, that at thy commemoration we be granted great mercy.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in the same tone:  
Dance, O Isaiah, and taking up the word of God, prophecy to the Maiden Mary: 
The bush shall burn, yet shall not be consumed by the radiance of the Godhead! 
Adorn thyself well, O Bethlehem! Open wide thy gates, O Eden! Ye magi, come and 
behold Salvation wrapped and lying in a manger, to Whom the star hath pointed, 
shining above the cave: the Lord and Bestower of life, Who saveth our generation!  
The Troparion of the holy hierarch, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast departed this world, cleaving unto Christ. * And having crucified thy 
flesh, thou livest for the Spirit, * O all-blessed Nahum. Thou didst strive to follow the 
course of the apostles, * and didst win countless multitudes in Bulgaria for the Faith. 
* Wherefore, by thy supplications ** deliver us from temptations.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Troparion of the forefeast, in the same tone:  
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 3 of the forefeast, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
With uprightness of mind * let us chant the hymns * of the forefeast of the nativity 
of Christ; * for, though equal in honor to the Father and the Spirit, * in His loving-
kindness He hath clothed Himself in our substance * that He might be born * in the 
city of Bethlehem. * His ineffable nativity ** have the shepherds and angels hymned.  
Let us shout to the sound of cymbals, * let us cry aloud in hymns: The advent of 
Christ hath come! * The predictions of the prophets have been fulfilled! * For Him of 
Whom they foretold * that He would appear to mankind in the flesh * is born in the 
holy cave * and lieth as a babe in the manger; ** and wrapped in swaddling-bands as a 
babe.  
Prepare thyself, O Bethlehem! * O Eden, be thou now opened! * The most holy 
one cometh to give birth! * Let the heavens be glad! * Let mortals leap for joy! * He 
Who is our rich Life * cometh in the magnitude of His mercy * to the manger and the 
cave, * assuming the poverty of Adam ** without change or commingling.  
And 5 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “With what wreaths of praise ...”:  
With what wreaths of praise, with what flowers of hymnody shall we adorn thee, 
O Christ-bearer Nahum? Receiving thy grace, we understand thee to be the beauteous 
abode of the Spirit, the splendid edifice of the Word, the right magnificent habitation 
of the Father, the most perfect dwelling-place of the Godhead Who is apprehended 
in three Hypostases and a single dignity, in Whom we all believe, and Who hath 
enlightened the populace of Bulgaria. (Twice)  
What words of prophecy do we apply to another as to thee, O holy one? Foreteller 
and mystic herald, river of the mysteries of God who gavest drink unto the cities of 
the ungodly, who purifieth the people with divine baptism, raising up a magnificent 
temple unto Christ out of the stony of heart. Wherefore, O blessed one, unceasingly 
ask that we be saved. (Twice)  
From all misfortunes and demonic perils, from temptation by unjust men who 
prefer wicked deeds, free all who have gathered to celebrate thine honored memory 
with love, who stand with faith before the divine shrine of thy relics and bow down 
with reverence before it; for we hold thee to be our most fervent helper.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Having received the wisdom of grace from the divine Spirit, thou didst instruct the 
inhabitants of Mresia in piety, O most honored father Nahum, thou adornment of all 
fasters and ascetics. As thou hast boldness before God, entreat Him to save our souls.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Adorn thyself well, O Bethlehem, for Eden hath been opened! Prepare thyself, O 
Ephratha, for Adam hath been restored, and Eve with him: for the curse hath been 
annulled, salvation hath blossomed forth, and the souls of the righteous are adorned, 
offering hymnody instead of myrrh as their gift, and receiving salvation of soul and 
incorruption. For, lo! He Who lieth in the manger doth order those who cry out to 
chant unceasingly in spirit: Glory be to Thee, O Lord!  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three lessons:  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord's hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete amour, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
At Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, and these Stichera: 
The composition of Parthenius of Leucium, in Tone II: O ye faithful, let us praise 
the star of light divine, the luminary of Bulgaria, the champion of the Faith, the godly 
Nahum; for he rejoiceth with the angels, receiving a crown of incorruption from God 
Himself, and prayeth that our souls be saved.  
O all-blessed and wise Nahum, even after death thou livest in Christ in the 
heavens; for having crucified thyself to the world for His sake and lived truly beyond 
the flesh, thou didst not live for thyself, rather Christ God dwelt within thee. Him do 
thou beseech, that our souls be saved.  
In Tone IV: As one who shared in the ways of the apostles, O venerable one, thou 
hast also been shown to share their dwelling-place, for thou didst keep their faith and 
didst finish the race so wondrously and well, that thou hast been deemed worthy to 
abide with them. With them entreat the Creator and Fashioner of all, that He deliver 
us from all evils.  
As a receptacle of the virtues, O ever-memorable one, thou didst become an abode 
of the Trinity, and, as thou didst promise, thou didst found a monastery for Christ; 
and having come to thee with the Father and the Spirit, O Nahum, He glorified thee 
surpassingly, making thee a son of God and a bridegroom through communion.  
The Mresian language, more difficult of comprehension than that of the 
Pannonians, of a generation subject of old to deception, which worshipped stones 
and trees, did ye free from grievous unbelief by your words and preaching, O most 
honored father Nahum; and now they are truly children of God, breathing Orthodox 
piety.  
In Tone VI: O divinely blessed father Nahum, boast of the faithful, most splendid 
ornament of fasters, pastor and teachers, by thy labors thou didst bring all to the 
Lord; for by thine entreaties send down peace and mercy upon thy flock, its 
shepherds and thy fellow ascetics.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
O venerable Nahum, the land of Mresia shone with the brilliance of thy teaching; 
wherefore, like heaven thou didst declare the glory of God, advancing more radiantly 
than the sun, and shining more brightly than a lamp. Therefore, thou didst lead to 
Christ a multitude of the Bulgarians, who believed with all their heart. Remember 
them now, as thou hast boldness before the Lord.  
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
O venerable father, thou gavest neither sleep unto thine eyes, nor slumber unto 
thine eyelids, until thou didst free thy soul and body from the passions, and didst 
prepare thyself as a receptacle of the Holy Spirit. For Christ, coming with the Father, 
made his habitation within thee. As thou art a favorite of the consubstantial Trinity, 
O most blessed Nahum, pray thou on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in the same tone: 
“Be not dour at the sight of my womb, O Joseph; for thou shalt see the One born 
from me, and shalt rejoice and worship Him as God!” the Theotokos said to her 
betrothed when she was to give birth unto Christ. Let us cry out to her, saying: 
Rejoice, O divinely joyous one! The Lord is with thee; and, because of thee, is with us 
as well!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”:  
Rejoice, O venerable Nahum, enlightener of Bulgaria, measure of dogmas, 
standard of Orthodoxy, heaven declaring the glory of Christ the King of all, ever 
vigilant eye watching over the ends of the earth, which thou didst fill with divine 
preaching! In thee hath the saying of the prophet been fulfilled, for thy sound hath 
gone forth into all the earth through the grace of Christ our God. Him do thou 
beseech, that He grant peace and great mercy to our souls.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
Rejoice, O venerable Nahum, preacher of the Gospel throughout Bulgaria, who 
instilled the love of the kingdom of Christ in every human soul! Wherefore, banishing 
deception, thou didst teach all the people to worship in Orthodox manner the 
uncreated Trinity - the beginningless Father, the Son Who is equally without 
beginning, and the divine Spirit Who proceedeth directly from the Father. Him do 
Thou entreat, that He grant peace and great mercy to our souls.  
Verse: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord * and shall hope in Him.  
Rejoice, O venerable Nahum, truly precious ornament of monastics, thou hast 
passed over to the place of wondrous habitation, to the abode of God, with joy and 
gladness of soul, where the beautiful sound of one keeping festival and of sweet 
praise is heard. For, having desired Him alone, thou didst mortify the flesh and 
receive the divine righteousness of Christ our God. Him do thou beseech, that He 
grant peace and great mercy to our souls.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Forsaking the tumults of life, O venerable Nahum, and taking the Cross of the 
Savior on thy shoulder, thou didst entrust thyself wholly unto God. Wherefore, while 
in the world thou didst show thyself to be beyond the flesh, O all-praised one; and 
having struggled with intense asceticism every day, with the angels thou art ever in the 
presence of the Spirit, and dost rejoice with them. As thou hast boldness before the 
Lord, pray that those who celebrate thine ever-honored memory may be delivered 
from misfortunes and sorrows.  
Both now ..., of the forefeast, in the same tone: 
O Bethlehem, receive standing as the metropolis of God; for the never-waning 
Light cometh to be born within thee. Ye angels, marvel in the heavens! Ye mortals, 
give glory on earth! O magi, bring ye most glorious gifts from Persia! Ye shepherds, 
piping, sweetly sound forth the thrice-holy hymn! Let every breath praise the Creator 
of all!  
After the Blessing of the loaves, the Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast departed this world, cleaving unto Christ. * And having crucified thy 
flesh, thou livest for the Spirit, * O all-blessed Nahum. Thou didst strive to follow the 
course of the apostles, * and didst win countless multitudes in Bulgaria for the Faith. 
* Wherefore, by thy supplications ** deliver us from temptations. (Twice)  
And the Troparion of the forefeast, in the same tone: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell! (Once)  

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS  
 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell! (Twice)  
Glory ..., that of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast departed this world, cleaving unto Christ. * And having crucified thy 
flesh, thou livest for the Spirit, * O all-blessed Nahum. Thou didst strive to follow the 
course of the apostles, * and didst win countless multitudes in Bulgaria for the Faith. 
* Wherefore, by thy supplications ** deliver us from temptations.  
 Both now ..., that of the forefeast (Once).  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
In that thy feet were truly most beautiful, and as thou didst proclaim the glad 
tidings of the peace which passeth all understanding, O venerable and godly one, thou 
didst tame wild beasts; the untamed pagans of Mresia, and didst bring them among 
the sheep. Wherefore, ask unshakable humility and great mercy for us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Today the Church rejoiceth, singeth and adorneth herself, celebrating the forefeast 
of the nativity; for it is truly a most holy solemnity, and she doth therefore array 
herself for the Lord of glory, and we all cry out to Christ God: O Lover of mankind, 
have mercy upon us who hymn Thee!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”:  
As a worker of miracles, an advocate and mediator for all before God, O most 
blessed God-bearer Nahum, thou boast of Bulgaria, by thy divine supplication deliver 
thy servants, we pray, from the misfortunes which befall us and from the flame which 
is to come.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
Thou hast descended from the bosom of the Father, and in an ineffable 
abasement hast taken upon Thyself our poverty, O Lover of mankind; in a manner 
transcending nature Thou hast been well-pleased to make Thine abode in a cave, O 
Lord, and Thou, the Creator and Lord, art nourished as a babe from Thy Mother's 
breasts. Wherefore, the magi, guided by the star, bring gifts unto Thee as the Master 
of creation, and the shepherds and angels marvel, crying: Glory in the highest to God 
Who cometh to be born as a man on earth!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Polyeleos, and this magnification: We bless thee, O venerable father Nahum, 
and we honor thy holy memory, O instructor of monks and converser with the 
angels.  
Selected Psalm verse: 
A: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto me, 
and He hearkened unto my supplication.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia ..., Glory to Thee, O God! (Thrice)  
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
O Nahum, thou emulator of the apostles, rule of hierarchs, adornment of fasters, 
who shared the sufferings of those who suffered exposure and struggled in 
conscience for Christ: as thou hast ever had divine boldness, thou didst preach the 
mystery of the Trinity, Whom do thou unceasingly entreat on behalf of those who 
hymn thee with faith.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
The Word of God, Who shone forth without commingling from the bosom of the 
Father before all ages, cometh forth within time seedlessly from thy womb, O most 
pure one, lifting up him who of old had grievously stumbled, raising him up to his 
primal beauty. The armies of the incorporeal beings come forth for His nativity and 
mystically send forth hymns of victory to mortals, crying aloud: Glory to God Who 
hath given us peace, breaking down the middle wall of enmity, as is His good 
pleasure!  
Song of ascents, the first antiphon of Tone IV.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath praise the Lord.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 43 (MT. 11: 27-30)  
The Lord said to His disciples: “All things are delivered unto Me of my Father: 
and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, 
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him. Come unto Me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and 
learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 
For My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.”  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
After Psalm 50, this Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Grace was poured forth in thy lips, O venerable father, and thou wast a shepherd 
for the inheritance of Christ, teaching the reason endowed sheep to believe in the 
consubstantial Trinity, in the one Godhead.  
Canon of the forefeast, with 6 Troparia, including the irmos; and two canons of the 
venerable one, with a total of 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the forefeast, the acrostic whereof is the (Greek) alphabet, the composition 
of Joseph, in Tone VI:  
Irmos: He Who in ancient times * hid the pursuing tyrant beneath the 
waves of the sea, * is now concealed in a manger * for Herod seeketh to 
slay Him * But let us sing with the magi; chanting unto the Lord, * for 
gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Judah shall not lack for a prince, for to him was a promise made, as hath been 
written before: Jesus Christ, the Expectation of the nations, hath come, and is born in 
a cave in His surpassing goodness.  
Be glad with great joy, O Bethlehem; for in thee is Christ the Lord born! Let the 
whole world leap up, receiving deliverance, and let all creation dance, keeping festival!  
Desiring to save the human race, the Supremely good One made His abode in the 
womb of the Virgin who knew not wedlock; and, lo! He cometh to be born. Let us 
worship Him, for gloriously hath He been glorified!  
Canon of the venerable one, the acrostic whereof is “I, Constantine, archpastor of 
Bulgaria, do praise Nahum, the latter acquisition of God”, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He hath 
been glorified.  
O Nahum, who art full of the streams of the Holy Spirit, by thine entreaties show 
me to be a divine river, that I may proclaim thy works, praising thee with hymns.  
Thou wast a follower of those who taught the Faith of Christ in the land of 
Bulgaria, O venerable one, sharing from thy youth in the labors and sufferings of 
Cyril and Methodius.  
Thy life was angelic, thy life truly beyond that of men, and thy struggle truly like 
unto that of the martyrs, O venerable one; wherefore we hymn thee.  
As a teacher of perfect doctrines, O Nahum, thou and thy fellow initiates of the 
mysteries went up to the summit of divine cedars, and covered the mountains of 
Mresia.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, from ages past nature hath recognized thee as the 
one who in a manner transcending nature alone art Mother and Virgin; for thou hast 
given birth for us unto the Creator of all.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Canon II of the venerable one, which is connected to the foregoing canon and the 
acrostic whereof is a continuation of that of the former; in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
O Christ Who of old dried up the deep for the people who were traveling on foot, 
dry up the abyss of my transgressions, and let fall a drop of understanding upon me, 
that with hymns I may praise Thy venerable one.  
Desiring to behold the ineffable glory of God, O Nahum, thou didst endure 
tribulations, imprisonment and cruelties, and every earthly disgrace, and didst struggle 
for the sake of Christ's name.  
Solitary in spirit, yet burning with zeal for the Faith, thou didst bear the yoke of 
the grace of Christ and didst clear the souls of thy people of the brush of the demons 
and didst plant therein the seed of divine understanding.  
O blessed one, thou didst consider the whole world to be as dung; thou didst love 
Christ, and by withdrawing from it thou didst draw nigh unto Him Who draweth nigh 
unto all for the sake of their faith.  
Theotokion: O Lady as thou hast given birth unto Life, give life unto me who have 
become dead through many and varied evils, and cause me to pass over to the life 
which is on high, that I may ever glorify thee as her who giveth me life.  
ODE III  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: When creation beheld Thee, * Who founded the whole earth upon the 
waters, * born in the cave, * it was seized with awe, crying aloud: * None is 
holy save Thee, O Lord!  
Thou didst desire to clothe Thyself in the guise of a servant, that Thou mightest 
deliver me from slavery to the evil one. I hymn Thy loving-kindness, O Word Who 
art co-beginningless and consubstantial with the Father: Glory to Thy dispensation!  
The Virgin cometh to give birth to the Lord in the cave! Come forth, O ye magi! 
Ye shepherds, come forth! Ye angels, cry out hymns from on high: The Deliverance 
of mankind hath come!  
Seeking me who have become lost and by my barren acts have been shown to be a 
den of thieves O Lover of mankind, Thou hast now arrived at the cave to be born 
today from the Virgin, O Master. Glory to Thy Nativity, O Word!  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon the 
waters, * O all-powerful One. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Thou didst pass beyond the bounds of nature, O blessed one, and draw nigh unto 
the mountains of divine knowledge through truly everlasting life; and bringing light to 
the mountains of ungodliness, thou didst protect the people with the mountains of 
faith.  
Out of the cruel and waterless pit of ignorance didst thou draw the children of 
darkness, hard of heart, showing them to be habitations of Christ through their 
teachers and thy compatriots.  
The people of the West, who were in the darkness of ungodliness, didst thou 
enlighten, O father, and by thy holy and divine teaching thou didst make them 
temples.  
Theotokion: O Virgin, the prophets proclaimed thee to be the mountain, the jar, 
the table, the golden censer and ark of holiness; and we hymn thee as the tabernacle 
which contained God.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory.  
In latter times the land of Bulgaria became thy portion, O venerable one, and with 
thy teachers thou didst struggle, and didst strive to share in the ways of the apostles.  
The godly Nahum was the assistant of the holy hierarch Clement: he reached the 
lands of the West and, having illumined them with the light of preaching, is therefore 
glorified with him.  
The people of Bulgaria, whom for thy sake, O venerable Nahum, the Lord hath 
raised up from stones as children of Abraham, as the Forerunner said, now glorify 
thee, abiding in the knowledge of Him.  
The people of Bulgaria, who before sat in the darkness of grievous unbelief, O 
venerable one, through thee have beheld the light of understanding; wherefore, we 
honor thy memory with sweet hymns of joy.  
Theotokion: Fill me with tranquility, O Theotokos, for thou art the tranquility of 
the souls of all peoples; and still the tempest of the demons which make war on me 
and in vain seek to thrust me into the abyss and pit of Hades, O Lady.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Today the Virgin cometh to the cave * to ineffably give birth unto the pre-eternal 
Word. * Having heard this, be glad, O thou ecumene, * and with the angels and 
shepherds glorify the pre-eternal God, ** Who is to appear as a little babe 
.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Ikos: O truly awesome wonder past all telling! He Who giveth existence to all, in 
His goodness hath entered the womb of the holy Virgin, and cometh to be born in 
the cave and to be laid in a manger. And His star is a herald from on high to the magi 
who come to do Him homage with gifts, drawing from afar those who zealously 
follow the prophecy of Balaam who said: “A star will proclaim beforehand the little 
babe, the pre-eternal God!”  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”:  
As one wise and intelligent, from the time of thy youth thou didst bow thyself 
beneath the easy yoke of thy Master, O father, and, filled with goodness, thou didst 
receive the godly Clement as thy fellow husbandman. With him thou didst plough the 
hearts of unbelievers and didst sow therein the seeds of Orthodoxy. Wherefore, thou 
hast passed over to the lands which are devoid of pain, ever reaping the reward of thy 
labors. O most blessed Nahum, entreat Christ God that He grant remission of 
offenses unto those who celebrate thy holy memory with love.  
Glory ..., another Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”: 
O venerable Nahum, emulator of the apostles and rule of hierarchs, adornment of 
the venerable and fellow struggler with the spiritual athletes of God: thou wast 
crowned as a martyr though thou didst not shed thy blood, for thou wast buffeted by 
cruel tribulations, bearing the divine name of Christ and ever preaching with boldness 
the mystery of the Trinity, to Whom do thou never cease to pray on behalf of those 
who praise thee. 
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the forefeast, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Rejoice, O Sion! Adorn thyself, O Bethlehem! For the Sustainer of all, having sent 
forth a star, hath announced His infinite condescension, before which the hosts of 
heaven tremble: Truly He Who alone is the Lover of mankind is immutably born 
from the Virgin!  
ODE IV  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Foreseeing Thine advent from the Virgin, * Habbakuk cried out in 
awe: * Thou hast come from Theman incarnate, O Redeemer * to restore 
Adam who had been expelled!  
The radiant cloud cometh forth to shine from her maternal womb Christ, the Sun 
of righteousness, Who illumineth the whole earth with the rays of divinity.  
God hath revealed Himself to be like unto men: He abaseth Himself by assuming 
flesh, that He might deify us, and is born in a cave. O ye faithful, let us receive Him 
with a pure heart.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Behold! Christ is born in the city of Bethlehem, that He might open Eden unto us, 
which of old was closed through the disobedience initiated by the serpent: Let us 
celebrate a divine festival!  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O Prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of the 
Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, Thou 
shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown forth! * Glory 
to Thy power, O Lord!  
Behold! by thy preaching have hardhearted pagans been called and come to know 
God, O wise one; for, as Isaiah writeth, all the land is filled with divine understanding; 
wherefore, we glorify thy memory.  
Full of higher wisdom, thou didst teach the all-simple people of Bulgaria to 
worship the Hypostases of the Trinity-God Who is immutably One in nature, united 
without commingling; and they cry aloud: Glory to Thee, O Lord!  
Like a divinely chosen steed thou didst stir up the sea of ungodliness, O wise 
Nahum, as the prophet saith; and thou didst draw forth as fish the men who were 
drowning in the depths of unbelief, who cry out: Glory be to thee O Lord!  
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be a divine palace and a temple truly 
consecrated unto God, O Virgin Mary. Him do thou entreat on our behalf, that He 
wash away the defilement of our sins, that we also may become the abode and 
habitation of the Spirit.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Thou wast shown to be an unshakable pillar of the Faith, in nowise toppled by the 
winds of temptations; enduring multifarious wounds, and opposing the enemies of 
the Holy Spirit.  
Speaking of the mighty works of God before kings and nations, with simplicity of 
speech thou didst shut the mouths of the rhetors who uttered evil fables; and magnify 
piety and the glory of Christ.  
For piety's sake, like an apostle and a preacher thou didst endure every tribulation; 
wherefore, we beseech thee, O venerable one: dispel every sorrow and illness from us 
who celebrate thy memory.  
Theotokion: O pure Mother of God, strengthen the movement of my mind, 
illumine the senses of my soul, and make me strong against mine enemies, that I may 
cry out unto thee: Glory to thy birthgiving, O Virgin!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE V  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: I seek Thee early in the morning, * Who for our sake didst mercifully 
empty Thyself * and willingly submit to be baptized by the hand of a servant, * 
O Word of God, * Grant Thy peace unto me the fallen one, * O Lover of 
mankind. 
Let the hearts of all mortals leap up, and let creation be glad! The Lord is born 
from the pure Maiden in the cave of Bethlehem, and the magi offer Him fitting gifts.  
O ye people, who of old sat in the shadow of death, behold the Light which hath 
shone forth upon us from the Virgin, and be filled with great sweetness of soul, ever 
magnifying the Word Who lowered Himself.  
Thou comest to be contained in a little cave, O Thou Who art infinite by nature, 
that, in Thy boundless mercy, Thou mightest magnify me who have made myself 
insignificant through disobedience.  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light * upon us who rise early at 
dawn, * unto the judgments of Thy commandments, * O Master, Lover of 
mankind, * Christ our God.  
O father, thou wast a new apostle, like unto the seventy; and, following Methodius 
as if he were Paul, thou wast an initiate of the mysteries of God, proclaiming Him by 
preaching.  
Like the chosen vessel, thou wast truly shown to be a receptacle of grace, O most 
wise one, like the godly Prophet Nahum of old, whose name and goodly ways thou 
didst inherit, O Nahum.  
Thou didst surpassingly love Christ with all thy heart, thy mind and soul, O 
venerable one, and thou wast accounted worthy to be surpassingly loved by Him,  
Theotokion: Tempest-tossed by violent changes, evil circumstances and long 
scattering, we flee to thy haven, O Lady, for thou art the hope of the hopeless.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin who 
hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, * and 
gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn thee. 
Thou didst sincerely hearken unto the all-wise teachings of the godly Methodius, 
who brought rebirth to Pannonia through holy baptism and the introduction of the 
written word, and thou didst emulate his way of life.  
Thy feet became beautiful through the preaching of the divine Gospel, and they 
traversed divers lands, leading up to the divine Light those who in darkness had 
stumbled on the rocks of unbelief.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
The apostles went about the whole earth and ploughed it; and thou and the godly 
Clement sowed doctrines therein, O venerable one, and now take in the fruits of 
divine knowledge and everlasting hymnody.  
Theotokion: O Lady, bestow a sword of goodwill upon us, strengthening us with 
thy compassions, help and aid; for evil circumstances pitilessly surround our lives.  
ODE VI  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have encompassed me; * and its stormy 
waves I can endure no more, * wherefore like Jonah I cry out to Thee, O 
Master: * Lead me up from corruption. 
Transcending the laws of the flesh, O Lord, the Virgin cometh to give birth to 
Thee in the cave and to lay Thee in a manger as a babe in the flesh.  
In His mercy, the Supremely divine One, Who was born of the Maiden who knew 
not wedlock, showeth me to be a citizen of heaven, though I had become a stranger 
to God through disobedience.  
Ye mountains, hills and valleys, be glad; for the Lord is born in the flesh, restoring 
creation which had become corrupt through wicked disobedience. 
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Emulating the Prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O Good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
O wise one, thou wast added to the four disciples of Cyril and Methodius, the 
preachers of Christ, the wise initiates of the holy mysteries, the godly fathers of the 
Bulgarians and Slavs.  
O preachers and initiates of the mysteries, ye were driven far away and endured 
imprisonment and beatings, suffering affliction for the procession of the Holy Spirit.  
With the most wise Cyril thou didst traverse far paths, from the North even unto 
Rome, sharing in his labors, O wise one; and with Methodius thou didst enlighten the 
Bulgarians.  
Theotokion: Deliver us from the cruel assault of the evil one, from the temptations 
of the passions and all misfortunes, O most pure one, and quickly rescue us from 
every harm.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
In thee also was the word of God fulfilled, for thy divine sound went forth into all 
the land of Bulgaria, and thy words even unto the ends of the earth.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
From the ends of the North even unto the ends of the West your paths were in 
the sea, O blessed ones, and ye entered Rome, proclaiming the New Testament.  
As a divine temple and precious divine habitation from thy youth, O God-bearing 
Nahum, by thy supplications make me a receptacle of the Holy Spirit.  
Theotokion: What will happen to me, who am ever beset on every side? Be thou a 
protection and refuge for me, O Bride of God, for thou art the invincible helper of 
the downtrodden.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Like a great sun doth the all-honored memorial of thy splendid struggles * shine 
forth upon all; * it illumineth the faces of those who hymn thee * and driveth away 
the demons and every illness. ** Wherefore, assembling, we faithfully praise thee with 
love.  
Ikos: Come, ye multitudes of the Slavs, and let us hasten together, rejoicing in our 
father Nahum, for he hath appeared today as the great intercessor and most splendid 
luminary; for he hath enlightened us all and dispelled the gloom of deception. He 
followed after Christ and gave himself up as a right acceptable sacrifice; and he now 
offereth unto all the faithful his most glorious memorial as a spiritual banquet. Let us 
all praise it with love!  
ODE VII  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: In Babylon the Children feared not the fiery furnace; * but cast into the 
midst of the flames * they were bedewed and sang: * ‘O Lord God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou.’ 
How can the least of caves hold Thee, O Word, Who in Thine exceeding 
abasement assumed the poverty of Adam, enriching mankind with the wealth of 
divine grace?  
Hearing strange words, the shepherds hastened to Bethlehem to behold Him Who 
lieth in a manger of dumb beasts and releaseth all mankind from irrationality.  
With mouth and heart let us hasten to hymn and worship with faith Christ Who 
cometh to be born in the flesh from the Virgin Maiden, in the cave.  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither touched 
nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a single mouth * 
Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * 'O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou.' 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Working wonders, God miraculously delivered thee and thy friends from prison 
and arrest by the ungodly, O Nahum; for the fetters suddenly fell from your hands 
and feet, and ye were released.  
Through the proclamation of divine doctrines thou didst become a teacher for 
people of evil ways, and by thy divine translations thou didst make them truly 
knowledgeable in things divine, transforming them from wild beasts into sheep of the 
meek Christ. 
 Thou wast shown to be a chariot of God, O Nahum, bearing the name of Christ 
in writing against many pagan kings, and glorifying His works, and being gloriously 
glorified by Him.  
Theotokion: O most holy and pure one, accept the lowly entreaties of thy servants, 
and by thy supplications deliver us from the grievous sorrows which afflict us; and 
cause us to share in thy divine glory.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: O all-hymned Lord God of our fathers, * Who saved the children of 
Abraham in the fire * and slew the Chaldeans, * blessed art Thou!  
O father, thou didst mix the sweat of asceticism with the sweat of apostolic labor, 
and later thou wast shown to be a willing martyr, though thou didst not shed thy 
blood. And thou didst cry aloud: Blessed art Thou, O God!  
Thou didst manifestly cut off the deadly bonds of wicked thoughts, as Moses freed 
his feet of old; and thou didst truly understand God and command the people to 
chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
He Who doeth the will of those who fear Him in nowise rejecteth thy prayers on 
our behalf, O father; wherefore, be thou ever mindful of those who hymn thee with 
all their heart and all their soul. 
ODE VIII  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Suffering affliction for the sake of the laws of their fathers, * the blessed 
Children in Babylon * scorned the foolish decree of the King. * Standing 
together in the midst of the flames, they remained unharmed, * and sang a 
song fitting for almighty God: * ‘O ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.’ 
Holding in thine arms, bowing down before, and kissing maternally the one Lord 
Who had become incarnate in a manner beyond all telling, and was clad in human 
likeness, O Maiden, thou didst say: “O my most sweet Child, how is it that I hold 
Thee Who holdest all creation in thy hand, while freeing it from the hand of 
bondage?”  
Make ready to chant to Him Who hath been born on earth, O divine angels! 
Guided by the star, bring ye gifts, O magi! Ye shepherds, hasten ye to behold Him 

--- PAGE 19 ---
sitting as a babe in His Mother's arms, crying out: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
O cloud of the Light, thou who knewest not wedlock, how canst thou wrap in 
swaddling-bands Him Who clothes the heavens with clouds by His ineffable will?  
How canst thou lay in a manger of dumb beasts the Master Who in His boundless 
mercy doth deliver mankind from irrationality? Him Whom all creation worships with 
fear, hymning Him throughout all ages.  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Let us hymn Nahum, the divinely inspired instrument of the Holy Spirit, O ye 
faithful, crying out to the Lord in sacred words: By his supplications save those who 
hymn Thy might!  
With Clement as thy companion, thou didst traverse all the lands of the Slavs, O 
most wise one, by thy preaching guiding Okhrid and the people round about it unto 
the straight path.  
Taking thy cross upon thy shoulder, O Nahum, thou didst follow after Christ, the 
one King, struggling lawfully; and from Him thou hast received a crown of victory, O 
blessed one of God.  
Theotokion: The children who were in nowise burned prefigured thy womb which 
was in nowise consumed by the divine Fire, O most pure one, but was preserved as a 
habitation for the one God.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Desiring to deliver all peoples from irrationality, the Word of God gave thee a 
tongue of fire, whereby thou didst lead the people of Bulgaria to a knowledge of the 
Truth, teaching them to hymn Christ throughout all ages.  
By thine opposition thou didst overcome the savagery of the tyrants, O ever-
memorable Nahum, and as a champion of the procession of the Holy Spirit from the 
divine Source of the uncaused Trinity thou didst endure wounding, beatings and 
imprisonment.  
Thou didst in nowise escape all tribulation, pain and groaning, O Nahum; but 
Christ, accepting thy labors for Him, hath caused thee to dwell in the place of 
ineffable joy and delight, where the first-formed beings now abide.  
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Beset with violent tribulations by enemies visible and invisible, contending with 
sorrows, pain and evil circumstances, with ignorant injustices and bitter banishment, 
we cry out in pain of heart: Save us, O Compassionate One, through the supplications 
of the venerable Nahum.  
Theotokion: Flight hath utterly failed me, and, as say the Scriptures, they that seek 
after me have multiplied; but be thou for me protection and strength, a refuge and 
confirmation, O Lady, a hope and the sure joy of salvation, that I may glorify thee 
throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Canon of the forefeast  
Irmos: Be not now amazed, O Mother, * beholding as an infant Him Whom 
the Father begat from within Himself * before the morning star; * for I have 
manifestly come to restore and glorify with Me * the nature of fallen mankind, 
* who with faith and love magnifieth thee.  
Rejoice, O most pure one, thou receptacle of ineffable joy! For, lo! thou comest to 
give birth ineffably in the cave to the Master Who truly desires to restore all creation, 
which of old became corrupt through disobedience. Hymning Him with faith, we 
magnify thee.  
O all ye souls of the righteous, and those beneath the earth, rejoice! For, lo! the 
Deliverance of all hath appeared, born in the city of Bethlehem! And the star 
proclaimeth Him to the magi, who seek Him with piety; and, beholding Him in the 
cave, they are filled with joy.  
O Virgin, we hymn thee as another heaven, who in the morning shall shine forth 
the Sun of righteousness upon us from thy most pure womb, illumining those in the 
darkness of death and corruption. Wherefore, we magnify thee with praises, as is 
meet.  
Canon I of the venerable one 
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of all 
descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom He was 
incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as the pure 
Mother of God.  
As is meet, the land of Bulgaria honoreth thy memory, O Nahum; for with the 
godly Clement, Gorazd the wonder-worker, and Angelarius the wise initiate of the 
sacred mysteries, thou wast its enlightener. By your supplications save it!  
Rome beheld your apostolic journeys, O godly Cyril, right blessed Methodius and 
glorious Nahum, and it stood in awe of the wonders of God wrought through you; 
wherefore, we honor you with annual hymnody.  
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
O blessed Nahum, the choirs of the fathers, the apostles, the venerable, the 
hierarchs, prophets and martyrs, have now received thee and those who suffered with 
thee; for thou didst emulate their manner of life. With them remember us all.  
We know thee to be the sacred ark of the covenant which beareth the word of 
God saving multitudes of the Slavs, and bringing them to the eternal promised land; 
wherefore, guided toward everlasting life, we venerate the shrine of thy relics.  
Theotokion: O most pure Theotokos, free all of us who trust in thee from 
iniquitous people and the assault of the demons, from the grievous oppression of 
multifarious passions, and from the cruel affliction of many temptations.  
Canon II of the venerable one 
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
O ye faithful, let us stand in the house of our God and let us glorify His mighty 
works and miracles in His courts; for He is wondrous in His saints, who submit to 
His commands. With them the venerable Nahum rejoiceth.  
That, holding festival, we may honor thee, O Nahum, by thy supplications deliver 
us from all assaults and evil circumstances, perils and tribulations, and every other 
form of wrath, entreating Christ, Who hath revealed thee to be a keeper of His 
commandments.  
The people whom thou didst nurture with thy labors, whom thou didst water with 
thy sweat, and whom thou didst root firmly by thy sufferings, O all-blessed one, offer 
thee annual hymnody as the first-fruits of thy memory; wherefore, pray thou to God 
for them.  
Loose me, O Christ, for Thou knowest mine infirmities, that through them I may 
find rest before my departure through the supplications of Nahum Thy favored one, 
O Master; and let me not become a joy for mine enemies in this age or that which is 
to come.  
Theotokion: With faith we entreat thee, the true Mother of the Creator Who hath 
wrought all things by His will: In that thou art good, cause the counsels and pursuit of 
those who are at enmity with us to be in vain, O all-hymned one, and preserve all thy 
servants, thy pastors and flock, from the hands of our enemies.  
Exapostilarion of the venerable one:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast visited us ...”: 
Christ hath visited a most embittered people, and through thee, O Nahum, hath 
saved them from the hands of the evil one and from the darkness of unbelief. And all 
the land hath been filled with divine understanding.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Glory ..., another Exapostilarion: 
As is meet, let the godly Nahum be honored in hymnody: the well of miracles and 
spring of healings, the glory of monastics and adornment of priests.  
Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the forefeast: 
Adorn thyself well, O Bethlehem! Open wide thy gates! For thy King cometh, 
Who before all ages hath in His mercy desired to become a man. Rejoice and dance, 
all creation!  
On the Praises, 6 Stichera: 3 of the forefeast, in Tone VI: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Go forth, ye angels ...”:  
The mystery appointed beforehand by the Father * before time began, * and Thy 
mystery appointed beforehand by the Father * before all ages, * and proclaimed of 
old by the prophets, * hath been revealed in the latter days: * God hath become a 
man, * receiving flesh from the Virgin, * the Uncreated One of His own will taketh 
on our form, * He Who Is entereth temporal existence: * Christ cometh forth, ** the 
King of Israel.  
I hymn Thee, O King * Who art wrapped in swaddling-bands, * for thou loosest 
the bonds of my falls into sin, * and, honoring me with immortal and incorruptible 
glory, * Thou hast made me wholly the Father's own, * refashioning and restoring me. 
* Wherefore, I cry to Thee: * Christ cometh forth, ** the King of Israel.  
The magi, observers of the stars, * beholding through the star * the light which 
proceedeth from the Light * and shone forth from the Virgin upon those on earth, * 
cast off the darkness of Persia * and all the deception of astrology, * and chanted in 
joy to God Who is born: * “Blessed is our God Who hath come! ** Glory be to 
Thee!”  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Come, ye who love the feasts of the Church, and, blessing Nahum, the precious 
receptacle of the Spirit, in sacred hymns, let us crown him, having tasted well of his 
words and received adoption of the divine Spirit; for by his supplications we receive 
the remission of our offenses.  
Thy death was truly precious in the sight of the Lord, O ever-memorable Nahum; 
for thy life is full of piety and purity, and is filled with all holiness. Thereby hast thou 
attained the deification, O father, which hath come to thee through sharing in the 
Divine.  
Grant us help against every tribulation and deliver us from temptations, O holy 
Nahum, for human aid is impotent. In a manner transcending that of men thou didst 
become a converser with the angels, and thou dost protect us who fear God and 
venerate thy precious relics.  

--- PAGE 23 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
The fruit of thy divine labors hath made steadfast the hearts of the faithful, O 
venerable father; for thou gavest neither sleep to thine eyes nor slumber to thine 
eyelids until thou didst sow piety and Orthodox dogmas. Wherefore, having now 
assembled, we praise thy memory, O Nahum. Standing with boldness before Christ, 
watch over us thereon, and pray that He save our souls from misfortunes.  
Both now ..., the composition of Anatolius, in Tone VIII:  
The Creator of all is born in Bethlehem; the pre-eternal King openeth Eden. He 
turneth back the flaming sword, and the middle wall of enmity is broken down. The 
hosts of heaven unite with mortals, angels and men form a mighty solemnity. The 
pure offer hymnody to the Pure One. We behold the Virgin as the cherubims' throne 
of glory, who contained God Whom naught can contain, and beareth Him Whom the 
seraphim glorify with fear, that He may grant the world great mercy.  
Greed Doxology. Troparia:  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast departed this world, cleaving unto Christ. * And having crucified thy 
flesh, thou livest for the Spirit, * O all-blessed Nahum. Thou didst strive to follow the 
course of the apostles, * and didst win countless multitudes in Bulgaria for the Faith. 
* Wherefore, by thy supplications ** deliver us from temptations. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell! (Once)  
Litanies. Dismissal. First Hour 

--- PAGE 24 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of the canon of the forefeast, 
and 4 from ODE VI of the 1st canon of the venerable one.  
Thou didst desire to clothe Thyself in the guise of a servant, that Thou mightest 
deliver me from slavery to the evil one. I hymn Thy loving-kindness, O Word Who 
art co-beginningless and consubstantial with the Father: Glory to Thy dispensation! 
(Twice) 
The Virgin cometh to give birth to the Lord in the cave! Come forth, O ye magi! 
Ye shepherds, come forth! Ye angels, cry out hymns from on high: The Deliverance 
of mankind hath come!  
Seeking me who have become lost and by my barren acts have been shown to be a 
den of thieves O Lover of mankind, Thou hast now arrived at the cave to be born 
today from the Virgin, O Master. Glory to Thy Nativity, O Word!  
O wise one, thou wast added to the four disciples of Cyril and Methodius, the 
preachers of Christ, the wise initiates of the holy mysteries, the godly fathers of the 
Bulgarians and Slavs.  
O preachers and initiates of the mysteries, ye were driven far away and endured 
imprisonment and beatings, suffering affliction for the procession of the Holy Spirit.  
With the most wise Cyril thou didst traverse far paths, from the North even unto 
Rome, sharing in his labors, O wise one; and with Methodius thou didst enlighten the 
Bulgarians.  
Theotokion: Deliver us from the cruel assault of the evil one, from the temptations 
of the passions and all misfortunes, O most pure one, and quickly rescue us from 
every harm.  
Troparion of the forefeast, in Tone IV: 
Make ready, O Bethlehem! * Be thou opened unto all, O Eden! * Adorn thyself, O 
Ephratha! * For in the cave the Tree of Life hath sprung forth from the Virgin. * Her 
womb is shown to be a noetic paradise, * in the midst of which is the divine Tree, * 
whereof eating, we shall live, and not die as did Adam. * Christ is born, that He might 
restore His image ** which of old fell!  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast departed this world, cleaving unto Christ. * And having crucified thy 
flesh, thou livest for the Spirit, * O all-blessed Nahum. Thou didst strive to follow the 
course of the apostles, * and didst win countless multitudes in Bulgaria for the Faith. 
* Wherefore, by thy supplications ** deliver us from temptations.  
 
 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone III:  
Like a great sun doth the all-honored memorial of thy splendid struggles * shine 
forth upon all; * it illumineth the faces of those who hymn thee * and driveth away 
the demons and every illness. ** Wherefore, assembling, we faithfully praise thee with 
love.  
Kontakion of the forefeast, in Tone III: 
Today the Virgin cometh to the cave * to ineffably give birth unto the pre-eternal 
Word. * Having heard this, be glad, O thou ecumene, * and with the angels and 
shepherds glorify the pre-eternal God, ** Who is to appear as a little babe.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 335 (HEB. 13: 17-21) 
Brethren: Obey those who have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they 
watch for your souls, as ones who must give account, that they may do it with joy, 
and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Pray for us: for we trust we have a 
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. But I beseech you the rather to 
do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner. Now the God of peace, that 
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, 
through the blood of the ever lasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work 
to do His will, working in you that which is well pleasing in His sight, through Jesus 
Christ; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight.  
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE, § 24 (LK. 6: 17-23)  
At that time Jesus stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great 
multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre 
and Sidon, who came to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and those who 
were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. And the whole multitude 
sought to touch Him: for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He 
lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said: “Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the 
kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye 
that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when 

--- PAGE 26 ---
they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your 
name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, 
behold, your reward is great in heaven.”  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings.  
 
